Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> An Act to determine the emoluments, allowances and privileges of Governors. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982. (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. The appointed date 01.04.1987.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 2--> 1 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 2 [(a) "ex-Governor" means a person who has been the Governor of a tate or two or more States; (aa) "Governor" means the Governor, or any person discharging the functions of the Governor, of any State or of two or more States] (b) "maintenance", - (i) in relation to official residences, includes the provision of electricity, gas and water, (ii) in relation to motor vehicles, includes the pay and allowances of chauffeurs and the provision of oil and petrol or other fuel; (c) "members of the family", in relation to a Governor, means [spouse, dependent children and the dependent parents] of the Governor; (d) "official residences", in relation to a Governor, means such residences as may be specified by the President, by notification in the Official Gazette, as the official residences of the Governor and includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the gardens thereof: (e) "rules" means rules made under this Act; (f) "State" does not include a Union territory. Deemed to come into effect form 1st January. 2007 (Act 1 of 2009) Substituted by the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "(a) "Governor" means the Governor, or any person discharging the functions of the Governor, of any State or of two or more States;"
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 3--> There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of2 [rupees thirty-six thousand per mensem]: PROVIDED that if a Governor, at the time of his appointment, (a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Government of a State or any of its predecessor Governments his emoluments shall be reduced,- (i) by the amount of that pension; and (ii) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension;3 [or] (iii)4 [...] (b) is in receipt of any benefit by way of contributory provident fund, his emoluments shall be reduced by the pension equivalent of such benefit. Section 3 deemed to come into effect from 1st April. 1986 (Act 17 of 1987). Substituted for "rupees eleven thousand per mensem", vide The Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1998 (Act 26 of 1998), with effect from 20.08.1998. Substituted for the word "and" by the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1994 (Act 1 of 1994) w.r.e.f. 01.06.1988. Sub-clause (iii) omitted by the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 1994 (Act 1 of 1994) w.r.e.f. 01.06.1988.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 4--> (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the President shall grant such leave to a Governor as he may consider necessary. (2) Where a Governor is granted leave by the President, he shall, during the period of such leave, be paid leave allowance at such rate as the President may by order determine: PROVIDED that such leave allowance shall be reduced to the extent, if any, to which the emoluments of the Governor are liable to be reduced under the proviso to Section 3.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 5--> A Governor shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to the use of his official residences throughout his term of office and no charge shall fall on the Governor personally in respect of the furnishing or the maintenance of such residences.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 6--> Subject to any rules made in this behalf, no charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of pay, allowances or pension or other emoluments paid to, or facilities provided for, the members of the household establishment provided to the Governor.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 7--> Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a Governor and the members of his family shall be entitled during the term of his office and thereafter also, to free medical attendance, accommodation and treatment in the hospitals maintained by the Central Government or the Government of any State.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 8--> (1) A Governor shall be entitled to use without payment of rent or hire, such number of motor vehicles as the President may by order determine. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely: - (a) grant of leave to a Governor under section 4; (b) matters relating to the household establishment provided to a Governor under section 6; (c) medical attendance, accommodation and treatment of a Governor and the members of his family under section 7; (d) the use of motor vehicles by the members of the family of a Governor under sub- section (3) of section 8; (e) the traveling allowance on assumption or vacation of office of a Governor under section 9; (f) allowances for renewing the furnishings and for the maintenance of the official residences under section 10; (g) the privileges to which a Governor is entitled and the allowances or expenses payable to a Governor under section 11. (3) Every rule made by the President under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. (2) No charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of the maintenance of the motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1). (3) The use of the motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1) by the members of the family of a Governor shall be regulated by rules made in this behalf.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 9--> Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a Governor shall be entitled to traveling allowance for himself and the members of his family and for the transport of his and his family's effects- (a) in respect of the journey for assuming office from the place where he is ordinarily residing to the place of his duty; and (b) in respect of the journey on relinquishing office from the place of his duty to the place where he would ordinarily reside thereafter or if he is to take up any other office under the Government (including the office of the Governor of another State) after such relinquishment, to the place of duty with respect to such other office.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 10--> Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a Governor shall be entitled to such allowances for renewing the furnishings and for the maintenance of the official residences, as the President may by order determine.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 11--> For the purpose of enabling a Governor to discharge conveniently and with dignity the duties of his office, he shall be- (i) entitled to such other privileges as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf, and (ii) paid, subject to any rules made in this behalf, such amount, as the President may, by general or .special order, determine by way of the following, namely :- (a) entertainment allowance; (b) hospitality grant; (c) household establishment expenses; (d) office expenses; (e) contract allowance, i.e., an allowance for miscellaneous expenses; (f) tour expenses; and (g) such other allowances or expenses as may be provided for by rules.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 12--> (1) Where, in the case of any Governor the President is satisfied that the amount authorised under this Act by way of any allowances or for meeting any expenses with respect to any matter requires to be increased or that a need has arisen to sanction expenses with respect to any matter for which provision, though permissible, has not been made in the rules made under this Act, he may by special order increase such amount or sanction such expenses to such extent as may be specified in such order. (2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) so as to have retrospective effect. (3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before both Houses of Parliament.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 12A--> Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the ex-Governor shall, for the remainder of his life, be entitled to secretarial assistance of one Personal Assistant on reimbursement basis: Provided that where such ex-Governor is re-appointed to the office of the Governor or elected to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of profit under the Union or a State Government, he shall not be entitled for such secretarial assistance for the period during which he holds such office. Inserted by the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 2014.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 13--> (1) The President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) grant of leave to a Governor under Section 4; (b) matters relating to the household establishment provided to a Governor under Section 6; (c) medical attendance, accommodation and treatment of a Governor and the members of his family under Section 7; (d) the use of motor vehicles by the members of the family of a Governor under sub-section 3 of Section 8; (e) the travelling allowance on assumption or vacation of office of a Governor under Section 9; (1) allowances for renewing the furnishing and for the maintenance of the official residences under Section 10; (g) the privileges to which a Governor is entitled and the allowances or expenses payable to a Governor under Section 11. 1 [(h) the manner of providing secretarial assistance and reimbursement under section 12 A] Inserted by Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Amendment Act, 2014 (8 of 2014) w.e.f 16th July. 2014
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 14--> (1) Every special order issued, before the commencement of this Act, by the President in regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges of any Governor (other than the Governor of Nagaland) shall, notwithstanding that such order was made with retrospective effect, or is inconsistent with any general order issued under any law with respect to those matters, be as valid and effective as if such special order formed part of this sub-section and this sub-section had been in force at all material times. (2) Every general or special order issued, before the commencement of this Act, by the President in regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges of the Governor of Nagaland shall, notwithstanding that such order was made with retrospective effect, be as valid and effective as if it formed part of this sub-section and this sub-section had been in force at all material times.
Governors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982_Section 15--> Nothing contained in this Act or the rules made there under shall have effect so as to diminish the emoluments and allowances of any Governor during his term of office. 
