Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the prevention of printing, publication, storage, distribution or supply of the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib by any person, other than the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee or any body, authorised by it with a view to ensure their sanctity and respect in accordance with the Sikh Rehat Maryada and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008. (2) It shall come into force at once.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 9th June, 2008 and was published in the Punjab Gazette (Extra.) Legislative Supplement. Part I, dated June 20, 2008.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab (a) "Bir of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib" means the holy scripture of the Sikhs, printed in any size or form and bound in one single volume, which is regarded as World incarnate, the embodiment and presence manifest or: spirit of the Ten Sikh Gurus; (b) "Deputy Commissioner" means an officer in-charge of a district, who is appointed as such by the State Government: and (c) "Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee" means the Committee, named as such by the Board, constituted under the provisions of Part Third of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925. (2) The words and expressions used in this Act, but not defined, shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Shriomani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee or any body authorised by it, shall print, publish, store, distribute and supply the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib. (2) The intimation with regard to the volumes of the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib whether finally printed or under process, existing at the time of the commencement of the Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act. 2008, with any person, shall be given by the person concerned in writing to the Deputy Commissioner within a period of fifteen days of coming into force of this Act. (3) On receipt of the intimation, referred to in sub-section (2) the Deputy Commissioner shall constitute a Committee, consisting of the following members to assess and determine the Bheta of the existing volumes of the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib, namely:- (a) One member, to be nominated by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee; (b) One officer, who should be a Sikh, not below the rank of the Extra Assistant Commissioner, to be nominated by the Deputy Commissioner; (c) One person, who should be a Sikh, engaged in the business of printing and publication, to be nominated by the Deputy Commissioner; and (d) If a Sikh Officer or person of the categories mentioned in sub-clauses (b) (c) above, is not available, then the Deputy Commissioner shall nominate another respectable Sikh Officer or person of any other local body or organisation. (4) The Committee, constituted under sub-section (3). shall assess and determine the Bheta of the volumes of the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Gum Granth Sahib referred to in sub-section (3) within a period of thirty days from the date of intimation, to be given under sub-section (2), and convey the same to the Deputy Commissioner, who shall further inform the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee and the person, who is in possession of those volumes. (5) The Bheta, so assessed and determined, shall be paid by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee to the person concerned within a period of thirty days from the date of assessment and determination, made by the said Committee. Explanation.-In this section, the term "Bheta" means the token consideration, received from any person by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee or any body, authorised by it for distributing, providing or supplying the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab No person, other than the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee or any body authorised by it. shall print, publish, store, distribute and supply the Birs of Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib after the commencement of the Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act. 2008.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab Whoever contravenes the provisions of this Act, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to two years and with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the State Government or its officer or official in respect of anything, which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.
Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Act, 2008_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Jaagat Jot Sri Guru Granth Sahib Satkar Ordinance, 2007 (Punjab Ordinance No. 9 of 2007) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance, referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
