Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab. (3) It shall come into force at one. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 24th April, 1956, and was first published for general information in the Punjab Government Gazette (Extraordinary) dated the 27th April. 1956.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, (1) "Land" means land which for reasons specified in clause (f) of sub-section (10 of section 59 of the Land Revenue Act, 1887, as amended by Punjab Act XIII of 1952, requires revision in the assessment of its land revenue. (2) "Factory" means a factory as defined in section 2 (m) of the Factories Act, 1948. (3) Any expression used and not defined in this Act shall have the same meaning as is assigned to it in the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) With effect from the Kharif harvest, 1955 1 [in the territories which immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of Punjab and from the Kharif harvest, 1957, in the territories which immediately before that date, were comprised in the State of Patiala and East Punjab State Union] and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Punjab Land Revenue Act (Act XVII of 1887), land under this Act shall be assessed to land revenue by Assistant Collector First Grade having jurisdiction, at the rates specified in the schedule appended hereto: Provided that the special assessment so levied shall not have the effect of adding to the value of any jagir or any assignment of land revenue. (2) Any person affected by an assessment made under sub-section (1) may, within 30 days from the date of demand of the assessment, present a petition for reconsideration of the assessment so far as it affects him to the Assistant Collector who shall pass an order setting forth his reasons for granting or refusing it. (3) An appeal from an order of the Assistant Collector shall lie within thirty days to the Collector whose decision shall be final. Inserted by Punjab Act. 18 of 1958. schedule.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The assessment at the rates fixed in the Schedule shall remain in force till such time as special assessment is made by the Revenue Officer in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, and the Rules made thereunder.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab Land revenue assessed under the Act shall be recoverable as land revenue under the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887.
Punjab Land Revenue (Special Assessments) Act, 1955_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab  Description Rate of Land Revenue 1. Land when put to use for a cinema or theatre building. 20 times the existing land revenue rate. 2. Land when put to use as a house when situated in the limits of - (i) the Municipal committees, 1st and 2nd class, and Cantonments. 4 times the existing land revenue rate. (ii) Municipal Committees, III class 3 times the existing land revenue rate. (iii) Notified Area Committees. Double the existing land revenue rate. 3. Land when put to use for other non- agricultural purposes, such as a factory not specified above, when situated in the limits of- (i) The Municipal Committees, 1st and 2nd class and Cantonments. 15 times the existing land revenue rate. (ii) Municipal Committees, III class 12 times the existing land revenue rate (iii) Notified Area Committees 10 times the existing land revenue rate. (iv) District Boards [or Zila Parishads] 10 times the existing land revenue rate. Note - 1 [(1)] Where only one land revenue rate was fixed at settlement for nehri land, that rate shall be taken as the rate of land revenue, while, in other cases including revenue-free lands, the highest barani land revenue rate shall be taken as the land revenue rate for the purpose of special assessment under this Act. Note - (2) In relation to the territories which immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of Patiala and East Punjab State Union, the lands situated in the limits of District Boards, shall mean the lands situated outside the limits of the municipalities and notified area committees.] Validiation - (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Punjab Land Revenue (special Assessments) Act, 1955, or in any other law for the time being in force or in any judgement, decree or order of any court or other authority where, at any time after the 15th day of May, 1958, and before the commencement of the Punjab land Revenue (special Assessments) Amendment and Validation Act, 1963, any special assessment has been made in respect of the lands, situated outside the limits of municipalities and notified area committees, in the territories, which, immediately before the 1st November 1956, were comprised in the State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union, such special assessment shall be and shall be deemed always to have been, valid and shall not be questioned on the ground that such lands were not the lands situated in the limits of District boards or that no District Boards were established in the said territories".2 Note renumbered as Note 1 by Punjab Act 17 of 1963 section 2(b). See Section 3, Punjab Act 17 of 1963. 
