Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the extension of certain regional laws to the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 21st December, 1960 and was first published for general information in the Punjab Government Gazette (Extraordinary), dated the 23rd December, 1960
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act - (a) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act; (b) "Transferred territories" mean the territories which immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of Patiala and East Punjab States Union.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The Punjab General Clauses Act, 1898, shall apply for the interpretation of this Act as it applies for the interpretation of a Punjab Act.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab All the enactments, as amended from time to time, specified in Schedule I and so much of the enactment, as amended from time to time, specified in Schedule II, as extends to the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the State of Punjab and relates to matters with respect to which the State Legislature has power to make laws for a State and all rules, regulations, notifications, orders and bye-laws made, and all directions or instructions, issued there under, which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Act in the said territories, are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in the transferred territories.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the enactments, or rules, regulations, notifications, orders and bye-laws made, and directions or instructions issued, there under, as referred to in section 4, any reference - (1) To a law which is not in force in the transferred territories shall in relation to such territories, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in such territories; and (2) To the State of Punjab by whatever form of words, construed as including a reference to the transferred territories.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab If immediately before the commencement of this Act, there is in force in the transferred territories any law corresponding to any of the enactments or rules, regulations, notifications, orders and bye-laws made, and directions or instructions issued, there under extended to those territories by section 4, that law, including the enactments specified in Schedule III, shall on the commencement of this Act save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, stand repealed: Provided that such repeal shall not affect - (a) The previous operation of any law so repealed or anything duly done or suffered there under; or (b) Any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired or incurred under any law so repealed; or (c) Any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against any law so repealed; or (d) Any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed: Provided further that anything done or any action taken under any law so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the enactment extended by section 4 to the transferred territories and shall continue to be in force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the enactment so extended.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab For purposes of facilitating the application in the transferred Territories of any enactment specified in Schedule I or Schedule II or of any rule, regulation, notification, order, bye-law, direction or instruction referred to in section 4, any court or other authority may construe the same with such alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or other authority.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the power of the State Government or of any officer or authority, exercisable under the enactments specified in Schedules I and II to add to, amend, vary of rescind the rules, regulations, notifications, orders and bye-laws made, and directions or instructions issued as extended by section 4 to the transferred territories.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab If any difficulty arises in giving effect in the transferred territories to the provisions of any enactment specified in Schedule I or Schedule II, the State Government may by order notified in the Official Gazette, make such provisions or give such directions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab EXTENSION OF PUNJAB ACTS (See section 4) Serial No. Year Number of the Act Short title 1 2 3 4 1 1948 (XXIV of 1948) The East Punjab Enumeration of Dwellings Act, 1948. 2 1950 (XIX of 1950) The Punjab Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab EXTENSION OF CENTRAL ACTS (See section 4) Serial No. Year Number of the Act Short title 1 2 3 4 1 1914 (IX of 1914) The Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914.
Punjab Laws (Extension No. 8) Act, 1960_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab REPEAL (See section 6) Serial No. Year Number of the Act Short title 1 2 3 4 1 2007 Bk. (VIII of 2007 Bk.) The Pepsu Local Authorities Loans Act, 2007 Bk. 
