Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab AN ACT further to amend the Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty- sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, for the words "thirty thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3, for the words "thirty thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3-A, in sub-section (2), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3-AA, for the words "fifteen thousand rupees" and "five thousand rupees", the words "twenty five thousand rupees" and "ten thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speaker's and Deputy Speaker's Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3-B, in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the words "two lac rupees", the words "three lac rupees" shall be substituted. H. P. S. Mahal, Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
