Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab AN ACT further to amend the Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Act, 1942. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Act, 1942 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2-A, for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "twenty five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3-A,- (i) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "twenty five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and (iii) in sub-section (2), for the words "five thousand rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 4, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "one thousand and five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 4-A, in sub-section (3), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Salaries and Allowances of Members) Amendment Act, 2015_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 4-B, in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the words "two lac rupees", the words "three lac rupees" shall be substituted. H.P.S. Mahal, Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
