Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the salaries of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Punjab. Whereas by the Government of India Act, 1935, provision has been made for the determination of the salaries of the Speaker and the Deputy speaker of the Punjab Legislative Assembly by Act of the Provincial Legislature; it is hereby enacted as follows :-
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937.1 Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor under Section 75 of the Government of India Act, 1935, on the 23rd April, 1937, and was first published in the Punjab Gazette, Extraordinary of the 28th April, 1937.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 1-A--> State(s): Punjab (a) House includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the gardens thereof. (b) Maintenance in relation to a house shall include the payment of local rates and taxes and charges for electricity and water.1 Section 1-A, added by Punjab Act No. 17 of 1952, Section 2, with effect from 17.4.1952.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to the Speaker of the Punjab Legislative Assembly [a salary at the rate of two thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem, Sumptuary allowance at the rate of two thousand rupees per mensem and convience allowance]1 at the rate of three thousand and six hundred rupees a year 2 [or in lieu thereof, a State Car, the expenses on the maintenance and propulsion of which shall be borne by the State Government] and there shall in addition be provided by Government a free furnished house 3 [-] for him 4 [the maintenance charges of which shall be borne by the State Government].5 [The State Government may allow him to continue in free occupation of the house for a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of his ceasing to be the Speaker: 6 [Provided that the maintenance and propulsion of State Car used by the Speaker shall not be subject to the limit of three thousand six hundred rupees a year.] Substituted by Punjab Act No. 5 of 1992. Vide Punjab Act 7 of 1972. The words at Simla' omitted by Punjab Act 36 of 1953, Section 2. Added by Punjab Act No. 17 of 1952, Section 3. Added by Punjab Act 36 of 1953. Vide Punjab Act 7 of 1972.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to the Deputy Speaker of the Punjab Legislative Assembly [a salary at the rate of two thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem, Sumptuary allowance at the rate of one thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem and convience allowance]1 at the rate of three thousand and six hundred rupees a year 2 [or in lieu thereof, a State Car, the expenses on the maintenance and propulsion of which shall be borne by the State Government and there shall in addition be provided by the State Government a free furnished house at Chandigarh for him the maintenance charges of which shall be borne by the State Government or in lieu thereof he shall be paid such allowance not exceeding three hundred rupees per mensem as the State Government may fix. The State Government may also allow him to continue in free occupation of the house for a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of his ceasing to be the Deputy Speaker. 3 [Provided that the maintenance and propulsion of State Car used by the Deputy Speaker shall not be subject to the limit of three thousand six hundred rupees a year.] Substituted by Punjab Act No. 5 of 1992. Vide Punjab Act 7 of 1972. Vide Punjab Act No. 7 of 1972.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 3-A--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall each be entitled to have a telephone installed at any place within his constituency or at his place of residence or at Chandigarh and all charges in respect of installation and security deposit shall be paid by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker themselves and the amount so paid shall be reimbursed to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker by the Government on production of receipts obtained from the Posts & Telegraph Department. (2) The charges in respect of rental, local and outside calls made by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker from one or more telephones installed in their names within the State of Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh shall be paid initially by the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker themselves and the amount so paid shall be reimbursed to them by the Government on production of receipts obtained from the Posts & Telegraph Department: Provided that the reimbursement of charges referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not exceed 2 [fourty eight thousand rupees per mensem. Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 20 of 1995. Substituted vide Act No. 21 of 1998.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 3-AA--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker constituency, secretarial and postal facilities allowance at the rate of 1 [five thousand rupees per mensem.2 Substituted vide Act 21 of 1998. Added vide Act No. 5 of 1992.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 3-B--> State(s): Punjab The speaker and the Deputy Speaker each along-with his spouse and his dependent children accompanying either of them and an attendant accompanying him to look after and assist him shall, during the course of a financial year, be entitled to travel by any railway in India or within or outside India by an air-conditioned coach or by air and an amount equivalent to the expenses incurred on such journey shall be reimbursed to him: Provided that where the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker travels by his own motorcar and furnishes a cash receipt from a licensed dealer, indicating the name of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, quantity of petrol or diesel purchased by him for propulsion of his motorcar the date on which it was purchased, the cost thereof and the registration number of his motorcar, the expenses so incurred shall be reimbursed to him: Provided further that the total expenses incurred for the facilities specified in this section shall not exceed the amount of1 [fifty thousand rupees in a financial year.2 Substituted vide Act 20 of 1998. Substituted vide Punjab Act 5 of 1992.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by rules, there may be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker by way of a repayable advance- (a) a sum of money not exceeding 2 [six lac rupees] for building or purchasing a house; and (b) a sum of money not exceeding 3 [three lac rupees] or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor-car or a Jeep or for conversion of a petrol driven Motor-car or a Jeep to a diesel driven vehicle, or a sum of money not exceeding ten thousand rupees or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor-cycle or a Scooter. [(1-A) The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker may be paid second repayable advance for the purchase of a motor-car, if they have repaid the entire previous advance, subject to the conditions specified in sub-section (1).]4 (2) On the acceptance of an application for an advance, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, shall execute a deed in the form prescribed by rules, undertaking to use the advance for the purpose for which, and to fulfill the conditions on which the advance is sanctioned, rendering himself and such property as may have been specified in the deed as security including the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance liable for the repayment of the loan and interest due thereon: Provided that no advance for building the house shall be sanctioned unless the plot or land on which the house is to be built, is exclusively owned and possessed by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker applying therefor, and is free from all encumbrances. (3) No transfer, assignment or charge made or created after the execution of the deed under sub-section (2), in relation to the property specified therein or the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance, shall be valid against the State Government, unless it has been made or created with its previous consent in writing. (3-A) Where the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker having obtained an advance under sub-section (1) dies while holding office as such, the amount of the advance or any part thereof which would have accrued after the date of his death in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant of the advance along with interest thereon shall be written off with the sanction of the prescribed authority. (4) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this section. Substituted vide Punjab Act 11 of 1979. Substituted vide Act 21 of 1998. Substituted vide Act 21 of 1998. Added vide Punjab Act 21 of 1998.
Punjab Legislative Assembly Speakers and Deputy Speakers Salaries Act, 1937_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab The salary and allowances payable to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, and free furnished house and other perquisites admissible to them, under this Act, shall be exclusive of income-tax which shall be payable by the State Government. 
