Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the appointment of a Serjeant-at-Arms to attend on the Speaker of the 1 [Haryana] Legislative Assembly, for the appointment of deputies and subordinates and for other matters. WHEREAS it is expedient that more definite provisions than at present exists should be made for the enforcement of the orders of the Speaker of the 2 [Haryana] Legislative Assembly in matters relating to the conduct of business and the maintenance of order; IT is hereby enacted as follows:- Deemed to have been substituted for the word "Punjab" by the Haryana Adaptation of Laws Order, 1968. Deemed to have been substituted for the word "Punjab" by the Haryana Adaptation of Laws Order, 1968.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act- (i) "Assembly" means the 1 [Haryana] Legislative Assembly, (ii) "Assembly building" means the Assembly Chamber, the lobbies and all other portions of the Assembly building, and includes its precincts, and (iii) "Speaker" includes a person acting as such under 2 [Articles 179 and 180 of the Constitution of India], or under the rules of procedure of the Assembly except for the purposes of sections 7 and 9. Substituted for the word "Punjab" by the Haryana Act 1 of 1966. Substituted for the word "section 65 of the Government of India Act, 1935" by Punjab Act 33 of 1957.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The Governor or such person as he may direct may appoint a Serjeant-at Arms and one or more deputy Serjeant-at-arms.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The Speaker shall have the power to direct the Serjeant-at-Arms or any of his deputies to remove or exclude from the Assembly building or any part thereof any person who in the opinion of the Speaker infringes the rules of procedure of the Assembly or otherwise behaves in a disorderly manner: Provided that this power shall not be exercised against a member of the Assembly unless he has first been directed by the Speaker to withdraw.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab The duties of the Serjeant-at-Arms and his deputies, if any, shall be to attend on the Speaker, to keep the doors of the Assembly building and to execute the orders given by the Speaker under section 4, for which purposes they may enlist to their aid such servants of the 1 [Government] or of the Assembly as they may consider necessary. Substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab The Governor or such person as he may direct may appoint such officers, messengers and other persons as may be required to assist the Serjeant-at-Arms in the proper execution of his duties. (OFFICES)
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab Except with the sanction of the Speaker, no court shall entertain any proceedings, either civil or criminal, which may be instituted against the Serjeant-at-Arms or any of his deputies in respect of any act done or purporting to be done by them in the execution of their duty or against any person in respect of the carrying out of orders given to him by the Serjeant-at-Arms or any of his deputies within the scope of their authority.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab The Serjeant-at-Arms and his deputies, and any person appointed under section 6 or enlisted in aid under section 5, shall be deemed to be public servants for the purposes of the Indian Penal Code.
Punjab Legislative Assembly (Offices) Act, 1939_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab The Speaker may frame rules for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
