Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab Received the assent of the President of India on the 13th July, 1962, and was first published in the Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 21st July 1962. An Act to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in its application to the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Thirteenth Year of Republic of India as follows: -
Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962.
Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In sub section (2) of section 12 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in its application to the State of Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the word "made" the words "and, where the acquisition of land is not for the purposes of the Union, also send a copy of the award to the State Government" shall be added.
Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely:- 12-A. Power to correct award:- (1) The Collector may, at any time but not later than six months from the date of award, or, where a reference is required to be made under section 18, before the making of such reference, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in the award either of his own motion or on the application of any person interested. (2) The Collector shall give immediate notice of any correction made in the award to all persons interested and, where the acquisition of land is not for the purposes of the Union, also to the State Government. (3) Where any excess amount is proved to have been paid to any person as a result of the correction made under sub-section (1), such person shall be liable to refund the excess, and if he defaults or refuses to pay, the same may be realised as an arrear of land revenue."
Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In Section 18 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- "(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the State Government may, where the requisition of land is not for the purposes of the Union and it considers the amount of compensations allowed by the award under section 11 to be excessive, require the Collector by written application that the matter be referred by him to the Court for determination of the amount of compensation. Explanation - In any case of land under Part VII, that requisition under this sub-section may be made by the State Government at the request of the Company on its undertaking to pay all the cost consequent upon such requisition. (2B) The requisition shall state the grounds on which objection to the award is taken and shall be made within six months of the date of award."
Land Acquisition (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In sub-section (1) of section 25 of the principal Act, the words "or be less than the amount awarded by the Collector under section 11" shall be omitted. 
