Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty- Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after section 59, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "59-A. Disposal of property - (1) With respect to the disposal of property belonging to a Committee, the following provisions shall have effect, namely:- (a) The Executive Officer may, with the sanction of the committee, lease, sell, let out on hire or otherwise transfer any property, movable or immovable, belonging to the Committee. (b) The consideration for which any immovable property may be sold, leased or otherwise transferred shall not be less than the value at which such immovable property could be sold, leased or otherwise transferred in normal and fair competition. (c) The sanction of the Committee under the aforesaid clause (a) may be given either generally for any class of cases or specially for any particular case. (d) Subject to any condition or limitation that may be specified by or under any other provision of this Act, the foregoing provisions of this section shall apply to every disposal of property belonging to the Committee made under, or for any purposes of this Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Executive Officer may, with the sanction of the Committee, transfer at market value, any immovable property belonging to the Committee to recognized political parties having representation in the current Vidhan Sabha but, having no office at the District Headquarter.".
Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 61, in sub-section (1), in clause (aa) in sub-clause (A), in Item I,- (i) at the end of serial No. (ix), the word "and " shall be omitted; and (ii) at the end of serial No. (x), the word "and" shall be added and thereafter, the following shall be added, namely:- "(xi) purchase centres, sub yards, principal yards, kissan sarais, office buildings and other properties owned and used by the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and the Market Committees established under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (Punjab Act No. 23 of 1961).".
Punjab Municipal (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 68, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(3) Where the tax calculated under sub-section (1), is not fully paid by the owner or occupier by the 31st December of the relevant financial year as aforesaid, but is paid on or before the 31st March of that financial year, a penalty of ten per cent of the remaining amount of tax so calculated shall be payable: Provided that no penalty shall be payable if the tax calculated under sub-section (1) for the financial year 2015-16 is fully paid by the 31st March 2016.". Vivek Puri Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
