Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-Seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows: -
Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 90, in sub-section (3-A), in clause (ii), in sub-clause (A), in item 1,- (i) at the end of serial No. (ix), the word "and" shall be omitted; and (ii) at the end of serial No. (x), the word "and" shall be added and thereafter, the following shall be added, namely:- "(xi) purchase centres, sub yards, principal yards, kissan sarais, office buildings and other properties owned and used by the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and the Market Committees established under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 (Punjab Act No. 23 of 1961).".
Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 112-A, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(3) Where the tax calculated under sub-section (1), is not fully paid by the owner or occupier by the 31st December of the relevant financial year as aforesaid, but is paid on or before the 31st March of that financial year, a penalty of ten per cent of the remaining amount of tax so calculated shall be payable: Provided that no penalty shall be payable if the tax calculated under sub-section (1) for the financial year 2015-16 is fully paid by the 31st March 2016.".
Punjab Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 172, the existing provisions shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) and after such re-numbered sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be added, namely: - "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Commissioner may, with the sanction of the Corporation, transfer at market value, any immovable property belonging to the Corporation to recognized political parties having representation in the current Vidhan Sabha but, having no office at the District Headquarter.". Vivek Puri Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
