Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the levy and collection of tolls on mechanical vehicles crossing certain bridges in the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Eighth of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957.1 (2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Punjab. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President of India on the 8th January, 1958
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) bridge means a bridge specified in the First Schedule annexed to this Act and such other bridge as may, from time to time, be notified by the State Government in this behalf; (b) mechanical vehicle means any laden or unladen vehicle designed to be driven under its own power including a motor vehicle as defined clause (18) of Section 2 of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, but does not include a cart or a bicycle; (c) Toll Inspector means the person authorised by the State Government to collect toll in respect of any mechanical vehicle crossing a bridge, and includes every Government servant posted at a bridge in connection with the collection of toll.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) There shall be levied and paid to the State Government on every mechanical vehicle specified in column 2 of the second Schedule to this Act, crossing a bridge, a toll at the rate, specified against each mechanical vehicle in column 3 thereof: Provided that no toll shall be levied on Defence Services Vehicles, and such other mechanical vehicle or class of mechanical vehicles any class of persons or individuals as the State Government may, by general or special order, exempt from the levy or payment of the toll. (2) Every person incharge of a mechanical vehicle shall, before crossing a bridge, pay to the Toll Inspector posted at the entrance of the bridge, the toll and shall not cross the bridge without obtaining a receipt from him in token of having paid the amount thereof. (3) Such receipt shall be handed over to the Toll Inspector posted at the other end of the bridge.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The Driver of a mechanical vehicle shall cause the vehicle to stop when required to do so by the Toll Inspector to enable him to carry out any duties imposed on him by or under this Act.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) Whoever- (a) attempts to cross any bridge without complying with the provisions of this Act; or (b) obstructs the Toll Inspector in the discharge of his duties imposed by or under this Act; or (c) contravenes any other provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any order or direction made under any such provision or rule; shall be liable, on conviction, to a fine which may extend to fifty rupees. (2) No Magistrate shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint in writing made by the Toll Inspector.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person, authorized to act by or under this Act, for anything done or purporting to have been done, in good faith, under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab No civil court shall have jurisdiction in any matter which the State Government or any other person or authority is empowered by this Act or the rules made thereunder to dispose of or take cognizance of, and regarding the manner in which the State Government or such person or authority exercise any powers vested in it or him by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab The State Government may by notification make rules, consistent with this Act, for securing the levy and collection of toll and generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab (See Section 2(a)) (i) Harike bridge on Sutlej on Ferozepore-Harike-Amritsar Road. (ii) Rupar bridge over Sutlej or Rupar-Nawanshahar Road. (iii) Bridge over Sirsa Aquaduct on Rupar-Nangal Road. (iv) Khanauri bridge on Ghaggar on Sangrur-Narwana-Jind Road.
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab (See Section 3)
Punjab Mechanical Vehicles (Bridge Tolls) Act, 1957_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab   RATE OF TOLL (IN RUPEES) Serial No. Particulars of the type of vehicle on which toll is leviable Outward journey Return journey if completed by the midnight of the following day on presentation of the original receipt of payment of toll for the outward journey 1 2 3 4  Rs. Rs. 1 Tractors carrying trailers or motortrucks when-  (a) Laden with goods 3.00 3.00 (b) Unladen 2.00 0.50 2 Trailer attached to a truck when-  (a) Laden with goods 1.50 1.50 1.50 (b) Unladen 1.00 0.25 3 Motor Bus-  (a) With passengers 3.00 3.00 (b) Empty (without passengers) 2.00 0.50 4 Light motor vehicle such as jeep pick-up van, land-rover, station, wagon, tractor, delivery van 2.00 0.50 5 Trailer attached to a motor car, pickup van, jeep, land-rover, station wagon when- 0.25 (a) Laden with goods 0.75  (b) Unladen 0.50 0.20 6 Motor Bicycle including Scooter 1.00 0.25 7 Motor Bicycle with side car or trailer 1.50 0.40 8 Motor Tricycle Motor Rickshaw including Scooter-Rickshaw 1.25 0.30 9 Any other mechanical vehicle not herein specifically provided for 3.00 3.00 
