Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab 
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952. 1(2) It extends to the whole of the Union Territory of Chandigarh except the areas to which the Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 (27 of 1952) extends. (3) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- "agriculture" includes horticulture and the planting and upkeep of orchard; "building" has the same meaning it,. is assigned to it in clause (2) of section 3 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Act III of 1911) "Deputy Commissioner" means the Deputy Commissioner of the District and includes any person for the time being appointed by the 2(Central Government) by notification in the official Gazette, to perform all or any of the functions of the Deputy Commissioner under this Act ; 3(4) "Commissioner" means any person for the time being appointed by the Administrator of the Union Territory of Chandigarh by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform all or any of the functions of the Commissioner under this Act. 5. prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act 6. "road" means a metalled or unmetalled road, whether a thoroughfare or not, accessible to the public and maintained by the '(Central Government) or by a local authority and 7. the expression "to erect or re-erect any building"' has the same meaning as is assigned to it in clause (5) of section 3 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Act No. III of 1911)
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) The 2(Central Government) may by notification in the official Gazette declare the whole or any part of the area to which this Act extends to be a controlled area for the purposes of this Act. (2) Not less than three months before making a declaration under sub-section (1) the 1(Central Government) shall cause to be published in the official Gazette, and ill at least two newspapers printed in a language other than English, a notification stating that it proposes to make such a declaration, and copies of the notification or of the substance thereof shall be published by the Deputy Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed at his- office and in the area desired to be controlled.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Deputy Commissioner shall within three p months of the declaration under sub-,section (1) of section 3 deposit at his office and at such other places as he considers a necessary, plans showing the area declared to be a "controlled area" for the purposes of this Act, signifying therein the nature of the restrictions applicable to the controlled area. (2) The plans so deposited shall be in the form prescribed and shall be available for inspection by the public free of charge at all reasonable times.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab Except as provided hereinafter, no person, shall erect or re-erect any building or make or extend any excavation or lay out any means of access to a road, in the controlled area save in accordance with the plans and restrictions and with the previous permission of the Deputy Commissioner in writing
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab (1) Every person desiring to obtain the Permission A referred to in section 5 shall make an application in writing to the Deputy Commissioner in such form and containing such information in respect of the building, excavation or means of access to which the application relates as may be prescribed. (2) On receipt of such application the Deputy Commissioner, after making such enquiry as he considers necessary, shall, by order in writing, either- grant the permission, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order ; or refuse to grant such permission. (3) When the Deputy Commissioner grants permission subject to conditions, or refuses to grant permission under sub-section (2), the conditions imposed or the grounds of refusal shall be such as are reasonable having regard to the circumstances of each case and the interest of tile general public. 1"(4) The Deputy Commissioner shall not refuse permission to the erection or re-erection of a building if such building is required for purposes subservient to Agriculture : Provided that where the Deputy Commissioner permits the erection or re-erection of a building under this sub-section, such building shall be erected or, as the case may be, re-erected only in accordance with such conditions as may be prescribed." (5) The Deputy Commissioner shall not refuse permission to the erection or re-erection of a building which was in existence on the date on which the notification under sub-section (2) of section 3 was made, nor shall he impose any condition in respect of such erection or re-erection unless he is satisfied that there is a probability that the building will be used for a purpose or is designed in a manner other than that for which-it was used or designed on the date on which the said declaration was made. (6) If at the expiration of a period of three months after an application under sub-section (1) has been made to the Deputy Commissioner, no order in writing has been passed by the Deputy Commissioner, permission shall, without prejudice to the restriction signified in- the plans under section 4 be deemed to have been given without the imposition of any conditions. (7) The Deputy Commissioner shall maintain a register as may be prescribed with sufficient particulars of all cases in which permission is given or deemed to have been given or refused by him under this section, and the said register shall be available for inspection without charge by all persons interested and such persons shall be entitled to take extracts therefrom.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any person aggrieved or affected by an order of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2) of section 6 granting permission subject to conditions or refusing permission, may w thin sixty days from the date of such order prefer an appeal to the Commissioner. (2) The order of the Commissioner on appeal shall be final.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab A person whose application has been refused or whose application has been granted subject to conditions, under subsection (2) of section 6 shall be entitled to claim compensation within three months of the order of the Deputy Commissioner under section 6 or the order of the Commissioner under section 7, if any, as the case may be, for any injury, loss or damage actually suffered on account of the order, in the manner hereinafter provided.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab (1) An application for compensation shall lie to an arbitrator appointed by the (Central Government) in this behalf. (2) Such arbitrator shall be a person who is or has been a District Judge or an Additional District Judge and he shall have all the powers of an arbitrator under the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940, and the provisions of the said Act shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to proceedings before him. (3) In computing the compensation to be awarded regard shall not be had to any consideration for advantages to be gained or improvements to be made in any land or building in the controlled area, with reference to their development or intended development in the future, or to increase in value as a result of the 2(development of Chandigarh as a Capital.) (4) The arbitrator shall have power to reject the application, after due enquiry, or to make an award for compensation.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab Nothing in this Act shall affect the power of Government or any other authority to acquire land or to impose restrictions upon the use and development of land comprised in the controlled area under any other law for the time being in force, or to permit the settlement of a claim arising out of the exercise of powers under this Act by mutual agreement.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 11--> State(s): Punjab (1) No land within a controlled area shall except with the permission of the 1(Chandigarh Government) be used for purposes other than those-for which it was used on the date of notification cinder sub-section (2) of section 3 ; and no land shall be used for the purposes of a charcoal-kiln, pottery-kiln, lime-kiln or brick-field or brick-kiln, except under ', and in accordance with, the conditions of a licence from the Deputy Commissioner on payment of such fees and under such conditions as may be prescribed. (2) The renewal of such licence may be made annually on payment of such fees as may be prescribed. (3) No person shall be entitled to claim compensation for any injury, damage or loss caused or alleged to have been caused by the refusal to issue or renew, a licence, except in cases where such kiln was in existence at the time of the notification under sub-section(2) of section 3 and in which case an application shall lie to the arbitrator within three months of the order of refusal in the manner provided in section 9.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 12--> State(s): Punjab (1) any person who- erects or re-erects any building or makes or extends any excavation or lays out any means of access to a road in contravention of the provisions of section 5 or in contravention of any conditions imposed by an order under sub-section (2) of section 6 or section 7 or of any conditions prescribed under the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 6 ; or uses any land in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention, with a further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day after the date of first conviction during which he is proved to have persisted in the contravention. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Deputy Commissioner may order any person who has committed a breach of the provisions of the said sub-section to restore to its original state or to bring in conformity with the conditions which have been violated, as the case may be, any building or land in respect of which a contravention such as is described in the said sub-section has been committed, and if such person fails to do so within after making such enquiry as he considers necessary and after giving such person an opportunity of being heard in the matter, himself take such measures as may appear to him to be necessary to give effect to the order and the cost of such measures shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land revenue." Trial of Offences.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 13--> State(s): Punjab No court inferior to that of a 2(judicial Magistrate) of the first class shall be competent to try any Offence punishable under this Act.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 14--> State(s): Punjab No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 15--> State(s): Punjab Nothing in this Act shall apply to- any building for residential Purposes or for purposes-subservient to agriculture in the abadi area of any village as defined in the revenue records; the erection or re-erection of a place of worship or a tomb or cenotaph or of a wall enclosing, a graveyard, place of worship, cenotaph or samadhi on land which is, at the time of the notification under sub-section (2) of section 3 occupied by or for the purposes of such place of worship, tomb, samadhi, cenotaph or graveyard. excavations (including wells) or other operations File in the ordinary course of agriculture, 1(Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, the expression "other operation" does not include erection of super-structures over tube-wells';.) the construction of an unmetalled road intended to give access to land solely for agricultural purposes.
Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952_Section 16--> State(s): Punjab (1) The '(Central Government) may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, subject to the '(condition) of' previous publication. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters. namely :- the form in which the plans under section 4 are to be displayed and the matters to be contained therein : the form in which applications under sub-section(1) of section 6 shall be made and the information to be furnished in such applications ; 1(bb) the conditions subject to which any building required for purposes subservient to agriculture may be erected or re-erected under subsection (4) of Section 6. the regulation of the laying out of means of access to roads ; the fees to be charged for the grant and renewal of licences under section 10 and the conditions governing such licences principles and conditions under which applications for permission under this Act may be granted or refused. 
