Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Ordinance further to amend the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873. Promulgated by the Governor of Punjab in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India. Whereas the Legislative Assembly of the State of Punjab is not in session and the Governor is satisfied that circumstances exist, which render it necessary for him to take immediate action; Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 213 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Punjab is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance, namely:-
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Ordinance may be called the Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for section 36, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "36. Levy of water cess for Maintenance and Development of Irrigation Infrastructure - The State Government may levy a water cess on the occupiers of land, who use canal water for the purposes of irrigation at the rate to be determined by the State Government from time to time and such occupiers, as accept the water, shall pay for water cess accordingly. Such water cess shall be payable within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed. The water cess so collected, shall be used by the State Government for maintenance and development of irrigation infrastructure. The rules hereinbefore referred to may prescribe and determine what persons or classes of persons are to be deemed to be occupiers for the purposes of this section and may also determine the several liabilities, in respect of the payment of water cess of tenants and of persons to whom tenants may have sublet their lands or of proprietors and of persons to whom proprietors may have let the lands held by them in cultivating occupancy.".
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, sections 37, 38 and 39 shall be omitted.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Amendment) Ordinance, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 44,- (i) for the existing heading, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:- "Water-cess by whom payable when charged on land held by several owners.". (ii) in the first line, for the words and sign "water-rate", the words and sign "water-cess" shall be substituted. Shivraj V. Patil Governor of Punjab. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
