Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873, in its application to the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the 28th day of August, 2012.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),in its application to the State of Punjab, in section 70, for the words "to a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or to imprisonment not exceeding one month, or to both", the words "to a minimum fine of five thousand rupees, but not exceeding fifty thousand rupees or to imprisonment not exceeding six months, or with both" shall be substituted.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 70, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "70-A. Order of the Divisional Canal Officer - (1) Whenever water is used by any person in an unauthorized manner or does any act under the provisions of clauses (1) to (7) and clauses (10) to (12) of section 70, the Divisional Canal Officer by an order, shall stop the supply thereof to such person for his next two turns for the first offence and for the second offence stop the supply for full turns during the crop season. In case any person still continues to use water in an unauthorized manner, he shall be excluded from the command area of the canal for a period of two years. (2) An appeal against every order passed by the Divisional Canal Officer shall lie to the Superintending Canal Officer. No appeal shall be entertained, unless it is filed within a period of thirty days from the date of communication of such order. (3) When supply of water of the offender is stopped, his share of canal water shall be distributed judiciously amongst the other share holders falling in the cultural commanded area of the canal from where offender is drawing canal water.".
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Ordinance, 2012 (Punjab Ordinance No. 4 of2012), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
