Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873 in its application to the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazettee.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Northern India Canal and Drainage Act, 1873, in its application to the State of Punjab, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for section 36, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "36. Levy of water cess for Maintenance and Development of Irrigation Infrastructure - The State Government may levy a water cess on the occupiers of land, who use canal water for the purposes of irrigation at the rate to be determined by the State Government from time to time and such occupiers, as accept the water, shall pay for water cess accordingly. Such water cess shall be payable within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed. The water cess so collected, shall be used by the State Government for maintenance and development of irrigation infrastructure. The rules hereinbefore referred to may prescribe and determine what persons or classes of persons are to be deemed to be occupiers for the purposes of this section and may also determine the serveral liabilities, in respect of the payment of water cess of tenants and of persons to whom tenants may have sublet their lands or of proprietors and of persons to whom proprietors may have let the lands held by them in cultivating occupancy.".
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, sections 37, 38 and 39 shall be omitted.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 44,- (i) for the existing heading, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:- "Water-cess by whom payable when charged on land held by several owners.". (ii) in the first line, for the words and sign "water-rate", the words and sign "water-cess" shall be substituted.
Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Northern India Canal and Drainage (Punjab Amendment) Ordinance, 2014 (Punjab Ordinance No. 3 of 2014), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
