Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Official Language Act, 1967. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008.1 (2) It shall come into force at once, except the provisions of section 3-A, which shall come into force after the expiry of a period of six months, from the date of its commencement. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 27th October 2008
Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Official Language Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act , after section 3, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "3-A.Use of Punjabi in Courts and Tribunals - (1) In all civil courts and criminal courts, subordinate to the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, all revenue courts and rent tribunals or any other court or tribunal, constituted by the State Government, work in such courts and tribunals shall be done in Punjabi. Explanation -For the purpose of this section, the words 'civil court' and 'criminal court' shall have the same meaning as respectively, assigned to them in the Code of Civil Procedure. 1908. and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. (2) The concerned Administrative Departments of the State Government, shall make arrangements to provide necessary infrastructure and training to the concerned staff, in order to ensure the use of Punjabi in all courts and tribunals, referred to in sub-section (1), within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008. 3-B.Use of Punjabi in the offices of State Government and public sector undertakings etc - In all offices of the State Government, public sector undertakings, boards and local bodies and offices of the schools, colleges and universities of the State Government, all official correspondence shall be made in Punjabi.'".
Punjab Official Language (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act after section 8, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "8-A.Power to inspect - The Director, Languages, Punjab or any, of his officers, authorized by him, may inspect any office of the State Government, public sector undertaking, board or corporation, and office of any school, college or university of the State Government, to ensure the implementation of the provisions of sections 3 and 3-B of this Act. The officer or official having custody of the records of the aforesaid offices, shall make such record available, to the said Director or officer for inspection. 8-B.State Level Empowered Committee - (1) There shall be constituted a State Level Empowered Committee to review and ensure the implementation of the provisions of this Act at the State level. (2) The State Level Empowered Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely :- (i) the Education Minister, Punjab ; Chairperson (ii) the Media Advisor to Chief Minister, Punjab or any person, to be nominated by the Chief Minister ; Member (iii) Advocate General, Punjab or his representative ; Member (iv) the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of School Education ; Member (v) the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Higher Education ; Member (vi) the Legal Remembrancer and Secretary to Government of Punjab ; Member (vii) two representatives of Sahit Sabhas to be nominated by the Government ; Members (viii) three renowned persons, associated with Punjabi Press, to be nominated by the State Government ; Members (ix) four representatives of the public, to be nominated by the State Government ; and Members (x) the Director, Languages, Punjab : Convener (3) The State Level Empowered Committee may give such directions to the District Level Empowered Committee for implementing the provisions of this Act. as it may deem appropriate. (4) The State Level Empowered Committee shall meet at least once in six months. 8-C.District Level Empowered Committee - (1) There shall be constituted a District Level Empowered Committee to review and ensure the implementation of the provisions of this Act at the District level. (2) The District Level Empowered Committee shall consist of the following, namely :- (i) A Minister or Member of the Legislative Assembly of the district, to be nominated by the Chief Minister ; Chairman (ii) the Deputy Commissioner ; Vice Chairman (iii) the District Education Officer ; Member (iv) two representatives of Punjabi Sahityakars in the district, to be nominated by the State Government ; Members (v) three persons, associated with Punjabi Press, to be nominated by the State Government : Members (vi) the District Public Relations Officer ; Member (vii) two representatives of the public, to be nominated by the State Government; Members (viii) the District Attorney; and Member (ix) the District Language Officer. Convener (3) The District Level Empowered Committee shall review the implementation of the provisions of this Act, in all offices of the State Government, public sector undertakings, boards and local bodies and offices of the schools, colleges and universities of the State Government at the District level, and shall send a report to the State Level Empowered Committee. (4) The District Level Empowered Committee shall comply with the directions given by the State Level Empowered Committee with regard to the implementation of the provisions of this Act and shall report back about the compliance of such directions. (5) The District Level Empowered Committee shall meet at least once in two months. 8-D.Punishment - (1) If any officer or official of the aforesaid offices is found guilty of persistently violating the provisions of this Act or the notification issued there under, he shall be liable for disciplinary action under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970: (2) Action against the guilty officer or official, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be taken by the concerned competent authority, on the basis of the recommendation made by the Director, Languages, Punjab : Provided that before taking any disciplinary action, the officer or official concerned, shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard." (Rekha Mittal), Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
