Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the adaption of Punjabi as the language to be used for all or any of the official purposes of the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Official Language Act, 1967.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 29th December, 1967, and was first published in the Punjab Government Gazette, Extraordinary, dated the 29th December, 1967.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - (a) "Punjabi" means Punjabi in Gurmukhi script; (b) "State Government" means the Government of the State of Punjab.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The official language of the State of Punjab shall be Punjabi.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab This State Government may, from time to time, by notification, direct that Punjabi shall be used for such official purposes of the State and from such date as may be notified in the notification.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab On and from such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint in this behalf, the language to be used in - (a) all Bills to be introduced, or amendments thereto to be moved, in either House of the Legislature of the State, (b) all Acts passed by the Legislature of the State, (c) all Ordinances promulgated, by the Governor under Article 213 of the Constitution, and (d) all Orders, Rules, Regulations, and Bye-laws issued by the State Government under the Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State shall be in Punjabi : Provided that the State Government may appoint different dates in respect of any of the purposes referred to in clauses (a) to (d) above.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab Until the Government otherwise directs by notification under section 4, English may continue to be used, in addition to the official language of the State or Hindi for the transaction of business in the Legislature of the State.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 6-A--> State(s): Punjab A translation in Punjabi published under the authority of the Governor in the Official Gazette of the State, on and after the date specified by notification; (a) of any Central Act or of any Ordinance promulgated by the President, with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; 2 [(aa) of any Central Act enacted before the commencement of the Constitution, with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; (aaa) of any Central Act passed under Article 252 of the Constitution]. (b) of any State Act or of any Ordinance promulgated by the Governor; or (c) of any order, rule, regulation or bye-law issued by the State Government under the Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State; shall be deemed to be an authoritative text thereof in Punjabi]. Inserted by Punjab Act 11 of 1969. See Punjab Act 12 of 1982.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to debar any person to submit a representation for the redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the State in any of the languages, including Hindi, used in the State.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the State Government shall take suitable steps to develop the Hindi language in the State.
Punjab Official Language Act, 1967_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab The Punjab Official Languages Act, 1960, is hereby repealed. 
