Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Pepsu Townships Development Board Act, 1954 with the aim and object to board base the Constitution of the Board to streamline the work. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-Seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Pepsu Townships Development Board Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) in Section 2 clause (g) shall be substituted and clause (h) shall be inserted in place of clause (g) as under:- "(g) "Senior Vice-Chairman" means the Senior Vice-Chairman of the Board". "(h) "Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of the Board".
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in sub-section (1) of section 4, the following words "Senior Vice-Chairman" and "Vice-Chairman" shall be inserted after the word Chairman and before words 'seven other members', and the word "seven" shall be substituted with the word six to read as under :- "(1) The Board shall consist of the Chairman, the Senior Vice-Chairman and Vice-Chairman and six other members, to be appointed by the State Government, of whom at least two shall be displaced persons settled in a township."
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in sub-section (3) of section 9, the following words have to be added:- (a) in sub-section (1) for the word "Chairman", the words "Chairman, Senior Vice-Chairman, Vice-Chairman" shall be substituted.
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, sub-section (3) of section 9, the words "or in his absence Senior Vice-Chairman" after the words "or in his absence Vice- Chairman" and the word "their" shall be inserted in place of word 'his' and sub-section (3) to read as under:- "(3) The Chairman or in his absence Senior Vice-Chairman or in his absence Vice-Chairman or in their absence any member, chosen by the members present from among themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the Board."
Pepsu Townships Development Board (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, clause (d) of section 2, words "Senior Vice-Chairman" and "Vice-Chairman" shall be inserted to read as under:- "(d) "member" means a member of the Board and includes the Chairman, Senior Vice-Chairman and Vice-Chairman. (Vivek Puri) Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
