Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words "THE PUNJAB PREVENTION OF HUMAN SMUGGLING", the words "THE PUNJAB TRAVEL PROFESSIONALS' REGULATION" shall be substituted.
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in the first line of the preamble, for the words "travel agents", the words and signs "travel agents, coaching institutes of IELTS, ticketing agents and general sales agents of airlines" shall be substituted.
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 6, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(6) If the licence is suspended, then applications, which are under process may be processed, but no new application shall be obtained.".
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 7, for the sign "." appearing at the end, the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that at the time of advertisement, if the license number is printed, then prior information need not to be given to competent authority.".
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, the existing section 10 read as sub-section (2) of section 10 and sub-section (1) shall be inserted, namely:- "(1) When a complaint is received by the Deputy Commissioner in the first instance may verify the same himself or get the same verified from the Additional Deputy Commissioner or Sub-Divisional Magistrate concerned.".
Punjab Prevention of Human Smuggling (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub-section (1), for the words and sign "not less than three years, which may extend to seven years", the words " which may be extended upto seven years depending upon the crime or offences committed" shall be substituted. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
