Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(cc) "educational institution" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1974;".
Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 7, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "8. Jurisdiction of Educational Tribunal - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and in sub-section (12) of section 7-A of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1974, the Educational Tribunal shall also have jurisdiction to hear cases of disputes between the Management Committees of all educational institutions and their employees.".
Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Amendment Ordinance, 2013 (Punjab Ordinance No. 4 of 2013), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amendment by this Act. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
