Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for Prohibition of Smoking in Cinema and Theatre Halls. It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Punjab. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor on the 20th April, 1951.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant to the subject or context. (a) the "Act" means the prohibition of Smoking in (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act 1951; (b) "Auditorium" means the portion of the building occupied by the audience or spectators during a show; (c) "Inspector" means the Inspector appointed under the Act by Government; (d) "Government" means the Government of the State of Punjab; (e) "Show" means a cinematograph exhibition or performance of a drama or dance; (f) "Smoking" means smoking of tobacco in any form, whether as cigarette, cigar, beeri or in pipe or hukka.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) No person shall smoke in Cinema or Theatre Halls, during the prohibited period, either in the auditorium or on the stage, except in so far as the smoking may be a part of the performance. Explanation. -The expression "prohibited period" means the period beginning from half an hour before the commencement of a show till the end thereof. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section shall be liable to be turned out of the Cinema or Theatre Hall without payment of any compenation or refund of any payment made by him and shall also be liable to arrest for the purposes of section 57 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, and on conviction to a fine, which may extend to rupees twenty.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab An Inspector may enter a Cinema or Theatre Hall to satisfy himself that the provisions of this Act are not being contravened.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except on the complaint, in writing, of an Inspector authorised in this behalf by a general or special order of the Director of Health Services, Punjab.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab All cases under this Act shall be tried in the manner provided for the summary trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.
Punjab Prohibition of Smoking (Cinema and Theatre Halls) Act, 1951_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab The State Government may, by notification, make rules for arrying out the provisions of this Act. 
