Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the disposal of properties taken over by the Punjab Government in package deal and for matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Twenty- seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on 19th April, 1976 and was published in Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary Legislative Supplement Part I dated 30.4.1976.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - 1 [(1) Commissioner means the Commissioner of a division. 2 [(1-A) 'package deal property' means the surplus evacuee property taken over by the State Government and referred to in the Government of India letter - (i) No. 3(35) Pol. II/60-Land & Rent, dated 3rd June 1961, read with letter No. 3(54)/Pol. II/60-L & R, dated 5th March, 1962. (ii) No. F. 18(40) J/61/Prop/Comp & Prop., dated 23rd March, 1963 and, (iii) No. F. 18(40)/61-Prop-Comp & Prop.,dated 29th March, 1963, reproduced in the Schedule to this Act; but excluding such property as may be required for transfer or allotment, by way of compensation to a displaced person, as defined in the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, and rural agricultural land required for similar allotment to a displaced person of non-Punjabi extraction in pursuance of the Directions of the Central Government given under Section 32 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, read with sub-rule (2) of Rule 66 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Rules, 1955 : (2) "Schedule Castes" means such castes as have been specified in Part X of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 in relation to the State of Punjab; (3) "standard acre" means a measure of land convertible with reference to yield from and the quality of, the soil, into an ordinary acre according to the prescribed scale; (4) "State Government" means the Government of the State of Punjab; and (5) "unauthorised occupation" means a person shall be deemed to be in unauthorised occupation of any package deal property - (a) where he has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, entered into possession thereof otherwise than under and in pursuance of any allotment, lease or grant or (b) where he notwithstanding anything contained in para (a), has whether before or after the commencement of this Act, entered into possession thereof in pursuance of an order obtained by him by means of fraud, false representation or concealment of any material facts; or (c) where he, being an allottee, lessee or grantee, has by reason of the determination or cancellation of his allotment, lease or grant in accordance with the terms in that behalf therein contained, ceased, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, to be entitled to occupy or hold such package deal property; or (d) where any person authorised to occupy, any package deal property has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act. - (i) sublet, in contravention of the terms of allotment, lease or grant, with-out the permission of the State Government or of any other authority competent to permit such sub-letting, the whole or any part of such package deal property, or (ii) otherwise acted in contravention of any of the terms, express or implied under which he is authorised to occupy such package deal property. Explanation - For the purposes of sub-clause (a) a person shall not merely by reason of the fact that he has paid any rent be deemed to have entered into possession as allottee, lessee or grantee. Vide Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979. Vide Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) For every district, the State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Chief Sales Commissioner, as many Sales Commissioners and Tehsildars (Sales) or Naib Tehsildars (Sales) as may be necessary for the purpose of performing the functions assigned to them by or under this Act. (2) Subject to the general superintendence and control of the State Government the Commissioner shall control the Chief Sales Commissioner, the Sales Commissioner, Tehsildar (Sales) and Naib Tehsildar Sales in his Division and the Chief Sales Commissioner shall Control the Sales Commissioner, Tehsildar (Sales) and Naib Tehsildar (Sales) in his district. Inserted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (i) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildaf (Sales) may transfer any package deal property. (a) by sale by public auction; (b) by sale by auction restricted to socially and educationally backward classes of citizens notified by the State Government from time to time or to the members of the Scheduled Castes; (c) by sale to such class of occupants and at such price as the State Government may by general or special order specify; (d) by sale to any co-operative society, Government company or local authority or to any corporate body for a public purpose; (e) by lease on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed; or (f) in such other manner as may be prescribed: Provided that, except in the case of a sale under clause (d), the maximum area that may be transferred to any person, including the area if any already owned by him; shall not exceed five standard areas or ten ordinary acres, whichever may be less: Provided further that no transfer shall be made Benami. (2) For the purposes of transferring any package deal property under sub- section (1), the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib Tehsildar (Sales) may transfer the same to any per son individually or jointly with any other person or persons. (3) Every Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) selling any package deal property to public auction or otherwise under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a Revenue Officer within the meaning of sub-section (4) of section 89 of the Regis tration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908).
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab Where a Tehsildar (Sale) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) is satisfied that any person is or has at time been in unauthorised occupation of any package deal property. Then without prejudice to any other action which may be taken against that person, the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib- Tehsildar (Sales) may, having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, assess the damages on account of the use and occupation of such package deal property and may, by order, require that person to pay the damages within such period and in such installments as may be specified in the order: Provided that no order shall be made against any person under this section until after the issue of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such order should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the same, have been considered by the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales), as the case may be.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any sum payable to the State Government in respect of any package deal property may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. (2) If any question arises whether a sum is payable to the State Government within the meaning of sub-section (1) in respect of any package deal property, it shall be re ferred to Sales Commissioner within whose jurisdiction the package deal property is situate and the Sales Commissioner shall, after making such enquiry as he may deem fit and giving to the person by whom the sum is alleged to be payable an opportunity of being heard, decide the question and the decision of the Sales Commissioner shall, subject to any appeal or revision under this Act, be final and shall not be called in question by any Court or other authority. (3) For the purposes of this section, a sum shall be deemed to be payable to the State Government notwithstanding that its recovery is barred by the Limitation Act, 1963(35 of 1963) or any other law for the time being in force relating to limitation of actions.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force but subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) may cancel any transfer or terminate any lease or amend the terms or any transfer or lease under which any package deal property is held or occupied by a person; Provided that no transfer shall be cancelled, lease terminated or the terms of any transfer or lease amended unless such an action is permissible under the terms and conditions of the instrument of transfer or lease, as the case may be, and unless an opportunity of showing cause has been given to the transferee or lessee, as the case may be. (2) Where any person - (a) has ceased to be entitled to the possession of any package deal property by reason of any action taken under sub-section (1), or (b) is, in the opinion of the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) otherwise in unauthorised possession of any package deal property; he shall, after has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his eviction from such package deal property, surrender possession of the property on demand being made in this behalf by the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) or by any other person duly authorised by the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales), as the case may be. (3) If any person fails to surrender possession of any package deal property on demand made under sub-section (2), the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, eject such person and take possession of such property and may, for such purpose, use or cause to be used such force as may be necessary.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tehsildar (Sales) or Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) under this Act may, within thirty days from the date of the order prefer an appeal to the Sales Commissioner, in such form and manner as may be prescribed: Provided that the Sales Commissioner may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. (2) The Sales Commissioner may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, vary or reverse the order appealed against and pass such order in relation thereto as he may deem fit.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Sales Commissioner may, within thirty days from the date of the order prefer an appeal to the Chief Sales Commissioner in such form and manner as may be pre scribed: Provided that the Chief Sales Commissioner may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. (2) The Chief Sales Commissioner may, after hearing the appeal, confirm, vary or reverse the order appealed against and pass such order in relation thereto as he may deem fit.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Chief Sales Commissioner may at any time call for the record of any proceedings under this Act in which a Tehsildar (Sales) or a Naib-Tehsildar (Sales) or Sales Commissioner 1 [in his district] has passed an order for the purpose of satisfying himself to the legality or propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as he may deem fit. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power under sub- section (1), if the Chief Sales Commissioner is satisfied that any order whether passed before or after the commencement of this Act, for the transfer of package deal property to any person, has been obtained by him by means of fraud, false representation or concealment of any material facts, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Chief Sales Commissioner may pass an order cancelling or modifying the order of such transfer. (3) No order which prejudicially affects any person shall be passed under this section without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (4) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (2) may, within thirty days from the date of the order, make an application for the revision of the order, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the 2 [Commissioner and the Commissioner] may pass such order thereon as it think fit. Inserted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979. Inserted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 11--> State(s): Punjab Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by any officer or authority under this Act or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by such officer or authority or the successor-in-office of such officer or authority.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 12--> State(s): Punjab Every officer appointed under this Act shall, for the purpose of making any enquiry or hearing an appeal under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely :- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; (c) requisitioning any public record from any Court or office; (d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses; (e) appointing guardians or next friends of persons who are minor or of unsound mind; (f) any other matter which may be prescribed; and any proceedings before any such officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) and every such officer shall be deemed to be a Civil Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974).
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 13--> State(s): Punjab Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder the officers appointed under this Act may take such measures as may be considered necessary or expedient for the purpose of securing, administering, preserving, managing or disposing of any package deal property entrusted to them and generally for the purpose of satisfactorily discharging any of the duties imposed on them by or under this Act and may for any such purpose as aforesaid, do all act necessary or incidental thereto.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 14--> State(s): Punjab (1) The State Government2 may by an order in writing, at any time, transfer any case pending before a Commissioner to another Commissioner. (2) The Commissioner may by an order in writing, at any time, transfer any case pending before a Chief Sales Commissioner to another Chief Sales Commissioner in his division. (3) The Chief Sales Commissioner may, by an order in writing, a anytime, transfer any case pending before any officer appointed under this Act to another officer within his district. (4) The officer to whom the case is transferred under sub-section (1) sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) may subject to any special direction in the order of transfer, proceed from the state at which it was so transferred. Substituted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979. Powers of the State Government under Sections 14 and 15(1) of the Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976, will be exercised by the Financial Commissioners holding the court." See Standing orders dated 21.5.1985 item No. 23
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 15--> State(s): Punjab (1) The State Government2 may at any time call for the record of any case under the Act pending before, or disposed of by, any officer and may pass such order in relation thereto as in its opinion the circumstances of the case require and as is not in consistent with any of the provision contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder. (2) Subject to the provision of sub-section (1), the Commissioner may at any time call for the record or any case under this Act pending before, or disposed of by, any officer, and may pass such order in relation thereto as in his opinion the circum stances require and is not in consistent with any of the provision contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder. (3) The State Government or the Commissioner shall not under this section pass an order reversing or modifying any proceedings or order of any officer without giving the affected person an opportunity of being heard. Substituted by Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979. Powers of the State Government under Sections 14 and 15(1) of the Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976, will be exercised by the Financial Commissioners holding the court." See Standing Orders dated 21.5.1985 item No. 23
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 15-A--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any appeal against an order of the Sales Commissioner pending under sub-section (1) of Section 9 or any proceeding pending under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 10, immediately before the commencement of Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Amendment Act, 1979 before the Chief Sales Commissioner shall stand transferred to and be decided by the concerned Chief Sales Commissioner. (2) Any application for the revision of an order of the Chief Sales Commissioner under sub-section (4) of Section 10 or any proceeding pending under Section 15, immediately before the Commencement of Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Amendment Act, 1979, before the State Government shall stand transferred to and be decided by the concerned Commissioner. Added vide Punjab Act No. 10 of 1979.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 16--> State(s): Punjab (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by any officer or an authority under this Act small be final and no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the State Government or any officer or authority appointed under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. (2) Nothing in the Punjab Public Premises and Land (Eviction and Rent Recovery) Act, 1973, shall apply to package deal property.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 17--> State(s): Punjab No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government or any person appointed under this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section 18--> State(s): Punjab (1) The State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters namely :- (a) The scale according to which a standard acre is to be converted into ordinary acres ; (b) the terms and conditions under which package deal property may be disposed of or the transferred under section 4; (c) the form and manner in which and the time within which an application for the transfer of property may be made by an occupant and the particulars which it may contain; (d) the procedure for the transfer of property and the manner of realisation of the sale-proceeds; (e) procedure for valuation of any property forming part of the package deal property; (f) the principles of assessment of damages of package deal property under un authorised occupation; (g) the powers, functions and duties of the Tehsildar (Sales) and Naib Tehsildar (Sales); (h) the form and manner in which records and books of accounts may be maintained; (i) the form and manner in which appeals, revisions or other applications may be preferred or made under this Act and the procedure for hearing such appeals, revisions or other applications; (j) the fees payable in respect of appeals, revisions or other applications made under this Act; (k) the power vested in Civil Court which may be exercised by an officer appointed under this Act; (l) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of ten days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive session aforesaid, the House agrees in making any modifications in the rule or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under that rule.
Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab Schedule [See section 2(1)] No. 3(35)/Pol. 11/60, Land and Rent GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF REHABILITATION Office of the Chief Settlement Commissioner Jaisalmer House, New Delhi. Dated the 3rd June, 1961. From The Chief Settlement Commissioner & Joint Secretary to the Government of India. To The Secretary to the Government of Punjab. Rehabilitation Department, Jullundur. Subject. - Sales of surplus rural evacuee lands and houses/taurs to the Punjab Government. Sir, 1. I am directed to refer to the correspondence resting with Shri B.S. Garewal's D.O. letter No. Reh. (61)/833, dated the 24th April, 1961, on the above subject, and to state that as a result of the further discussions held with him on the 4th May, 1961, the following decisions have been taken for transfer of the surplus evacutee lands and houses/taurs to the Punjab Government :- (1) An area of about 80,000 std. acres of surplus land will be sold to the Punjab Government at the rate of Rs. 445 per std. acre. (2) The surplus rural house/taurs, the estimated value of which is about Rs. 2 crores will be sold to the Punjab Government at 5 per cent of the reserve price already fixed. (3) The Punjab Government will be given a rebate equal to 60% of the sale price of (1) and (2) above to meet administrative expenses for the disposal of the above properties. (4) Banjar land, approximately 1,11,004 acres will be sold to the Punjab Government at Rs. 5 per acre. (5) The entire area of Ghair Mumkin land, the area of which is not yet known will be sold to the Punjab Government at a token price of Rs. 100. (6) Any other land which is not fit for cultivation such as land under river action or situated in the Bet areas will be treated as Ghair Mumkin/banjar land, as the case may be and sold to the Punjab Government on the rates mentioned under (4) and (5) above. The area of such land is also not yet known. 2. The area or the number wherever mentioned is only approximate. The Punjab Government would take immediate steps to find out the extent of area of each category and the number of the houses taurs together with their reserve price. The total amount payable on that amount will also be intimated in them soon. 3. It has also been decided that the entire price of the above properties will be paid by the Punjab Government within a period of 3 years commencing from 1st April, 1961. The payment will be made half yearly so as to complete the entire price in six installments. The first installment will be paid on 1st October, 1961. These installments will not bear any interest. The last installment will be paid on or before 31st March, 1964. 4. Those properties will also be deemed to have been transferred to the Punjab Government with effect from the 1st April, 1961. All income derived from these properties after that date, i.e., rent, lease money etc., will be credited to State Head of Account. 5. The amount to be paid by the Punjab Government will be credited to the compensation pool under the head of account "XLVI-Misc receipts on account of Displaced Persons Receipts on account of acquired evacuee property." 6. Monthly return of the progress of the work may please be forwarded to this office on the 10th of each month. Yours faithfully, S.W. SHIVESHWARKAR. Chief Settlement Commissioner and Joint Secretary to Government of India No. 3(54)/Pol. II/60-L & R GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF REHABILITATION Office of the Chief Settlement Commissioner Jaisalmer House, New Delhi. Dated 5th March, 1962. From The Chief Settlement Commissioner, To The Secretary to the Government of Punjab, Rehabilitation Department Jullundur. Subject:- Sales of excess land in occupation of the allottees. Sir, I am directed to refer to item No. 3 of the minutes of the meeting held at Chandigarh on the 29th January, 1962, on the above subject and to say that as decided in the meeting the excess area in occupation of the allottees may be treated as a part of the package deal and its price at the rate of Rs. 445 per standard acre be paid along with the price of other properties forming part of the deal. It may, however, be clarified that only the excess land which has been detected and sold after 1st April, 1961 will be disposed of in the above manner. The sale price of the excess land which was detected before that date will be paid directly to the Compensation Pool as was done hitherto. Yours faithfully, SHIV KUMAR VERMA. From Chief Settlement Commissioner, No. F. 18(4)J/61/Prop/Comp & Prop. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF WORKS, HOUSING AND REHABILITATION (DEPARTMENT OF REHABILITATION) Office of the Chief Settlement Commissioner Jaisalmer House, New Delhi. Dated the 23rd March, 1963 From The Chief Settlement of Commissioner. To The Secretary to Government of Punjab, Rehabilitation Department, Jullundur. Subject :- Sale of acquired evacuee urban agricultural lands in Punjab to the Punjab Government in a Package Deal. Sir, 1. I am directed to refer to Shri B.S. Grewal's d.o. letters Nos. 2976/C (Reh) and Reh (CH) 63/234, dated the 19th December, 1962 and 18th February, 1963, on the above subject and to Item No. III of the minutes of meeting held in the room of Secretary of Works, Housing and (Rehabilitation on 8th January, 1963, with the Financial Commissioner, Punjab and also to item IV of the minutes of the meeting held at Chandigarh on the 16th February, 1963, between the Chief Minister, Punjab and the Union Minister of Works, Housing and Rehabilitation, and to convey the sanction of the President to the sale of the remaining acquired evacuee urban agricultural land in Punjab to the State Government at the rates etc. shown in the attached statement. 2. The total price recoverable from the Punjab Government in respect of the above lands is Rs. 18.18,950 (Rupees Eighteen Lacs, Eighteen Thousand, Nine Hundred and Fifty only). The above amount will be paid by the Punjab Government in a lump- sum on first April, 1963, but in case the State Government desired to pay the amount within a period of one year, i.e. upto 31st March, 1964, no interest will be charged. The amount paid by the Punjab Government will be credited to the 'Compensation Pool' under the Help of Account "L II-Miscellaneous-Receipts on account of DPS- Receipts forming part of Compensation Pool-Receipts on account of sale of acquired Evacuee Properties," 3. The above lands will be deemed to have been transferred to the Punjab Government from 1st April, 1963. All income derived from the properties after 1st April, 1963, i.e. rents, lease money, etc. will be credited to the State Head of Account. 4. Acquired Evacuee Urban agricultural lands which has already been sold by auction or by allotment by the Regional Settlement Commissioner but in respect of which sales/transfers might be cancelled in future on account of the failure of purchasers to pay up the balance purchase price according to agreements, will also be transferred to the Punjab Government at the rates mentioned in para 1 above and the price paid by the Punjab Government will be credited to the Head Account mentioned in para 2 above. 5. This letter issues with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance (Department of (Expenditure) - Vide their U.O. No. D-710/FRI/63, dated 22nd March, 1963. Yours faithfully, M.J. Srivastava. Settlement Commissioner (C) & Ex-officio, Under Secretary to the Government of India. Statement showing the area and cost of Acquired Evacuee Urban Agricultural Lands in Punjab sold to the Punjab Government in a 'Package' deal Sl. No. Nature Of land Area Rate per acre Amount 1 2 3 4 5 1. Evacuee Area 680,Q0 Acres Rs. 1,100/- Rs.7,48,000,00 2. Area under occupancy rights 651.00 Acres Rs.550/- Rs. 3,58,050,00 3. Evacuees share of area jointly owned by Evacuees and non-Evacuees 1,296,00 Acres Rs.550/- Rs. 7,12,800,00 4. Shamlat lands, Ghair Mumkin Rasta mumkin 186,00 Rs. 100/-( Johar Acres Token price in alt) Total 2,812,00 Acres Rs. 18,18,950 Note - (1) Evacuee area shown at Serial No. 1 included 176 acres which were auctioned were from 1st December, 1962 to 8th January, 1963 and the bids were not confirmed. (2) Detailed lists of the above lands transferred to the Punjab Government, will be furnished to the State Government by the R.S.C. Jullundur. M. J. Srivastava. Settlement Commissioner and Ex-officio. Under-Secretary to the Government of India. No. F18(40)140-Prop/Comp. & Prop. GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF WORKS, HOUSING AND REHABILITATION (Department of Re-habilitation) Office of the Chief Settlement Commissioner Jaisalmer House, New Delhi. Dated the 29th March, 1963. From The Chief Settlement Commissioner. To The Secretary to Government of Punjab, Rehabilitation Department, Jullundur/Chandigarh. Subject - Transfer of acquired evacuee urban built up properties to the Government of Punjab in package deal. Sir, 1. I am directed to refer to item No. VI of the minutes of the meeting held at Chandigarh on 16th February, 1963 between the Chief Minister, Punjab and the Union Minister for Works, Housing and Rehabilitation and to convey the sanction of the President to the sale of the remaining Acquired Evacuee Urban Built-up properties comprising of houses, shops, Khola/sites in Punjab to the Punjab Government at 15 per cent of their reserve price as per details given in the attached statement. 2. The total price recoverable from the Punjab Government in respect of the above properties is Rs. 27,25,294 (Rupees twenty-seven lacs-twenty-five thousand two hundred and ninety-four only). The above amount will be paid by the Punjab Government in a lump sum on 1st April, 1969, but in case the State Government desire to pay the amount within a period of one year i.e. up to 31st March, 1969, no interest will be charged. The amount paid by the Punjab Government will be credited to "Compensation Pool" under the Head of Account" L.II - Miscellaneous Receipts on account of DPS - Receipts forming part of Compensation Pool - Receipts on account of Sale of Acquired Evacuee Properties." 3. The above properties will be deemed to have been transferred to the Punjab Government from 1st April, 1963. All income derived from these properties after 1st April, 1963, i.e. rents, lease money etc. will be credited to the State Head of Account. All receipts of these properties in respect of the period prior to the 1st April, 1963, will be credited to the Central Government. 4. Acquired Urban Evacuee built up properties which had already been sold by auction or by allotment by the Regional Settlement Commissioner but in respect in which sales transfers might be cancelled in future on account of failure of purchasers to pay up the balance purchase price or for any other reasons will not form part of this Package Deal. Such properties will be disposed of by the State Government and the sale proceeds credited to the Central Government. The question of paying the State Government a commission on the sale proceeds to cover their expenditure will be considered in due course. 5. This letter issue with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), vide their U.O. No. 766/FR-1163, dated 27th March, 1962. Yours faithfully, M.J. SRIVASTAVA, Settlement Commissioner and Ex-Officio, Under Secretary to the Government of India. STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS IN RESPECT OF ACQUIRED EVACUEE URBAN PROPERTIES IN PUNJAB SOLD TO THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT IN A PACKAGE DEAL Sr. No. Nature of properties No. of properties Reserve price Price to be paid by the Punjab Government 1 2 3 4 5 1. House 7,381 Rs.1,15,33,313/- Rs.17,29,997/- 2. Shops 170 Rs.6,64,218/- Rs.99,633/- 3. Kholas/sites 7,543 Rs.59,71,092/- Rs.8,95,564  15,094 Rs.1,81,68,63- Rs.27,25,294 Note - Detailed lists of the properties transferred to the Punjab Government are being prepared by the Regional Settlement Commissioner, Jullundur after actual survey and will be furnished to the State Government by the Regional Settlement Commissioner. There may, therefore, be some variation in the above figures. M.J. SRIVASTAVA Settlement Commissioner and Ex-Officio, Under Secretary to the Government of India. 
