Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 19th March, 2008
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act. 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2., in clause (zt), for the word and figure "section 10", the word, figure and letter "section 13-A" shall be substituted.
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 10, in sub-section (1), the words "a Sarpanch and" shall be omitted.
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 13, the following sections shall be substituted, namely :- "13. Notification of election and oath of allegiance by Panches:- (1) Every election of a Panch shall be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette and no member shall enter upon his duties until his election has been so notified and he has taken an oath or affirmation as specified in Schedule 1. (2) If a person refuses to take an oath or affirmation, referred to in sub-section (1), his election shall be deemed to be invalid and a fresh election shall be got conducted. (3) No person, whose election is deemed to be invalid under sub-section (2). shall be eligible for election to any Gram Panchayat for a period of two years from the date of such invalidation. 13A. First meeting of the Gram panchayat:- The Deputy Commissioner or any officer or official of the State Government, authorised by him in this behalf, shall call the first meeting of the Gram Panchayat in such manner, as may be prescribed, as soon as, the election of all Panches is notified, to elect the Sarpanch from amongst them."
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 15, to sub-section (1), the following Explanation shall be added, namely :- "Explanation-After the Sarpanch is elected, a meeting of the Gram Panchayat shall be held by him at the earliest possible and such meeting shall be deemed to be the "first meeting" of the Gram Panchayat for the purpose of this sub-section.".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 19,- (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "two-third majority of the total number of Panchcs of the Gram Sabha concerned", the words "majority of Panchcs" shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "Gram Sabha", the words "Gram Panchayat" shall be substituted ; and (c) in sub-section (3), for the words "a majority of the members of the Gram Sabha present and voting concerned", the words "a two-third majority of the total number of Panchcs holding office for the time being" shall be substituted.
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Ordinance, 2008 (Punjab Ordinance No 1 of 2008), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act. as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. (B.S. Mehandiratta), Secretary to Government of Punjab. Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
