Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(tt) "Electronic and Print Media" means official websites on internet and newspapers in Punjabi, English and Hindi language having wide circulation in the State of Punjab;".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 10,- (i) in sub-section (1-C), in the proviso, for the sign "." appearing at the end, the sign ":" shall be substituted; (ii) after the existing proviso to sub-section (1-C), the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that de-limitation of wards shall be made immediately on the basis of population if a new Gram Panchayat is established or existing Gram Panchayat is bifurcated or amalgamated."; and (iii) after sub-section (1-C), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(1-D) Coloured site plan of each ward depicting the area and numbers allotted to the houses etc. should accompany the proposed list of wards of a Gram Panchayat.".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 10-A, for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) The Deputy Commissioner or any Officer authorized by him not below the rank of Extra Assistant Commissioner, by notification published in the Official Gazette, shall propose the formulation of wards of the Gram Sabha area to be multi members constituencies as provided under sub-sections (1-C) and (1-D) of section 10 and shall earmark each ward by assigning a separate serial number. (2) The list of proposed wards shall be affixed on the Notice Board of the offices of the Deputy Commissioner or any Officer authorized by him not below the rank of Extra Assistant Commissioner and the Gram Panchayat concerned. In case of any objections or suggestions, a person registered as voter of the Gram Sabha area may submit the same, in writing to the office of the Deputy Commissioner or said authorized Officer concerned within a period of twenty-one days of displaying the list of the proposed wards. After considering the objections or suggestions, if received, the Deputy Commissioner or said authorized Officer, shall pass a well reasoned order to formulate the wards within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of objections and suggestions and the decision of the Deputy Commissioner or the said authorized Officer thereupon shall be final: Provided that information about the exercise for formulation or delimitation of wards shall be widely publicised through electronic and print media.".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 43, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(4) The Panchayat Secretary of the Gram Panchayat concerned, shall maintain the record of numbers allotted to the houses in two original registers or record in the Gram Sabha area and keep on updating the same in case any change occurs in the numbers allotted to the houses. The Panchayat Secretary shall hand over one original register or record of numbers allotted to the houses to the Block Development and Panchayat Officer of the area and make the both records updated in all respects in the month of October every year.".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 101,- (i) in sub-section (2), for sign "." appearing at the end, the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that de-limitation of territorial constituencies shall be made immediately on the basis of population if a new Panchayat Samiti is established or existing Panchayat Samiti is bifurcated or amalgamated."; and (ii) after sub-section (2) and the proviso now being added, the following sub-section (3) shall be added, namely:- "(3) The list of proposed territorial constituencies comprising coloured site plan of each territorial constituency depicting the area etc., shall be affixed on the Notice Board of the offices of the Director, Rural Development and Panchayats or any Officer authorized by him not below the rank of Deputy Director and the office of Panchayat Samiti. In case of any objections or suggestions, a person registered as a voter in the Panchayat Samiti area, may submit the same in writing to the office of the Director, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer within a period of twenty-one days of displaying the list of the proposed territorial constituencies. After considering the objections or suggestions, if received, the Director, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer shall pass a well reasoned order to formulate the territorial constituencies within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of objections and suggestions and the decision of the Director, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer thereupon, shall be final: Provided that information about the exercise for de-limitation of territorial constituencies shall be widely publicised through electronic and print media.".
Punjab Panchayati Raj (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 164,- (i) in sub-section (2), for sign "." appearing at the end, the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that de-limitation of territorial constituencies shall be made immediately on the basis of population if a new Zila Parishad is established or existing Zila Parishad is bifurcated or amalgamated."; and (ii) after sub-section (2) and the proviso now being added, the following sub-section (3) shall be added, namely:- "(3) The list of proposed territorial constituencies comprising coloured site plan of each territorial constituency depicting the area etc., shall be affixed on the Notice Board of the offices of the Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayats or any Officer authorized by him not below the rank of Deputy Director and the office of Zila Parishad. In case of any objections or suggestions, a person registered as a voter in the Zila Parishad area, may submit the same in writing to the office of the Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer within a period of twenty-one days of displaying the list of the proposed territorial constituencies. After considering the objections or suggestions, if received, the Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer, shall pass a well reasoned order to formulate the territorial constituencies within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of objections and suggestions and the decision of the Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayats, or said authorized Officer thereupon, shall be final: Provided that information about the exercise for delimitation of territorial constituencies shall be widely publicised through electronic and print media.". H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
