Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Right to Service Act, 2011. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Right to Service Act, 2011(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "First Appellate Authority" and "Second Appellate Authority" wherever occurring, the words "Grievance Redressal Authority" and "Appellate Authority" shall, respectively, be substituted.
Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 7, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "7-A. Power to take suo-moto notice. - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Grievance Redressal Authority and the Appellate Authority, as the case may be, shall have the power to take suo-moto notice of failure to deliver service in accordance with the provisions of this Act in public interest, and to pass such order as the facts and circumstances of the case, may warrant: Provided that before passing an adverse order against a person, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be given to such person."
Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub-section (1), for the word "four", the word "ten" shall be substituted.
Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Right to Service (Amendment) Ordinance, 2016 (Punjab Ordinance No.4 of 2016), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act. (Vivek Puri) Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
