Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide relief and remove hardships to those Multipurpose Health Workers (Female), who were selected and appointed on regular basis in pursuance of their selection on the basis of advertisement dated the 12th July, 1992, but whose services were terminated after they had rendered nearly three years service on the ground that their appointments were beyond the advertised posts. It is, however, made clear that these appointments are being made as a one-time measure in peculiar facts and circumstances considering the extreme hardships of these Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) and their families. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Fifty- second Year of the Republic of India as follows:
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the 12th day of July, 1992. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 4th September, 2001.
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "advertised posts" means the actual vacancies on the date of advertisement made on the 12th July, 1992, and shall deem to include anticipated vacancies, which may fall vacant between the date of advertisement and the date of first appointment made in pursuance of the selection process; (b) "appointing authority" means the Director, Health Services, Family Welfare, Punjab; and (c) "Multipurpose Health Workers (Female)" means the Multipurpose Health Workers (Female), who were selected in pursuance of the advertisement, dated the 12th July, 1992, issued by the Department of Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, and who were appointed on regular basis in pursuance thereto, but whose services were terminated on the 27th March, 1997.
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The appointments of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) against the advertised posts shall be made by the appointing authority.
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The date of joining of the Multipurpose Health Workers Female shall be the date, on which they actually join the posts in pursuance of this Act.
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab The seniority of the Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) shall be determined from the date of their joining.
Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Act, 2001_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Recruitment of Multipurpose Health Workers (Female) Ordinance, 2001 (Punjab Ordinance No. 3 of 2001), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
