Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide relief and remove hardships of those teachers who were regularly selected and were appointed in pursuance of their regular selection on the basis of advertisement, dated the 19th August, 1992, but whose services were terminated after they had rendered three years service on the ground that their appointments were beyond the advertised posts. It is, however, made clear that these appointments are being made as a one-time measure in peculiar facts and circumstances considering extreme hardships of these teachers and their families. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the 19th day of August. 1992. The following Act of the Legislature of the State of Punjab received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 24th September, 1999, and is hereby published for general information:-
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) advertised posts means the actual vacancies on the date of advertisement made on the 19th August. 1992 and shall deem to include anticipated vacancies which may fall vacant between the date of advertisement and the date of first appointment made in pursuance of the selection process; (b) appointing authority means the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab; and (c) teachers means.  (i) the teachers or lecturers or masters or mistresses, who were regularly selected in pursuance of the advertisement, dated the 19th August, 1992, issued by the Department of Education, Punjab, and who were appointed in pursuance thereto, but whose services were terminated on the 13th November. 1997: and (ii) the teachers or lecturers or masters or mistresses, who were regularly selected in pursuance of the advertisement, dated the 19th August. 1992. issued by the Department of Education. Punjab and who were appointed in pursuance thereto, but were later on regularly selected on a lower cadre post having lower pay scale in pursuance of the advertisement, dated the 28th December, 1994 and the 12th January, 1996.
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The appointments of teachers against the advertised posts shall be made by the appointing authority.
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The date of joining of the teachers shall be that date on which they actually join the posts in pursuance of this Act or it shall be deemed to be that date, after all the selected teachers in pursuance of the advertisements, dated the 28th December, 1994 and the 12th January, 1996, have joined the posts against which they were selected, whichever is later.
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab The seniority of the teachers shall be determined from the date of their joining.
Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Act, 1999_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Recruitment of Teachers Ordinance, 1999 (Punjab Ordinance No. 3 of 1999), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act. 
