Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for a change in the composition of the East Punjab Special Tribunal. It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor on the 14th April, 1950 and first published in the Punjab Government Gazette (Extraordinary) of April 15, 1950.
Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, - (a) "Principal Ordinance" means the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1943 (Ordinance No. XXIX of 1943) as modified by East Punjab Special Tribunal (Continuance) Act, 1948 (East Punjab Act No. XXIX of 1948); (b) "The Tribunal" means the Tribunal known as the Punjab Special Tribunal by virtue of paragraph (1) of Article 3 of the Indian Independence (Special Tribunals) Order, 1947.
Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) As from the 1st of December, 1949, the principal Ordinance shall apply in relation to the Tribunal and to the cases not disposed of by it before that date subject to the modification that for section 4 thereof the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "4. Composition of the Punjab Special Tribunal. - The Punjab Special Tribunal shall consist of one member to be appointed by the State Government, who shall be a person qualified under paragraph (2) of Article 217 of the Constitution of India, for appointment as a judge of a High Court." (2) Notwithstanding the change in the composition of the Tribunal effected by subsection (1), it shall not be necessary for the Tribunal to recommence any proceedings or to recall and re-hear any witness who has given evidence before such change and it shall be lawful for the Tribunal to act on the evidence already recorded by or produced before it.
Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Act, 1950_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The East Punjab Special Tribunal (Change of Composition) Ordinance, 1950 is hereby repealed but notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken in exercise of any powers conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in exercise of powers conferred by or under this Act. 
