Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the salaries and allowances of Deputy Ministers in the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act. 1956. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 23rd April, 1956.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 15th September, 1956 and was first published for general information in the Punjab Government Gazette (Extraordinary), dated the 19th September, 1956.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "House" includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the gardens thereof. (b) "Maintenance" in relation to a house shall include the payment of local rates and taxes and charges for electricity and water.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to each Deputy Minister, a salary at the rate of two thousand, two hundred and fifty rupees per mensem and sumptuary allowance at the rate of one thousand rupees per mensem. Substituted by Act No. 5 of 1992.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab Each Deputy Minister shall be entitled 1 [-] throughout his term of office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter to the use of a house for residence furnished and maintained by the State Government or in lieu thereof, he shall be paid such allowance not exceeding one hundred and fifty rupees per mensem as the State Government may fix. Explanation - The Deputy Minister shall not become liable personally for any payment in case the standard rent of the house allotted to him for residence exceeds one hundred and fifty rupees per mensem. See Punjab Act 16 of 1982
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab Each Deputy Minister shall be entitled to the use of a car the expenses on the maintenance and propulsion of which shall be borne by the State Government, or in lieu thereof to a conveyance allowance of three hundred rupees per mensem: Provided that the maintenance and propulsion expenses of the State car in use by the Deputy Minister shall not be subject to the limit of three hundred rupees.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 5-A--> State(s): Punjab (1) Every Deputy Minister shall be entitled to have a telephone installed at any place within his Constituency or at his place of residence or at Chandigarh and all charges in respect of installation and security deposit shall be paid by the Deputy Minister himself and the amount so paid shall be reimbursed to the Deputy Minister, by the Government, on production of receipts obtained from the Posts and Telegraph Department; (2) The charges in respect of rental, local and outside calls made by a Deputy Minister from one or more telephones installed in his name within the State of Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh shall be paid initially by the Deputy Minister himself and the amount so paid shall also be reimbursed to the Deputy Minister by the Government on production of receipts obtained from the Posts and Telegraph Department: Provided that the reimbursement of charges referred to in sub- sections (1) and (2) shall not exceed 2 [forty eight thousand] rupees per annum. Substituted by Act 20 of 1995. Substituted by Act 21 of 1998.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 5-B--> State(s): Punjab (1) Every Deputy Minister along with his spouse and his dependent children accompanying either of them and an attendant accompanying him to look after and assist him shall, during the course of a financial year, be entitled to travel by any railway in India or within or outside India by an air-conditioned coach or by air and an amount equivalent to the expenses incurred on such journey shall be reimbursed to him: Provided that where a Deputy Minister travels by his own motor car and furnishes a cash receipt from a licensed dealer indicating the name of the Deputy Minister, quantity of petrol or diesel purchased by him for propulsion of his motor car, the date on which it was purchased, the cost thereof and the registration number of his motor car, the expenses so incurred shall be reimbursed to him: Provided further that the total expenses incurred for the facilities specified in this section shall not exceed the amount of forty thousand rupees in a financial year] Substituted by Act 5 of 1992.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 5-BB--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to the Deputy Minister, constituency, secretarial and postal facilities allowance at the rate of 2 [five] thousand rupees per mensem. Added by Act 5 of 1992. Substituted Act 21 of 1998.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 5-C--> State(s): Punjab (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by rules, there may be paid to each Deputy Minister by way of a repayable advance - (a) a sum of money not exceeding 1 [six lakhs rupees] for building or purchasing a house; and] 2 [(b) a sum of money not exceeding 3 [three lakhs] rupees or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor Car or a Jeep or for conversion of a petrol-driven Motor Car or a Jeep to a diesel-driven vehicle, or a sum of money not exceeding 4 [twenty five] thousand rupees or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor-Cycle or a Scooter. (2) On the acceptance of an application for an advance, the Deputy Minister shall execute a deed in the form prescribed by rules, undertaking to use the advance for the purpose for which, and to fulfil the conditions on which. the advance is sanctioned, rendering himself and such property as may have been specified in the deed as security, including the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance, liable for the repayment of the loan and interest due thereon: Provided that no advance for building the house shall be sanctioned unless the plot or land on which the house is to be built, is exclusively owned and possessed by the Deputy Minister applying therefor, and is free from all encumbrances. (3) No transfer, assignment or charge made or created after the execution of the deed under sub-section (2), in relation to the property specified therein or the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance, shall be valid against the State Government, unless it has been made or created with its previous consent in writing. 5 [(3-A.) Where a Deputy Minister having obtained an advance under sub-section (1) dies while holding office as such, the amount of the advance or any part thereof which would have accrued after the date of his death in accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant of advance along with interest thereon shall be written off with the sanction of the prescribed authority.] (4) The State Government, may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this section. 6 [5-CC. A Deputy Ministry may be paid second repayable advance for the purchase of a motor-car, if he has repaid the entire previous advance subject to the conditions specified in section 5-C.] Substituted vide Punjab Act 21 of 1998. Substituted by Act No. 16 of 1986. Substituted by Act 21 of 1998. Substituted by Act 5 of 1992. Inserted by Act No. 5 of 1992. Added by Act 21 of 1998.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab The travelling allowance of the Deputy Ministers shall be regulated in accordance with such rules as may be framed or adopted by the State Government from time to time: Provided that no mileage or travelling allowance shall be chargeable in respect of journeys performed in a State Car.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 6-A--> State(s): Punjab The Chief Parliamentary Secretary and the Parliamentary Secretary shall be entitled to the same salary, allowances, amenities and privileges as are admissible to a Deputy Minister under this Act.] Inserted by Punjab Act 25 of 1978.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab No person in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum out of funds provided by the State Legislature by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership of either house of the State Legislature.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 7-A--> State(s): Punjab The salary and allowances payable to a Deputy Speaker, Chief Parliamentary Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary and free furnished house and other perquisites admissible to them under this Act shall be exclusive of income tax which shall be payable by the State Government.] Inserted by Punjab Act 25 of 1973.
Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers Punjab Act, 1956_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab The Salaries and Allowances of Deputy Ministers, Punjab Ordinance, 1956, is hereby repealed. 
