Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab State Commission for Minorities Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab State Commission for Minorities Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(g) "Senior Vice-Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson" means the Senior Vice-Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Commission.".
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3, in sub-section (2), in clause (aa), for the words "a Vice-Chairperson,", the words "a Senior Vice-Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 5,- (i) in the margin, for the words and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice-Chairperson, Vice- Chairperson" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (1), for the word and sign "Chairperson , Vice- Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice- Chairperson , Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted; and (iii) in sub-section (2), for the words "Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson or the Senior Vice-Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 6,- (i) in the margin, for the words "Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson or Senior Vice-Chairperson or Vice- Chairperson" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (1), for the words "Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson", wherever occurring, the words "Chairperson or Senior Vice-Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted; and (iii) in sub-section (2), for the words "Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson", the words "Chairperson or the Senior Vice-Chairperson or the Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 7 and in the margin for the words and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", wherever occurring, the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice-Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 10, for the word and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, the Senior Vice- Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 12, for the words "Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson", the words "Chairperson or Senior Vice-Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 13, for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Commission. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Senior Vice-Chairperson and in the absence of Senior Vice- Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Commission.".
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 24 and in the margin, for the words and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice-Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 11--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 25, for the words and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice- Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted.
Punjab State Commission for Minorities (Second Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 12--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 27, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the word and sign "Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson", the words and sign "Chairperson, Senior Vice-Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson" shall be substituted. (Vivek Puri) Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
