Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians Act, 2011. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians Act, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- (e) "Member" means a Member of the Commission and includes the Honorary Member, the Chairperson and the Secretary;".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 3, in sub-section (2), in clause (d), at the end, the word "and" shall be omitted and thereafter, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(dd) minimum one Honorary Member and maximum two Honorary Members, who may be nominated by the Government from amongst the persons of Indian Origin, who are permanently settled abroad and have acquired the citizenship of any other country, other than India, and who are holders of Persons of Indian Origin card or Overseas Citizen of India card issued by the Government of India and have knowledge of difficulties of Non-resident Indians and matters relating to them which need resolution in India; and".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 6, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members - (1) The Chairperson and Members, excluding the Honorary Member(s), shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon their office or until they attain the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: Provided that the Government may extend the term of office of the Chairperson or the Members, excluding the Honorary Member(s), for a further period of two years, but the term shall not be extended beyond a period of five years. (2) The Honorary Member(s) shall hold office for a term of one year from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: Provided that the Government may extend the term of office of Honorary Member(s) for a further period of two years.".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 8, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence or leave or otherwise, such one of the Members, who is not a Honorary Member, as the Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 9, in the proviso, at the end, for the sign ".", the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that the Honorary Member shall not be paid any salary or allowances and his terms and conditions of services shall be such, as may be prescribed.".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 14, in clause (d), at the end, for the sign ".", the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that no Honorary Member shall be associated by the Commission in conduct of inquiry or investigation into the matters falling within its authority.".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 21, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "21. Chairperson, Members and staff of the Commission to be public servants - The Chairperson, Members, other than Honorary Member(s), officers and other employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.".
Punjab State Commission for Non-Resident Indians (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 23, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "23. Cognizance of the offence - No court shall take cognizance of any offence specified in section 22, except on a complaint in writing of the Chairperson or an officer, authorized by the Chairperson in this behalf.". H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
