Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for pension and medical facilities to persons who have been members of the Punjab State Legislature. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Twenty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification, appoint.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act unless the context otherwise requires member means a person who, after the commencement of the Constitution of India, has been a member of:- (i) the Punjab Legislative Assembly; or (ii) the Punjab Legislative Council; or (iii) the Legislative Assembly of the erstwhile State of Patiala and East Punjab State Union; or (iv) partly as a member of the one and partly as a member of the other.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) From the date of commencement of this Act, there shall be paid to every person who has served as a member for a period of five years, whether continuous or not, a pension of three hundred rupees per mensem: Provided that where any person has served as aforesaid for a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional pension of fifty rupees per mensem for every year in excess of five, so, however, that in no case the pension payable to such person shall exceed five hundred rupees per mensem. 1 [(1-A) Where a person has served as member for full term of a Legislative Assembly but that term falls short of five years by a period not exceeding three months such person shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1). be deemed to have served as a member for a period of five years:] 2 [(1-B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and (1-A), there shall be paid to every person who has served as a member a pension of3 [one thousand rupees] per mensem: Provided that where any person has served as aforesaid for a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional pension of one hundred rupees per mensem for every year in excess of five 4 [ - ]; 5 [(1-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a Member who is entitled to pension under this Act, and who has served as Chief Minister of the State, shall be entitled to the following facilities, namely:- 1. Car One 2. Petrol 250 liter per mensem., 3. Medical facilities As available to a Minister. 4.Driver One 5. Residence Rent free furnished accommodation. 6. Furnishing of the Residential Accommodation Expenditure to the limit of Rs.35,000 (Rupees thirty five thousand only) per annum. 7. Telephone One free calls up to the value of Rs. 48, 000 (Rupees forty eight thousand only) per annum. 8. Electricity Free to the extent of Rs. 1.500 (Rupees one thousand five hundred only) per month. 9. Staff Personal Assistant: One Special Assistant: One Peons: Two 6 [(1-D) Where an Ex-Chief Minister, is entitled to salary, allowances, facilities, perks or any other remuneration under any Act or rules for the time being in force, he shall have option to avail the facilities of the office. he is holding or to avail the facilities mentioned above. (1-E) The expenditure to be incurred on providing the facilities mentioned above, shall be debitable to the Head relating to Ministers i.e. 2013 - Council of Ministers-101-Salaries of Ministers and Deputy Ministers-01- Salaries-101-Salaries of Ministers and Deputy Ministers-01-Salaries and Sumptuary Allowances-108-Travel Expenses.] (2) Where any person entitled to pension 7 [under sub-section (I) or sub-section (1-B)] (i) is elected to the office of the President or Vice-President of India or is appointed to the office of the Governor of any State or the Administrator of any Union Territory; or (ii) becomes a member of the Council of States or the House of People or any Legislative Assembly of a State or Union Territory or any Legislative Council of a State or the Metropolitan Council of Delhi constituted under section 3 of the Delhi Administration Act, 1966: or (iii) is employed on a salary under the Central Government or any State Government or any Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State Government or any local authority or becomes otherwise entitled to any remuneration from such Government, Corporation or local authority: such person shall be entitled to any pension 8 [under sub-section (I) or sub- section (1-B) for the period during which he continues to hold such office or as such member, or is so employed, or continues to be entitled to hold such remuneration: Provided that where the salary payable to such person for holding such office or being such member or so employed, or where the remuneration referred to in clause (iii) payable to such person is. in either case. less than the pension payable to him 9 [under sub-section (I) and sub- section (1-B)] such person shall be entitled only to receive the balance as pension under that sub-section. (3) Where any person entitled to pension 10 [under sub-section (1) or sub- section (1-B)] is also entitled to any pension from the Central Government or any State Government, or any Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State Government or any local authority, under any law or otherwise then, - (a) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under such law or otherwise, is equal to or in excess of that to which he is entitled 11 [under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1-B)] such person shall not be entitled to any pension under that sub-section: and (b) where the amount of pension to which he is entitled under such law or otherwise is less than that to which he is entitled 12 [under sub- section (1) or subsection (1-B)] such person shall be entitled to pension under that sub-section only of an amount which falls short of the amount of pension to which he is otherwise entitled under that sub-section. Explanation - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that the pension payable under the Freedom Fighters Pension Scheme, 1972, framed by the Central Government and the financial assistance given from the Punjab National Workers Relief Fund shall not be taken into account for the purposes of determining the amount of pension payable under this Act. (4) In computing the number of years, for the purposes of sub-section (1), the period during which a person has served as a Chairman, Minister, Speaker, Deputy Chairman, Deputy Minister, Deputy Speaker or Chief Parliamentary Secretary or Parliamentary Secretary by virtue of holding office of member shall also be taken into account. 13 [(5) No person shall be entitled to pension under this Act for or in respect of 14 [the term and during the period for which he has incurred disqualification] under the Representation of People Act, 1951 or any other law for the time being in force.] Inserted by Punjab Act 7 of 1979. Inserted by Punjab Act 10 of 1986. Substituted by Act No. 21 of 1998 Words omitted by Act No. 5 of 1992. Inserted by Punjab Act 21 of 1998. Inserted by Punjab Act 21 of 1998. Inserted by Act No. 10 of 1986. See Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986.) See Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986.) See Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986). Sec Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986). Sec Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986). See Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986). Substituted Act 3 of 1998.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 3-A--> State(s): Punjab If any person to whom pension is admissible under this Act has not paid to the State Government any amount payable by him on account of any residential accommodation or any other facility of whatever nature provided to him by the State Government in his capacity as Minister, 2 [Leader of the Opposition as defined in the Salary and Allowances of Leader of Opposition in Legislative Assembly Act, 1978], Speaker, Deputy Minister, Deputy Speaker, Chief Parliamentary Secretary, Parliamentary Secretary, or member, the above referred to amount due from him may be recovered from his pension. See Punjab Act 23 of 1978. See Punjab Act 24 of 1981.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 3-B--> State(s): Punjab In the event of death of a member, - (i) who is getting pension under section 3: or (ii) who is entitled to such pension, but is not getting; or (iii) who would have been entitled to such pension had he or she not died, his or, as the case may be, her spouse shall be entitled to draw family pension at the rate of fifty per cent of the pension to which the member would have been entitled had he or she not died]. Substituted Punjab Act 16 of 1993.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 3-C--> State(s): Punjab Every person, who draws pension or family pension or is entitled to draw the same shall, in addition to the pension or family pension, as the case may be, admissible under this Act, shall be paid dearness allowances on pension, as is admissible to other pensioners of the State Government. Added by Punjab Act 21 of 1998.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab Every person who is entitled to pension under the provisions of section 3, shall also be entitled to such medical facilities for himself and for the members of his family 1 [as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act]. See Act No. 10 of 1986 (Published in Extraordinary Gazette of 21st April. 1986).
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 4-A--> State(s): Punjab (1) Where a person who is serving as a Member of the Punjab Legislative Assembly, dies while in such service, there shall be paid to the members of his family an ex-gratia grant of one lakh rupees: Provided that where the Member dies as a result of any terrorist act, the members of his family, shall be paid an ex-gratia grant of three lakhs rupees. (2) Where a person who is entitled to pension under the provisions of section 3, dies as a result of terrorist act, the members of his family, shall be paid on ex-gratia grant of one lakh and fifty thousand rupees. Explanation.- For the purpose of section 4-A, the expression terrorist act shall have the meaning as assigned to it in the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (Central Act 28 of 1987)]. Substituted vide Act No. 5 of 1992.
Punjab State Legislative Members (Pension and Medical Facilities Regulation) Act, 1977_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (I) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the State Government may make rules in respect of the following matters, namely:- (a) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished by any person for the purpose of claiming any pension under this Act; (b) the family members who shall be entitled to medical facilities; (c) generally for regulating payment of pension and providing medical facilities under this Act. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made, before the House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of ten days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive session aforesaid, the House agreed in making any modification in the rule or the House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under that rule. 
