Punjab State Legislature Officers, Ministers and Members (Medical Facilities) Act, 1965_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An act to extend medical facilities to persons holding certain offices in the Punjab State. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixteenth Years of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab State Legislature Officers, Ministers and Members (Medical Facilities) Act, 1965_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab State Legislature Officers, Ministers and Members (Medical Facilities) Act, 1965.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 21st November, 1965, and was first published in the Punjab government Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 23rd November, 1965.
Punjab State Legislature Officers, Ministers and Members (Medical Facilities) Act, 1965_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every person holding, for the time being, any of the following offices shall be entitled to such medical facilities for himself and for members of his family as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government in this behalf, namely:- 1 (i) [...] (ii) the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Punjab Legislative Assembly; (ii) a Minister or a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister of the Punjab State; or (iv) a Member of the 2 [...] Punjab Legislative Assembly. (2) Every rule made under sub-section (1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before3 [-] the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of ten days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and, if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid, or the session immediately following, 4 [the legislature] agree in making any modification in the rule or5 [the Legislature] agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Vide Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970. Omitted by the Adaptation of Punjab Laws Order, 1970. Omitted by the Adaptation of Punjab Laws Order, 1970. Subs. by the Adaptation of Punjab Laws Order, 1970. Subs. by the Adaptation of Punjab Laws Order, 1970. 
