Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to establish and incorporate an Agricultural University for the development of agriculture in the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 13th October, 1961, and was first published in the Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated 18th October, 1961.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act and in all Statutes made here under, unless the context otherwise requires; (a) "Academic Council" means the Academic Council of the University; (b) "Agriculture" means the basic and applied science of soil and water management, crop and livestock production and management, home science and the betterment of rural people; (c) "Board" means the Board of Management of the University; (d) "College" means the constituent College of the University; (e) "prescribed" means prescribed by the statutes of the University; (f) "registered graduate' means a graduate registered under the Act; (g) "Statutes' and "Regulations' mean, respectively, the Statutes and Regulations of the University made under this Act; (h) "student of the University' means a person enrolled in the University for taking a course of study for a degree, diploma or other academic distinction duly instituted; (i) "Teacher' means a person appointed or recognised by the University for the purpose of imparting instruction or conducting and guiding research or extension programmes and includes a person declared by the Statutes to be a teacher; and (j) "University" means the Punjab Agricultural University as incorporated under this Act.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor of the University, the first Members of the Board of Management, the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of "The Punjab Agricultural University', (2) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold, dispose of property and to contract, and may by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The headquarters of the University shall be at Ludhiana.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The University shall be deemed to be established and incorporated for the following purposes, namely; (a) Making provisions for imparting education in different branches of study, particularly agriculture, veterinary and animal science, agricultural engineering, home science and other allied sciences; (b) Furthering the advancement of learning and prosecution of research, particularly in agriculture and other allied sciences; (c) Undertaking the extension of such sciences to the rural people of the State; and (d) Such other purposes as the State Government may by notification direct.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) The University shall subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, be open to all persons; Provided that nothing herein shall require the University to admit to any course of study a larger number of students than may be prescribed; (2) The State Government may direct that the university shall reserve in colleges seats for women or the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes or such educationally backward classes of citizens as may be declared by the State Government in this behalf, and, where such direction has been given, the University shall make the reservation accordingly; Provided that no such person shall be entitled to be admitted to the University unless he or she meets the standards laid down by the University.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab The University shall have the following powers :- (1) To provide graduate and post graduate instruction in agriculture, veterinary and animal science, agricultural engineering, home science and other allied sciences and in such other branches of learning as the University may deem fit; (2) To make provision for instruction in applied fields research and the dissemination of the finding of research and technical information through an extension education program; (3) To institute degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (4) To hold examinations and to grant and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions to and on persons who shall have; (a) Pursued a course of study as prescribed; or (b) Carried out research in the University or in an institution recognised in this behalf by the University under the prescribed conditions; (5) To confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the prescribed manner and under prescribed conditions; (6) To provide lecturers and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons not enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them when deemed desirable; (7) To co-operate with other Universities and authorities in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine; (8) To institute teaching, research and extension education posts required by the University and to appoint persons to such posts; (9) To create administrative, ministerial and other posts, and to make appointments thereto; (10) To institute and award fellowships, scholarships and prizes in accordance with the Statutes; (11) To institute and maintain residential accommodation for students of the University; (12) To institute and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed; (13) To supervise and control the residential accommodation and to regulate the discipline of the students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and welfare; and (14) To do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be requisite in order to further the objects of the University.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab The State Government may cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as it may direct of the University, its buildings, laboratories, and equipment and of any institution maintained by the University and cause to an enquiry to be made in the like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and the finances of the University. (2) The State Government shall in every case give notice to the University of its intention to inspect or make an enquiry and the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such inspection or enquiry. (3) The State Government may address the Board with reference to the result of such inspection and enquiry with such advice as the State Government may offer regarding the action to be taken. (4) The Board shall communicate to the State Government such action as it proposes to take or has taken as the result of such inspection or enquiry. (5) If the Board does not, within a reasonable time take action to the satisfaction of the State Government, the State Government, may after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue such directions as it may deem fit, and the Board shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab The following shall be the authorities and officers of the University :- Authorities of the University (i) Board of Management; (ii) Academic Council; (iii) Board of Studies; and (iv) Such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be Authorities of the University. Officers of the University (i) Chancellor; (ii) Vice-Chancellor; (iii) Deans of the Colleges; (iv) Director of Research; (v) Director of Agricultural Extension Education; (vi) Omitted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965. (vii) Director of Student Welfare; (viii) Registrar; (ix) Comptroller; (x) Estate Officer; (xi) Librarian; and (xii) such other persons in the service of the University as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Governor of Punjab shall be the Chancellor of the University. He shall by virtue of his office be the Head of the University and shall, when present, preside at a convocation of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall have such other powers as are provided in this Act or as may be prescribed.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab (1) The State Government shall, within a period of one year from the commencement of this Act, establish the Board of Management which shall consist of the following members :- (i) Secretary to Government, Punjab, Community Development Department; (ii) Secretary to Government, Punjab, Agricultural Department; (iii) Secretary to Government, Punjab, Finance Department; 1 (iii-a) the Vice- Chancellor of the University; (iv) seven persons, not being officials, to be appointed by the State Government as follows :- (a) One eminent agricultural scientist having background of agricultural research or education; (b) Two progressive farmers or live-stock breeders having experience of an interest in scientific farming and live-stock improvement; (c) One distinguished industrialist, businessman, manufacturer, or trader having interest in agricultural development; (d) One outstanding woman social worker preferably having background of rural advancement; and (e) Two elected members of the Punjab Panchayat Samities and Zila Parishads; (v) Two persons to be elected by the registered graduates of the 2 [branch of learning from amongst themselves in such proportion as may be prescribed;] Provided that for the first election, one person shall be elected in the prescribed manner by the Alumni Association 'of the Government Agricultural College, Ludhiana and the other by the Alumni Association of the Government College of Veterinary and Animal Science, Hissar. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the term of office of the members of the Board, other than official members, shall be five years : Provided that the term of office of a member appointed or elected, as the case may be, to fill a casual vacancy shall be the residue of the term of his predecessor. (3) At the first meeting of the Board, the members of the Board, other than official members, shall draw lots to determine the term of their office so that two members shall retire after one year, two after two years, two after three years, two after four years and one after five years. (4) Six members of the Board shall form a quorum at a meeting of the Board : Provided that if a meeting is adjourned for want of quorum, no quorum shall be necessary at the next meeting called for transacting the same business. 3 [(5) The Chancellor shall be the Honorary Chairman of the Board and the Vice-Chancellor its Working Chairman.] Proviso omitted. (6) The following officers shall be associated at the meeting of the Board as technical advisers but they not be entitled to vote at any such meetings :- (a) One person appointed by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; (b) Director of Agricultural, Punjab; (c) Director of Animal Husbandry, Punjab; (d) Director of Public Instructions, Punjab; and (e) Director of Technical Education, Punjab; (7) The Board shall have the right to obtain assistance of such other technical experts as it may deem fit (8) The members of the Board shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration for performing the functions assigned to the Board under this Act except such daily and travelling allowances as may be prescribed. 4 [Provided that nothing herein shall affect the emoluments or other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor,] (9) The powers and duties of the Board shall be as follows :- (a) To approve the budget submitted by the Vice-Chancellor; (b) To hold and control the property and funds of the University and issue any general directive on behalf of the University; (c) To accept and transfer any property on behalf of the University; (d) To administer funds placed at the disposal of the University for specific purposes; (e) To invest moneys belonging to the University; (f) To appoint the officers, teachers and other employees of the University in the manner prescribed; (g) To direct the form and use of the common seal of the University; (h) To appoint such committees as it may deem necessary for its proper functioning; (i) To borrow money for capital improvements and make suitable arrangements for its repayment; (j) To appoint the Vice-Chancellor subjects to the provisions of section 11; (k) To meet at such times and so often as the Board may deem necessary, provided that regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least once in every two months and at least two thirds of these regular meetings shall be held every year at the headquarters of the University; (l) To regulate and determine all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act and the Statutes, and to exercise such powers and to discharge such duties as may be conferred or imposed on the Board by this Act and the Statutes. Inserted by Punjab Act 10 of 1962, section 2 (1). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 3 (1). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 3 (2). Inserted by Punjab Act 9 of 1962 section 2 (3).
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Punjab The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Board in the manner prescribed : Provided that - (a) the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the State Government; and (b) in the event of appointment not being unanimous, it shall be 1 [made by] the Chancellor. (2) The term of officer of the Vice-Chancellor shall be four years and he shall be eligible for re-appointment. (3) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. (4) When a vacancy occurs, or is likely to occur, in the office of the Vice-Chancellor by reason of leave or any cause other than the expiry of the term, the Registrar shall report the fact forthwith to the Board, and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1). (5) Until the vacancy is filled under sub-section (4) or until such time as the Board designates an acting Vice-Chancel lor, the Registrar shall carry on the current duties of the office of the Vice-Chancellor. (6) The Vice-Chancellor may relinquish office by resignation in writing addressed to the Board and ordinarily delivered to the Secretary of Board at least two months prior to the date on which the Vice-Chancellor wishes to be relieved. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 4.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and the Chairman of the Academic Council and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor preside at a convocation of the University and shall confer degrees on persons entitled to receive them. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise general control over the affairs of the University and shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline at the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene meetings of the Academic Council unless he temporarily delegates this power to some other officer of the University. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and he shall, without prejudice to the powers of the State Government under section 24, possess all such powers as may be necessary in this behalf. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of the budget and the statement of accounts to the Board. (6) In any emergency, which in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor, requires immediate action to be taken, he shall take such action as he deems necessary and shall at the earliest opportunity report the action taken to the officer, authority or other body for confirmation who or which in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter, but nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to empower the Vice-Chancellor to incur any expenditure not duly authorised and provided for in the budget. (7) Where any action by the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (6), affects any person in the service of the University to his disadvantage, such person may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days of the date on which the action is communicated to him. (8) Subject as aforesaid, the Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the orders, of the Board regarding the appointment, suspension and dismissal of officers, teachers and other employees of the University. (9) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the close co-ordination and integration of teaching, research and extension education. (10) The Vice Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. (11) The salary and allowances payable to the officers, teachers and other employees of the University shall be determined by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. (2) The Registrar shall be responsible for the custody of the records and the common seal of the University. He shall be the ex-officio Secretary of the Academic Council and the Board, and shall place before them all such information as may be necessary for the transaction of business. He shall receive applications for entrance to the University and shall keep a permanent record of all syllabii, curricula and other information as may be deemed necessary. (3) The Registrar shall make arrangements for the conduct of examination as may be prescribed and shall be responsible for the due execution of all processes connected therewith. (4) The Registrar shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed or required from time to time by the Vice-Chancellor. (5) The Registrar shall not during the tenure of his office accept any remuneration other than that provided under the Statutes.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Comptroller shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. (2) The Comptroller shall manage the property and investments of the University; and advise in regard to its financial policy. He shall be responsible for all account matters including the preparation of budget and statement of accounts for presentation to the Vice-Chancellor. (3) The provisions contained in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of section 11 and sub-section 5 of section 13 shall, as far as may be, apply to the office of the Comptroller. (4) The Comptroller shall -(a) ensure that no expenditure not authorized in the budget, is incurred by the University otherwise than by way of investment, and (b) disallow any expenditure not warranted by the terms of any Statute or for which provision is required to be made by the Statute but has not been so made. (c) All moneys belonging to the University shall be kept in the Treasury or in a Bank approved by the State Government.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Punjab The Estate Officer shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board and shall be responsible for the custody, maintenance and management of all the buildings, lawns, and gardens and the other property of the University.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Director of Student Welfare shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. (2) The Director shall have the following duties :- (a) To make arrangements for the housing of students; (b) To direct a program of student-counseling; (c) To arrange for the employment of students in accordance with the plans approved by the Vice-Chancellor; (d) To supervise the extra-curricular activities of the students; (e) To assist in the placement of graduates of the University; and (f) To organize and maintain contact with the Alumni Associations of the University.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Punjab (1) Each college shall have a Dean who shall be a whole-time officer and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. (2) The Dean shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for all matters concerning his college. 1 [(3) The Dean shall be responsible for the organization and the conduct of resident instruction of the Department of the College.] Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 5.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Punjab 1 Omitted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 6.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Punjab The Librarian shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board and shall be in charge of the Library. He shall be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for all the matters concerning the Library.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Academic Council shall be in charge of the academic affairs of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, superintend, direct and control, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standard of instruction, education and examinations, and other matter connected with the obtaining of degrees and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Academic Council shall have power :- (a) To advise the Vice-Chancellor on all academic matters, including the control and management of the libraries; 1 [(aa) to co-opt at its meeting such Heads of Departments as it may consider necessary;] (b) To make recommendations to the Vice-Chancellor for the institution of the Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships and teacher-ships and other teaching posts and in regard to the duties and emoluments thereof; (c) To formulate, modify or revise schemes for the constitution or re-constitution of departments of teaching, research and extension; (d) To make regulations regarding the admission of students to the University; (e) To make regulations regarding examinations conducted by the University and the conditions on which students shall be admitted to such examinations; (f) To make regulations relating to courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and certificates; (g) To make recommendations regarding post-graduate teaching, research and extension; (h) To make recommendations regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for teachers in the University; (i) To exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act. (3) The constitution of the Academic Council shall be as follows :- (a) Vice-Chancellor; (b) Deans of the Colleges of the University; (c) Director of Extension Education; (d) Director of Research; 2 [(e) Omitted.] (f) the Head of one 3 [Department] from each college (selected) by the respective colleges); (4) The term of office of the members specified in clause (f) of sub- section (3) shall be two years. Inserted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 7(1) Omitted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965. Substituted for the word "section" by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, Section 10.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 21--> State(s): Punjab (1) The following shall be the constituent colleges of the University :- (a) The College of Agriculture at Ludhiana; (b) The College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences at Hissar; (c) The College of Agricultural Engineering, the College of Home Science, 1 [the College of Basic Science and Humanities and any other Government College] in the Agricultural Sciences which may be established after the commencement of this Act; (d) Such other college as may be prescribed; (e) Central Government institutions of the agricultural research, technical and extension education in the Punjab desiring it to be integrated as constituent colleges of the University, 2 [(2) There shall be a Board of studies for each constituent College of the University and where there is more than one College in a branch of learning there shall be one board of studies for all the constituent Colleges in that branch. The Deans of various Colleges shall be the Chairman of respective board and the heads of Departments of the colleges shall be members. Where there is board of studies for more than one College in a branch, the Deans shall act as Chairman of the board of studies by rotation according to seniority for a period of one year each. The Vice-Chancellor may nominate to the board of studies such other teachers of related subjects or sciences from the same or other Colleges, as he may deem fit. The duties of such board shall be to prescribe syllabi to ensure integrated and well balanced course of study.] (3) Every college shall comprise such 3 [Departments] as may be pre prescribed and each 4 [Department] shall be assigned such subjects of study as the academic council may deem fit. 5 [(4) There shall be a Head of each Department who shall be responsible to the Dean for resident instruction, to the Director of Research, for research and to the Director of Extension Education for extension education.] (5) The Head of the 6 [Department] shall be 7 [selected by the Vice-Chancellor and appointed by him with the approval of the Board. The duties, powers and functions of the Heads of 8 [Departments] shall be such as may be prescribed. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 8(1). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 8 (2). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16. Inserted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 8 (3). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 8 (4). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Punjab (1)2 [Experiment Stations] shall be established under the University subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes which shall have the responsibility for research, both fundamental and applied. Research activities shall be 11 3 [concentrated as far as possible] at the Central Research Stations and other Regional Research and Testing Stations in the different agro climatic zones of the State. (2) The Research and Educational Institutions of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of Animal Husbandry together with their staff and funds shall be transferred to the Agricultural University on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the State Government in consultation with the Board of Management. (3) There shall be a Director of Research responsible to the 4 [Vice-Chancellor] and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the Deans and with the approval of the Board. (4) The Director of Research shall be a whole-time officer trained in Agriculture and shall initiate, guide and co-ordinate 5 [the research program of the University and its outlying sub-stations.] Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16. Substituted for the word "Agricultural Experiment Station" by the Punjab Act, 12 of 1965, section 8 sub-section (1) and 2 (i) Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 8 (2) (ii) Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 9 (3). Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 9 (4)
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 23--> State(s): Punjab The University shall be responsible for - (a) The agricultural extension functions in the State which are primarily educational in nature; and (b) Imparting training to the future Extension Officers for the National Extension Blocks and instructors for the Extension Training Centers. (2) All subject-matter Extension Specialists shall be the members of the staff of their respective subject matter 1 [Departments] in the University and work in close co- ordination with the Departments of Agriculture, Development and Co-operatives. (3) The Director of Extension Education shall be a whole-time officer technically trained in agriculture and shall be appointed by the Vice- Chancellor in consultation with the Deans with the approval of the Board. (4) The Director of Extension Education shall be responsible to the [Vice-Chancellor] and shall develop programs for assisting farmers and housewives in applying results of scientific investigation to the solution of their problems. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965 section 16.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 24--> State(s): Punjab (1) All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-officio members) of any authority or body of the University shall be filled, as soon as possible, by the person or body who or which appointed, elected or co-opted the members whose place became vacant, and the person appointed, elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the remaining period of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. (2) A person who is a member of any authority of the University as a representative of another body, whether of the University or not, shall retain his seat on the University authority so long as he continues to be member of the body by which he was appointed or elected and thereafter till his successor is duly appointed or elected. (3) No act or proceeding of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid by reason merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, such authority or body. (4) The Board may remove any person from membership of any authority or body, or any employee of the University, on the ground that such person has taken part in subversive activities or is convicted of such offence involving moral turpitude as the State Government may by notification, specify. (5) If any question arises whether any person has been duly appointed or elected as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University subordinate to the Board or whether any decision of the University is in accordance with this Act, and the Statutes, the question shall be referred to the State Government whose decision thereon shall be final.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 25--> State(s): Punjab (1) Employees of the Teaching and Research 1 [Departments] of the Departments of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, who are either permanent or on probation, and are acceptable to the University shall be taken by the University into its service and treated as on foreign service. (2) Employees surplus to the requirements of the University holding liens (substantive or on probation) against permanent posts shall be absorbed by State Government elsewhere. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 16.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 26--> State(s): Punjab The age of retirement and other conditions of service of all employees of the University shall be such as may be prescribed. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 11.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 27--> State(s): Punjab The University shall constitute 1 [ - ] gratuity and provident fund for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other employees in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. The word "pension" was omitted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 12.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 28--> State(s): Punjab Subject to the provisions of this Act, the members of the technical staff of the University shall be selected by the Head of the 1 [Department] in consultation with the members of the 2 [Department] concerned, 3 [recommended by the Dean or the Director of Research or the Director of Extension Education, as the case may be] and appointed by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Board. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 16. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 16. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 13
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 29--> State(s): Punjab Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for any matter and shall, in particular, provide for the following :- (a) The constitution, powers and duties of the authorities of the University; (b) The election, appointment and continuance in office of members of the authorities of the University and of the officers, teachers and other employees of the University including the filling up of vacancies and all other matters relating to those authorities and officers, teachers and other employees for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; (c) The designation, the manner of appointment, the powers and the duties of the officers of the University; (d) The classification and the manner of appointment of teachers; (e) The constitution of a 1 [gratuity or provident fund or both] for the benefit of officers, teachers and other employees of the University; (f) The institution of degrees and diplomas; (g) The conferment of honorary degrees; (h) The establishment, amalgamation, sub-division and abolition of 2 [Departments]; (i) The establishment and the abolition of hostels maintained by the University; (j) The institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; (k) The maintenance of a register of graduates; (l) The admission of students to the University and their enrolment and continuance as such; (m) The courses of study to be laid down for degrees and diplomas of the University; (n) The conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree, diploma or other courses and the manner in which the examinations are to be held and the eligibility for the award of degrees and diplomas; (o) The conditions of residence of the students of the University and the levying of fees for residence in hostels maintained by the University; (q) The number, qualifications, emoluments and other conditions of service of officers, teachers and other employees of the University and the preparation and the maintenance of the record of their services and activities; (r) The fees which may be charged by the University for any purpose; (s) The remuneration and allowances, including travelling and daily allowances, to be paid to persons employed on the business of the University; (t) The conditions for the award of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes, stipends and fee concessions; and (u) All other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 14. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965. section 16.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 30--> State(s): Punjab (1) The first Statutes with regard to matters set out in clauses (a) to (t) of section 29 shall be made by the State Government and a copy thereof shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature for fifteen days, and they shall be subject to such additions and alterations as may be agreed to by both the Houses but without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done there under. (2) The Board may from time to time thereafter make new or additional Statutes and may amend or repeal the Statutes in the manner hereinafter in this section provided. (3) The Academic Council may propose to the Board the draft of any Statute and such draft shall be considered by the Board at its next meeting : Provided that the Academic Council shall not propose the draft of any Statute or any amendment of a Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an opportunity to express its opinion upon the proposal and the opinion so expressed shall be considered by the Board. (4) The Board may consider any such draft as is referred to in sub-section (3) and pass the proposed Statute or reject it or return it to the Academic Council for re-consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which it may suggest. (5) Any member of the Board may propose to the Board the draft of any Statute and the Board may either accept or reject the proposal if it relates to a matter not falling within the purview of the Academic Council. In case such a draft relates to a matter within the purview of the Academic Council the Board shall refer it for consideration to the Academic Council which may either report to the Board that it does not approve the proposal which then shall be deemed to have been rejected by the Board, or submit the draft to the Board in such form as the Academic Council may approve and the provisions of this section shall apply in the case of the draft submitted by any member of the Board as may apply in the case of a draft presented to the Board by the Academic Council.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 31--> State(s): Punjab (1) Any authority of the University may make regulations consistent with this Act and the Statutes - (a) for laying down the procedure to be observed at its meeting and the number of members required to form a quorum; (b) providing for all matters which by this Act and the Statutes are to be provided for by the regulations; and (c) providing for any other matter solely concerning the authority and not provided for by this Act and the Statutes. (2) Every authority of the University shall make regulations providing for the giving of notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be transacted at meetings and for keeping of records of the proceedings of the meetings. (3)The Academic Council may, subject to the provisions of the Statutes, make regulations providing for courses of study, system of examinations, and degrees and diplomas of the University after receiving drafts of the same from the Board of Studies concerned. (4) The Academic Council may not alter a draft received from the Board of Studies but may reject it or return it to the Board of Studies for further consideration together with the suggestions of the Council. (5) The Board may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify, of any regulation made under this section or the annulment of any regulation made under sub-section (1)-
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 32--> State(s): Punjab Every student of the University shall reside in a hostel or under such conditions as may be prescribed.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 33--> State(s): Punjab The Board may by Statutes delegate to any officer or authority of the University any of the powers conferred on it by this Act or by the Statutes to be exercised subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 34--> State(s): Punjab The Annual Report of the University shall be prepared under the directions of the Vice-Chancellor and submitted to the Board at least one month before the annual meeting at which it is to be considered. The Board shall after consideration of the Report forward it to the State Government with such comments as may be deemed necessary and the State Government shall cause a copy of the Report together with its comments to be laid before each House of the State Legislature.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 35--> State(s): Punjab (1) The University shall have a general fund to which shall be credited - 1 [(a) income from fees, endowments and grants and from properties of the University including hostels, experimental stations and farms]; (b) contributions and grants which may be made by the Government on such conditions which it may impose; (c) other contributions, grants and benefactions. (2) There shall be constituted a Finance Committee which shall consist of- (a) the Vice-Chancellor; (b) the Comptroller; (c) the Secretary to Government, Finance Department; and (d) a member chosen by the Board from amongst the non-official members. (3) The powers and duties of the Finance Committee shall be - (a) to examine the annual accounts of the University and the advise the Board thereon; (b) to examine the annual budget estimates and advise the Board thereon; (c) to review the financial position of the University from time to time; (d) to make recommendations to the University on all matters relating to the finances of the University; (e) to make recommendations to the Board oh all proposals involving expenditure for which no provision has been made in the budget or which involves expenditure in excess of the amount provided in the budget. (4) The accounts and the balance-sheet shall be submitted by the Vice- Chancellor through the Board to the State Government, which shall cause them to be audited by the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts, Punjab. (5) The Accounts, when audited, shall be printed and copies thereof, together with audit report, shall be submitted by the Vice-Chancellor to the Board, which shall forward them to the State Government with such comments as may be deemed necessary and the State Government shall cause a copy of the audited accounts together with its comments to be laid before each house of the State Legislature. Substituted by Punjab Act 12 of 1965, section 15.
Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961_Section 36--> State(s): Punjab Until such time as the authorities of the University are duly constituted, any officer of the University to be appointed by such authorities may be appointed temporarily by the Vice-Chancellor. 
