Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board Act, 2013. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the Stale of Punjab in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board (Amendment) Act, 2013. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 5, in sub-section (2), for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(ii) any grant/amount received from the Government, the State Public Sector Undertakings that is Corporations, Boards, Trusts and Societies on account of percentage share of their revenues or out of their profits on a case to case basis or any other source;".
Punjab Ancient, Historical Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Cultural Heritage Maintenance Board (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 6,- (i) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-A) There shall also be levied a cess under this section on the civil works to be executed by the Greater Mohali Area Development Authority and the works of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board, Department of Irrigation that is related to Irrigation, Drainage, Flood Management Programme and works of the Punjab State Tubewell Corporation and Ranjit Sagar Dam Project, Shahpur Kandt."; and (ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "rupees fifty crores". the words "rupees fifteen crores" shall substituted. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
