Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,- (i) in clause (k), at the end, the word "and" shall be omitted; (ii) in clause (l), at the end, for the words and sign "this Act.", the words and sign "this Act; and" shall be substituted; and (iii) after clause (l), the following clause shall be added, namely:- "(m) "Public Sector Undertaking" means an organization owned by the Government or in which the Government has pervasive control or created by an Act of the Government.".
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 6, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "6. Restrictions on holding of shares - No member other than the Government, a Public Sector Undertaking or a co-operative society shall, hold more than such portion of the share capital of a co-operative society, as may be prescribed which in no case shall exceed one-tenth of the share capital: Provided that in the case of milk producers co-operative society engaged in the marketing of such other perishable commodity, as may be notified by the Government, from time to time, in this behalf (hereinafter referred to as 'society dealing in notified commodity') registered after the commencement of the Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 1978, no member shall have or claim any interest in the shares of such society exceeding one thousand rupees.".
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 15, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "15. Persons who may become members - No person shall be admitted as member of a co-operative society except the following, namely:- (a) an individual competent to contract under section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872); (b) any other co-operative society; (c) the Government; (d) a Public Sector Undertaking; and (e) such class or classes of persons or associations of persons as may be notified by the Government.". H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and legislative Affairs. 
