Punjab Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2013. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on and with effect from the 9th day of September, 2013.
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961, in section 26, in subsection (2), in clause (a), in the second proviso, for the sign ";" appearing at the end, the sign ":" shall be substituted and thereafter, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that the condition of share capital of twenty lacs of rupees or more mentioned in the first proviso to clause (a) of subsection (2) of section 26 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961, shall not apply in the case of any Central Co-operative Bank, which has been provided finance by the Government, the Government of India, the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development or the Reserve Bank of India and the Government may appoint as Managing Director of such Bank, any person, who is a Member of the Indian Administrative Service, the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch), a Deputy Registrar, a Joint Registrar or an Additional Registrar of Co-operative Societies or is a professional having specialization in the field of banking and possessing the qualifications and experience specified by the Government in this behalf ;".
Punjab Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 (Punjab Ordinance No. 8 of 2013), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in subsection (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
