Court Fees (Punjab Second Amendment) Act, 2009_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab AN ACT Further to amend the Court Fees Act, 1870, in its application to the State of Punjab. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Court Fees (Punjab Second Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Court Fees (Punjab Second Amendment) Act, 2009.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 24th December, 2009
Court Fees (Punjab Second Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Court Fees Act, 1870, in its application to the State of Punjab, for Schedule-I (alongwith the Table of Rates of ad valorem fees leviable on the Institution of Suits) and Schedule-II, the following Schedules hall be substituted, namely :- "Schedule I Part 'A' Table of rates of ad valorem fees leviable on the institution of suits. The amount or value of the subject matter Proper fee Maximum leviable fee When the amount or value,-  (a) exceeds one rupee, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees; Two and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding one rupee. Two hundred and fifty rupees. (b) exceeds ten thousand rupees, but does not exceed twenty thousand rupees ; Two hundred and fifty rupees plus three and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding ten thousand rupees. Six hundred rupees. (c) exceeds twenty thousand rupees, but does not exceed thirty thousand rupees ; Six hundred rupees plus four and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding twenty thousand rupees. One thousand and fifty rupees. (d) exceeds thirty thousand rupees, but does not exceed forty thousand rupees ; One thousand and fifty rupees plus five and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding thirty thousand rupees. One thousand and six hundred rupees. (e) exceeds forty thousand rupees, but does not exceed fifty thousand rupees ; One thousand and six hundred rupees plus six and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding forty thousand rupees. Two thousand, two hundred and fifty rupees. (f) exceeds fifty thousand rupees, but does not exceed sixty thousand rupees ; Two thousand, two hundred and fifty rupees plus seven and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding fifty thousand rupees. Three thousand, rupees. (g) exceeds sixty thousand rupees, but does not exceed seventy five thousand rupees ; Three thousand rupees plus six and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding sixty thousand rupees. Three thousand, nine hundred and seventy five rupees. (h) exceeds seventy five thousand rupees, but does not exceed one lac rupees; Three thousand, nine hundred and seventy five rupees plus five and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding seventy five thousand rupees. Five thousand, three hundred and fifty rupees. (i) exceeds one lac rupees, but does not exceed two lac rupees; Five thousand, three hundred and fifty rupees plus three and one-half per centum of the amount exceeding one lac rupees. Eight thousand, eight hundred and fifty rupees. (j) exceeds two lac rupees, but does not exceed three lac rupees; Eight thousand, eight hundred and fifty rupees plus two and a quarter per centum of the amount exceeding two lac rupees. Eleven thousand and one hundred rupees. (k) exceeds three lac rupees, but does not exceed four lac rupees ; and Eleven thousand and one hundred rupees plus two and a quarter per centum of the amount exceeding three lac rupees. Thirteen thousand, three hundred and fifty rupees. (l) exceeds four lac rupees, proper fee leviable shall be thirteen thousand, three hundred and fifty rupees plus two rupees and twenty five naya paise for each one hundred rupees or part thereof, exceeding four lac.  Part 'B' Serial No. Purpose for which fee is to be levied Proper fee 1. Plaint in a suit for possession under the Specific Relief Act, 1963, section 6. Half of the fee, as specified in Part 'A' of this Schedule. 2. Application for review of judgment, if presented before the ninetieth day from the date of decree. Half of the fee as specified in Part 'A' of this Schedule. 3. Application for review of judgment, if presented on or after the ninetieth day from the date of decree. Equal to the fee as specified in Part 'A' of this Schedule. 4. Copy of judgment or order not being, or having the force of a decree. (a) When the judgment or order is passed by any civil court other than the High Court, or by the Presiding Officer of any Revenue Court or Office, or by any other judicial or Executive Authority; and Ten rupees.  (b) When such judgment or order is passed by the High Court. Twenty rupees. 5. Copy of a decree or order having the force of a decree passed by any Civil Court or High Court or by any Revenue Court. Twenty rupees. 6. Copy of the order of the Rent Controller. Twenty rupees. 7. Copy of any document liable to stamp duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, when left by any parly to a suit or - proceeding in place of the original withdrawn; provided such copy is not subject to any duty under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. (a) When the stamp duty chargeable on the original, does not exceed seventy five paise; and The duty, chargeable on the original document.  (b) In any other case. Twenty rupees. 8. Copy of any revenue or judicial proceeding or order, not otherwise provided for by this Act, or copy of any account statement, report or the like, taken from any Civil or Criminal or Revenue Court or office or from the office of any Chief Officer charged with the executive administration of a Division. (a) for orders upto three years' old; and Thirty rupees.  (b) for orders beyond three years' old One hundred and fifty rupees. 9. Probate of a will or letters of administration with or without will annexed (a) When the amount or value of the property in respect of which, the grant of probate or letters is made, exceeds one thousand rupees, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees; Two and one- half per centum on such amount or value.  (b) When such amount or value exceeds ten thousand rupees, but does not exceed fifty thousand rupees; and Three and one quarter per centum on such amount or value.  (c) When such amount or value exceeds fifty thousand rupees: Four per centum on such amount or value.  Provided that when after the grant of a certificate under Part X of the Indian Succession Act, 1925, or under the Bombay Regulation No. VIII of 1827 in respect of any property included in an estate, a grant of probate or letters of administration is made in respect of the same estate, the fee payable in respect of the latter grant, shall be reduced by the amount of the fee, paid in respect of the former grant 10. Certificate under Part X of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925) In any case Two and one- half per centum on the amount or value of any debt or security, specified in the certificate under section 374 of the Act and four per centum on the amount or value of any debt or security to which the certificate is extended under section 376 of the Act.  Note :  (i) The amount of a debt is its amount, including interest, on the day on which the inclusion of the debt in the certificate is applied for, so far as such amount can be ascertained.  (ii) Whether or not any power with respect to a security, specified in a certificate has been conferred under the Act, and where such a power has been so conferred, whether the power is for the receiving of interest or dividents on, or for the negotiation or transfer of, the security, or for both purposes, the value of the security is its market value on the day on which, the inclusion of the security in the certificate is applied for, so far as such value can be ascertained. 11. Application to the High Court for the exercise its jurisdiction under section 44 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 (Punjab Act 6 of 1918) or to the Court of the Financial Commissioner for the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under section 84 of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 (Act 16 of 1887). When the amount exceeds one thousand rupees. Ten rupees. Schedule II Fixed fees Sr. No. Purpose for which fee is to be levied Proper fee 1 Application or petition (a) (i) When presented to any officer of the Customs Department or Excise Department or to any Magistrate by any person having dealings with the Government, wherein the subject matter of such application or petition relates exclusively to those dealings; Ten rupees.  (ii) When presented to any Revenue Officer by any person holding temporarily settled land under direct engagement with Government, wherein the subject matter of such application or petition relates exclusively to such engagement; Ten rupees.  (iii) When presented to Municipal Commissioner under the relevant Act for the time being in force for the conservancy or improvement of any place, wherein the subject matter of such application or petition relates to such conservancy or improvement; and Ten rupees.  (iv) When presented to any Civil, Criminal or Revenue Court, or to any Board or executive officer for the purpose of obtaining a copy of any judgment, decree or order passed by such Court, Board or Officer, as the case may be, or of any other document or record in such Court, Board or Office. Ten rupees.  (b) (i) When containing a complaint or charge of any offence other than an offence for which police officer may, under the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, arrest without warrant and presented to any criminal court; Ten rupees. - (ii) When presented to a Civil, Criminal or Revenue Court, or any revenue officer or to any Magistrate in his executive Ten rupees.  capacity, and not otherwise provided for by this Act; or to deposit in court, revenue or rent; or for determination by a Court of the amount of compensation, to be paid by a landlord to his tenant; and  (iii) When presented to a Commissioner or Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or Executive Authority or to a Commissioner of Revenue and not otherwise provided for by this Act; and Ten rupees.  (c) When presented to the High Court,-  (i) Under the Companies Act, 1956 for winding up a company ; One thousand rupees.  (ii) Under the said Act for taking some other judicial action; Two hundred rupees.  (iii) Under article 226 of the Constitution of India other than the petition for habeas corpus and petition arising out of criminal proceedings; and One hundred rupees.  (iv) in all other cases. Twentyfive rupees. 2 Application to any Civil Court for calling records from another Court. When the court grants the application and is of the opinion that the transmission of such records involves the use of the post. Ten rupees. 3 Application for leave to sue as a pauper. Ten rupees. 4 Application for leave to appeal as a pauper. (a) When presented to a District Court; and Ten rupees.  (b) When presented to a Commissioner or the High Court. Fifty rupees. 5 Plaint or memorandum of appeal in a suit to establish or disprove a right of occupancy. Fifty rupees. 6 Undertaking under section 49 of the Divorce Act, 1869. Fifty rupees. 7 Mukhtarnama or Wakalatnama:- When presented for the conduct of any one case-  (a) to any Civil or Criminal Court or to any Revenue Court, or to any Collector or Magistrate, or other executive officer, or to a Commissioner of Revenue, or Customs, or to any officer, not being the Chief Revenue or Executive Authority, except such, as are mentioned in clause (b); and Ten rupees.  (b) to a High Court, Commissioner, Board of Revenue, or other Chief Controlling Revenue or Executive Authority. Twenty rupees. 8 Memorandum of appeal when the appeal is not from a decree or an order having the force of a decree, and is presented- (a) to any Civil Court other than a High Court, or to any Revenue Court or Executive Officer other than the High Court or Chief Controlling Revenue or Executive Authority; and Ten rupees.  (b) to the High Court or Commissioner or other Chief Controlling Executive or Revenue Authority. Twenty rupees. 9 Caveat. Twenty five rupees. 10 Petition in a suit under the Converts Marriage Dissolution Act, 1866. Twenty five rupees. 11 Every petition or application or memorandum of appeal under the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954) or the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (25 of 1955). Fifty rupees. 12 Plaint or Memorandum of appeal in each of the following suits-  (i) to alter or set aside a summary decision or order of any of the Civil Courts, not established by Letters Patent or of any Revenue Court; Ten rupees. (ii) to alter or cancel any entry in a register of the names of the proprietors of revenue paying estates; Fifty rupees. (iii) to obtain a declaratory decree when no consequential relief is prayed; Fifty rupees. (iv) to set aside an award ; Fifty rupees. (v) to set aside an adoption deed; and Fifty rupees. (vi) every other suit where it is not possible to estimate the money- value, the subject matter in dispute, and which is not otherwise provided for by this Act. Fifty rupees. 13 Application under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996). Fifty rupees. 14 Agreement in writing stating a question for the opinion of the Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Fifty rupees. 15 Every petition under the Divorce Act, 1869, except petition under section 44 of the aforesaid Act, and every memorandum of appeal under section 55 of the same Act. One hundred rupees. 16 Plaint or memorandum of appeal under the Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act 1936 (III of 1936). Five hundred rupees. 17 Plaint or memorandum of appeal in a suit by a reversioner under the Punjab Customary Law for declaration in respect of an alienation of ancestral land. Five hundred rupees. 18 Application or memorandum of appeal for relief under the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949; Fifty rupees. 19 Claim for money (whether secured or unsecured) or counter claims under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (Act X of 1949). (a) where the amount exceeds five hundred rupees, but does not exceed two thousand and five hundred rupees ; Fifty rupees.  (b) where the amount exceeds two thousand and five hundred rupees, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees ; and One hundred rupees.  (c) where the amount exceeds ten thousand rupees Two hundred rupees. 20 Memorandum of Appeal from an order or decision passed under the provisions of section 45-B of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (Act X of 1949) (a) where the amount exceeds five thousand rupees, but does not exceed ten thousand rupees ; and One hundred rupees.  (b) where the amount exceeds ten thousand rupees Two hundred rupees. 21 Application, petition, appeal and revision before any court, public officer or authority or body, appointed under any Central or State Act for the time being in force (a) for application or petition; and Ten rupees.  (b) for appeal or revision Ten rupees. 22 Complaint under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 Fifty rupees,".
Court Fees (Punjab Second Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The Court Fees (Punjab Amendment) Act, 2009 (Punjab Act No. 13 of 2009), is hereby repealed. (Rekha Mittal), Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. Practice & Procedure 
