Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section Preamble--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 An Act to make better provision for local self-government in the districts of 2 [East Punjab] WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the law in force in 3 [East Punjab for the levy and expedient to provide for the constitution of district boards and local boards in those territories, and to define and regulate the powers to be exercised by those boards; It is hereby enacted as follows: For Statement of Objects and Reasons,see Gazette of India, 1883, Pt. V, p. 464;for Proceedings in Council, see ibid., Supplement, pp. 1161 and 2087. Subs. by the A.O.1948 for "the Punjab" Subs. by the A.O. 1948 for "the territories administered by the Lieutenant-Governor of the Punjab"
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 1--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab District Boards Act, 1883; (2) 1 [ It extends to the Provinces of East Punjab and Delhi ]; (3) It shall come into force in each district on such date as the 2 [ Provincial Government ], by notification, directs.Foot Note Subs. by the A.O. 1948 for the original words as amended by the A. O. 1937. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 2--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 2.Form the date on which this Act comes into force in any district, the Punjab local Rates Act, 1878 , shall be credited to the 1 [ Provincial Government ] and notification published under that Act, shall, so far as may be, be deemed to have been respectively imposed, credited and published under this Act. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 3--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) " land " means land assessed to the land-revenue, and includes land wherof the land-revenue has been wholly, or in part, released, compounded for, redeemed or assigned; (2) " land-revenue " includes tirni or grazing-dues levied for grazing on 1 [Crown lands ] under section 48 of the Punjab Laws Act, 1872 ; (3) " land-holder " means any person responsible for the payment of the land-revenue, if any,assessed on land. It also includes the proprietor of pounded for, redeemed or assigned : (4) " annual value " means- (a) double the land-revenue for the time being assessed on any land, whether the assessment is leviable or not ; or (b) where the land revenue has been permanently assessed , or has been wholly or in part compounded for or redeemed, double the amount which, but for such permanent assessment, composition or redemption, would have been leviable ; or (c) where no land-revenue has been assessed, double the amount which would have been assessed if the average village rate had been applied ; Provided that, in any tract in which, under the settlement for the time being in force, the improvement of the land due to canal irrigation has been excluded from account in assessing the land-revenue, and a rate has been imposed in respect of such improvement, that rate shall be added to the land-revenue for the purpose of computing the annual value : (5) " financial year " means the year commencing on the first day of April : (6) " prescribed day " means such day as the 2 [ Provincial Government ] may, from time to time, prescribe : (7) " notification " means a notification published in the Official Gazette : (8) " notified " means notified in the Official Gazette : (9) "Deputy Commissioner " means the Deputy Commissioner of a district, and includes any officer specially appointed by the 3 [ Provincial Government ] to perform the functions of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "Govt. lands". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 4--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Repealed By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab XI of 1922),s. 3.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 5--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) All land shall be subject to the payment of a rate, to be called The local the local rate, not exceeding 1 [ twelve and not less than ] 2 [ ten pies ] for every rate. Rupee of its annual value. Foot Note 2- Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s. 4. (2)The proportion which the local rate shall bear to the annual value of land shall, except as provided in sub-section (3), be fixed for each district by the 3 [Provincial Government] by notification. (3)The 4 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, delegate to the district board, subject to such restrictions or conditions as it thinks fit, its powers under sub-section (2), and may, by notification, cancel or vary any such notification.. Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s. 4. Subs. by the Punjab District Boards Act Amendment Act, 1906 (Punjab 2 of 1906), s. 2. for "one anna". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 6--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab From such date as may be notified in respect of each district by the1 [Provincial Government], all authorized rates and cesses for the maintence of roads, schools and the district-post shall merge in and become part of the local rate, and no rate or cess other then the local rate shall be thereafter leviable for those purposes.. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 7--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The land-holder shall be liable for the local rate subject to the following provisos, namely- (1) where the land-holder pays the land-revenue in kind to any assignee of revenue or any village-headman, the assignee of revenue or village-headman shall be liable for the payment of the local rate instead of the land-holder, and no demand shall be made by any such assignee or village-headman on the land-holder in respect of payment of the rate; and (2) where the Government has, under any lease current at the time when this Act comes into force, paid the local rate on tirni, it shall continue to pay the rate during the currency of the lease.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 8--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When a local rate is payable by a land-holder in respect of lands held by a tenant with a right of occupancy holding at a favourable rent, the land-holder may realize from the tenant a share of the rate, bearing the same proportion to the whole rate as the excess of the annual value over the rent paid by the tenant bears to half of the annual value.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 9--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 The proceeds of the local rate levied in each district shall, except as provided in section 68, be allotted to the district board established for that district under this Act: Provided that the 2 [Provincial Government] may direct that the whole or any portion of the net proceeds of the local rate levied whithin the limits of any municipality, 3 [small town (as defined in the Punjab Small Towns Act,1921 )], notified area or military cantonment after deducting the expenses of collection, shall be carried to the credit of the municipal or town fund, or made available for the purpose of public improvement in the cantonment or for carrying out therein any rules made under 4 [section 280 of the Cantonments Act,1924 ].] Subs. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act,1906 (Punjab 2 of 1906), s.3. for original section. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Ins. By Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act,1925 (Punjab 6 of 1925), s.2. Subs. By the Punjab Act 6 of 1925 s.2. for "s.26 of the Cantonments Act,1889".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 10--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) The 1 [Provincial Government] shall, by notification, establish a district board for each district. (2) The 2 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, establish a local board or local boards within the limits of any district, and may cancel or vary any such notification. (3) A district board shall have authority throughout the district for which it is established, and a local board shall have authority throughout such portion of the district in which it is established, as the 3 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, direct : Provided that a board shall not have authority over any portion of a district which is for the time being included in a military cantonment, 4 [small town as defined in the Punjab Small Towns Act,1921], or a municipality. . Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Ins. By the Punjab District Board (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s.5.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 11--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) A district board or local board shall consist of such number of members, not less then six, as the 1 [Provincial Government] may fix in this behalf.(2) The members may be appointed by the 2 [Provincial Government] either by the name or by official designation, or may be elected in accordance with rules made by the 3 [Provincial Government] under this Act, or some may be appointed and some elected, as the 4 [Provincial Government] directs : Provided that-(a) when the 5 [Provincial Government] has directed that all or any proportion of the members shall be elected, it shall not thereafter direct that they shall be appointed, unless a majority of the electors declare that so desire; 6 [...] 7 [(b) of the appointed members not more then one-half or six, whichever is less, shall be8 [whole-time salaried servants] 9 [of the crown];] and(c) not less than one-half of the members of the board shall be land-holders in the district. (3)When, under a direction issued under sub-section (2), any places on a board are required to be filled by election, and a sufficient number of members is not elected, the 10 [Provincial Government] may fill those places by appointment. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L.G.". The words "or the G. G. in C., for some reason affecting the public interests, sanctions the direction" repealed by the Devolution Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s. 2 and Schedule I. Subs. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s.6, for the original clause Subs. By the Punjab District Board Act (Amendment) Act,1925 (Punjab 6 of 1925), s.3, for "salaried officers". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "of Govt".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 11A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [11A.Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Oath Act, X of 1873.1873,every person who is elected or appointed to be a member of the district board shall before taking his seat take or make, at a meeting of the board, an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to the Crown in the following form, namely:- I, A.B., having been elected/appointed a member of this board, do solemnly swear (or affirm)that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the King Emperor of India, His heirs and successors, and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter: Provided that- (a) if any such person omits or refuses to take or make such oath or affirmation, his election, or appointment, as the case may be, shall be deemed to invalid; (b) in the case of such invalid election the person, if any, who obtained the next largest number of votes from amongst those who failed to secure election, shall be deemed to have been duly elected, or if the election was uncontested a fresh election shall be held, or in the case of such invalid appointment the 2 [Provincial Government] shall appoint another person in the manner prescribed in sub-section (2) of section 11; (c) no person whose election or appointment has been deemed to be invalid under this section shall be eligible for election or appointment to any District Board for a period of two years from the date on which he ought to have taken or made such oath or affirmation.] Ins. By Punjab Act II of 1922, s. 7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 12--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)A member of a district board or local board, when appointed by virtue of an office, shall, unless and until the 1 [Provincial Government] otherwise directs, continue to be a member of the board while he continues to hold that office. (2) The term of office of all other elected and appointed members, respectively, of a district board or local board shall be fixed by 2 [Provincial Government] by rules made under this Act, and may be so fixed as to provide for the retirement of members by rotation, but shall not exceed three years. (3)An outgoing member shall, if otherwise qualified. Be again eligible for election or appointment. 3 [(4)Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) or in any rules made by the4 [Provincial Government] thereunder, an outgoing member shall, unless the5 [Provincial Government] otherwise directs, continue to office until the election or appointment of his successor is notified.] Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.". Ins by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1919 (Punjab 3 of 1919),s. 2.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 13--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (13)A member of a local board or of a district board may resign by notifying in writing his intention to do so to the 1 [Commissioner]; and, of the acceptance by the 2 [Commissioner] of such resignation, the member shall be deemed to have vacated his office. Subs. by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (4 of 1914), s.2 and Schedule, Pt. I, for "L. G.". Subs. by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (4 of 1914), s.2 and Schedule, Pt. I, for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 14--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (14). The 1 [Provincial Government] may remove any member of a district board or local board - (a) if he refuses to act, or becomes incapable of acting, or is declared insolvent, or is convicted of any such offense, or subjected by a Criminal Court to any such order, as implies, in the opinion of the 2 [Provincial Government], a defect of character which unfits him to be a member; (b) if he has been declared by notification to be disqualified for employment in the public service; (c) if he, being a member of a local board, without an excuse sufficient in the opinion of the 3 [Provincial Government], neglects for more than three consecutive months to be present at the meetings of that board, or, being a member of the district board, without such sufficient excuse, neglects for more than six months to be present at the meeting of that board; (d) if his continuance in office is, in the opinion of the 2[Provincial Government], dangerous to the public peace or order; or (e) when he is a salaried officer 4 [of the Crown], if his continuance in office is, in the opinion of the 5 [Provincial Government] unnecessary or undesirable. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." . Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." . Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." . Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for the "Govt.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 14A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [14A. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing section of this Chapter or in the rules made thereunder, the 2 [Provincial Government] may, at any time, for any reason which it may deem to affect the public interests or at the request of the majority of electors, by notification direct that the seat of any specified member, whether elected or appointed, shall be vacated on a given date, and in such case,such seat shall be vacated accordingly.] Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1919 (Punjab 3 of 1919), s. 3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 15--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) When the place of an elected member of a local board or district board becomes vacant by the resignation or removal of the member or by his death, a new member shall be chosen in accordance with the rules made by the 1 [Provincial Government] under this Act to fill the place: Provided that the 2 [Provincial Government] may direct in any such case that the vacancy shall be left unfilled. 3 [Provided further that when an elected member's seat ha s been vacated under the provisions of section 14A, the Provincial Government may, if it thinks fit, fill his place by appointment.] (2)When the place of an elected member of a local board or district board appointed by name becomes vacant as aforesaid, the 4 [Provincial Government] may, if it thinks fit, appoint a new member to fill the place. (3)A person chosen or appointed under this section to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office until the person whose place he fills would regularly have gone out of office, and shall then go out of office, but shall be again eligible for election or appointment. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." . Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." . Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (East Punjab Amendment)Ordinance, 1948 (East Punjab Ordinance 6 of 1948),s. 2.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 16--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Every district board shall be a body corporate by the mane of the district board of its district, and shall have perpetual succession and common seal, with power to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and, subject to any rules made by the 1 [Provincial Government] under this Act, to transfer any such property held by it, and to contract and do all other things necessary for the purposes of its constitution, and may sue and be sued its corporate name. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 17--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The several district boards and local boards constituted under this Act shall come into existence at such time as the 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, fix in this behalf. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G." .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 18--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 18(I)A member of every district board or local board shall be elected or appointed to be chairman of the board, and shall hold office for such term, not exceeding three years, as the 1 [Provincial Government] may, by a rule under this Act, fix. (2)The 2 [Provincial Government] shall determine, as regards each board or as regards any class of boards, whether the chairman shall be a person appointed by virtue of his office or by name or be elected. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 19--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I)A district board or local board may elect one 1 [or two] of its members 2 [not being 3 [whole-time salaried servants] of Government] to be vice-chairman, 4 [or vice-chairman, and when to vice-chairman or elected on the same date, shall declare which of them shall be the senior]. (2)A vice-chair-man so elected shall hold office for such term as the board may the, by rule, fix. Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s. 8. Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s. 8. Subs. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1925 (Punjab 6 of 1925), s. 3, for "salaried officers" .
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 19A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [19A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every district board may, with the previous sanction of the 2 [Provincial Government], by resolution delegate to the chairman, vice-chairman, secretary , civil surgeon, medical officer of health or any officer of the department of Public Instruction all or any of the powers conferred upon the board under section 20 and 27.] Ins. by Punjab Act II of 1922, s, 9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 19B--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [19B.(I)In cases of emergency the chairman or, in his absence or during the vacancy of his office, a vice-chairman may direct the execution of any work or the doing of any act which the district board is empowered to execute or do, and the immediate execution or doing of which is, in his opinion, necessary for the service or safety of the public, and may direct that the expense such work or doing such act shall be act paid from the district fund : Provided that every direction given under this section shall be reported to the next following meeting of the board.(2) The chairmen of wise chairmen shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the board. (3) The chairman or, in his absence or during the vacancy of his office , a wise chairman may prohibited , until the matter has been considered by the board, the doing of any act which is in his opinion undesirable in the public interest provided that the act is one which the board has power to prohibit (4) If the chairman or wise-chairman , as the case may be , omits to take actions under subsections (I) or sub-section (3), the Deputy Commissioner may by written notice require him to do so , and if he refuses or fails to take such actions, the Deputy Commissioner may exercise the power described unlimited in subsections (I) and (3). (5) If the expense of executing the work or of doing the act as described in the subsection (I) is not paid as directed , the chairman , wise- chairman or Deputy Commissioner , as the case may be , may make and order directing the person having the custody of the balance of the district fund to pay the expense or so much thereof as is , from time to time , possible from that balance in priority to all other charges against the same . (6)No direction given under this section shall be questioned in any court on the ground that the case was not one of emergency. Ins by Punjab Act II of 1922, s. 9.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 19C--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [19C. Every office or servant employed by a board whether for the whole or part of his time and drawing remuneration of not less than thirty rupees per mensen, and every member of a board shall be deemed to be a public servent within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Panel XLV of 1860 Code.] Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab II of 1922), s.9
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 20--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) The following matters shall, subject to such exceptions and conditions as the 1 [Provincial Government] may make and impose , be under the control and administration of each district board within the area subject to its authority-- (a) the management of all property vested in the district board: (b) the construction, repair and maintenance of public roads and other means of communication: (c)the establishment, maintenance and visiting of public hospitals, dispensaries, sarais and schools, and the construction and repair of all buildings connected with these institutions: (d) the training of teachers and the establishment of scholarships : (e) the supply storage and preservation from pollution of water for drinking, cooking and bathing purposes: and (f) the planting and preservation of trees. (2) The 2 [Provincial Government] may direct that any of the following matters shall, subject to such exceptions and conditions as it may make and impose, be under the control and administration of a district board within the area subject to its authority--- (g) the management of any property vested in her majesty 3 [for the purposes of the province]: (h) the establishment, maintenance, visiting and management of markets, rest-houses, encamping-grounds and other public institutions, and the construction and repair of all buildings connected with these institutions: (I) the construction and repair of embankments, and the supply, storage and control of water for agricultural purpose: (j) the preservation and reclamation of soil, and the drainage and reclamation of swamps: (h) the construction, repair and maintenance of famine preventive works, and the establishment and maintenance of such relief- works, relief-houses and other measures in time of famine of scarcity as may be entrusted to the charge of the board by the 4 [Provincial Government]; (l)the registration of births, marriages and deaths; (m)fairs and agricultural shows and industrial exhibitions; (n) the establishment and management of pounds including, where the Cattle-Trespass Act, 1871 , is in force, such functions of the 5 [Provincial Government] and the magistrate of the district 6 under that Act as may be transferred to the board by the 7 [Provincial Government]; (o) the management of such public ferries as may be entrusted to the charge of the board under the section 7A of the Northern India Ferries Act, 1878 , as amended by this Act 8 ; (p) any other local works or measures likely to promote the halt, comfort, convenience and interests of the public or the agricultural or industrial prosperity of the country ;and (q) any other matters which the 9 [provincial Government] may declare to be fit and proper matters to be taken under the control and administration of the board. (3)The 10 [Provincial Government] may cancel or modify any direction given by it under sub-section(2). (4)A district board shall , so far as the funds at its disposal permit, make due provisions for all matters placed under its control or administration by or under section. 11 [(5)Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorising the provincial Government to interfere with any property held or occupied for purposes which are purposes of the central Government.] Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G.". See s.31 of that Act The section as amended by this Act,has been replaced by a new section by the A.O. 1937 The section as amended by this Act,has been replaced by a new section by the A.O. 1937 Ins. By the A.O. 1937.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 20A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [20A. Subject to such terms as may be agreed upon beforehand the district board may--- (a) delegate any of the following duties to a panchayat duly established under sections 5 of the punjab village panchayat Act, 1921 --- (I) any matters under the direct administration control of the board; (ii) the construction, maintenance or improvement of any property under the control or management of the board, other than property covered by clause(i); (iii the control and management of cattle pounds; and (b) appoint a village panchayat duly appointed under the said Act to be a school attendance committee under section 16 of the Punjab primary Education Act ,1919.] Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 ( Punjab Act 11 of 1922 ),s.10.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 21--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)The1 [Provincial Government],or,subject to the control of the 2 [Provincial Government],a district board, may direct that ,with in the area subject to the authority of a local board, any matter placed under the control and administration of the district board by or under section 20 shall be transferred to the control and administration of the local board. (2) A local board ,as the agent of, and subject to the control of, the district board, shall , so for as the funds at its disposal permit, make due provision for all matters trasferred to its control and administration under sub-section(1). (3)It shall be the duty of the district board to enforce responsibility imposed on a local board by sub-section(2). Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 22--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Expert as otherwise provided by this Act, a local board shall not incur expenses or undertake liabilities to any amount exceeding the limit imposed by the district board of its district.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 23--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)If a local board makes default in the performance of any duty imposed on it by or under this Act, the district board may, by order in writing,fix a period for the performance of the duty. (2) If the duty is not performed within that period, the district board may appoint some person to perform it , and may provide for the expenses of,and incidental to,it s performance out of the funds appropriated to or for the purpose of the local board.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 24--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab A district board may concur with any other district board, or with any municipal committees,or with any munisipal committees, or with any cantonment authority , or with more than one such board, committee or authority,in appointing out of their respective bodies,a joint committee ,for any purpose in which they are jointly interested , and for delegating to any such join committee any power which might be exercised by either or any of the boards,committees or authorities concerned, and in framing or modifying regulations as to the proceedings of any such joint committee, and as to the conduct of correspondence relating to the purpose for which the joint committee is appointed.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 25--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)Minutes of the proceedings at each meeting of a district or local board shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose ,and shall be signed by the chairman of the meeting or of next ensuring meeting, and shall be published in such manner as the 1[Provincial Government] may from time to time direct, and shall ,at all reasonable times and without charge,be open to the inspection of any inhabitant of the district who plays any rate or tax under this Act (2) A copy of every resolution passed by a local board at a meeting shall ,within three days from the date of the meeting ,be forwarded to the district board and to the Deputy Commissioner. (3) A copy of every resolution passed by a district board at a meeting shall, within three days from the date of meeting , be forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 26--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Every district board, and every local board ,with the sanction of the district board,may make rules as to- (a)the time and place of its meeting and the manner in which notice of meeting shall be given; (b)the conduct of proceeding at meeting and the adjournment of meetings; (c)the custody of the common seal and the purposes for which it shall be used; (d)the division of duties amongst its members; (e)the powers to be exercised by sub-committees or members to whom particular duties have been assigned ; 1 [(ee)the powers conferred under section 20 and 27 that may be delegated to the chairman ,vice-chairman,secretary ,civil surgeon ,medical officer of health or any officer of the department of Public Instruction;] (f) the person by whom receipts shall be granted for money received under this Act; (g)the duties ,appointment ,leaves,suspension,and removal of the officers and servants of the board; (h)the term for which the vice-chairman shall hold office ; and (i)other similar matters; Provided that every rule made under this section must be consistent with this Act and with any rules made by the 2 [Provincial Government] under this Act , and shall be published in such manner as the 3 [Provincial Government] may direct. Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922),s. II. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 27--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to any rules which may be made under this Act in this behalf, every district board may employ and pay such officers and servants as may necessary and proper for the efficient execution of its duties and of the duties of the local board acting under it; Provided that if , at any time , in the opinion of the deputy Commissioner-- (a) the number of persons employment by a board under this section, or the remuneration assigned by the board to those persons, or to any of them , is excessive, or (b) any such person is unfit for his employment, the board shall, on the requirement of the deputy commissioner, reduce the number, or remuneration, of those , or as the case may be, dismiss the unfit person; 1 [Provided further that the appointment of a secretary to the board shall be subject to the approval of the 2 [Provincial Government].] (2) The board may appeal against any requirement under this section to the commissioner of the division, whose decision shall be final. 3 [(3) When the deputy commissioner is a member of the board, the commissioner and the 4 [Provincial Government] shall take the place of the deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner , respectively , for the purposes of this section.] Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922), s. 12. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 28--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab In the case of a a1 [Person in the service of the crown], a district board may-- (I) if his services are wholly lent to it, contribute to his pension or gratuity and leave-allowances in accordance with 2 [the rules for the time being government his time to the pension for the time being governing his conditions of service];and (2)if he devotes only a part of his time to the performance of duties in behalf of the board, contribute to his pension or gratuity and leave-allowances in such proportion as may be determined by the Government 3 [under which he is serving]. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "Govt. official". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "the rules of the Civil Service Regulations for the time being in force". Ins. by the A. O. 1937.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 29--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab In the case of an officer or servant , not being 1 [a person in the service of the crown] referred to in section 28, a district board may (1) grant him leave-allowances, and, if he is employed under the district committee when this Act comes into force and not entitled to pension, or if his monthly pay is less than 2 [twenty] rupees, a gratuity ; and (2) if empowered in this behalf by the 3 [Provincial Government] (a) subscribe in his behalf for pension or gratuity and leave-allowance under 4 [the rules for the time being governing his conditions of service] ; or (b) Purchase for him 5 an annuity on his retirement: Provided that no pension, gratuity, leave-allowance or annuity shall execeed the sum to which, under 6 [the rules for the time being governing his conditions of service]. The servant would be entitled if the service had been 7 [service under the crown in India]. 8 [(3) Nothing in this section or in section 37 contained shall be deemed to prohibit the established of a provident fund by officers or servants of a district board, not being 9 [Person in the service of the crown], or to debar a district board, if otherwise express authorised by the 10 [Provincial Government] in this behalf, from contributing from the district fund towards such provident fund at such rates and under such conditions as the district board may, by rules to be confirmed by the 11 [Provincial Government], fix and the apportion for such purpose.] Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "a govt. official". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the Punjab District boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922), s. 13, for "ten". Subs. by A.O. 1937 for "the rules of the civil service regulations for the time being in force". The words "from the Govt. or otherwise" repealed by the A. O. 1937. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "service under the Govt.". Added by s. I of Punjab Act I of 1995.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 30--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [30. A district board may, with the previous sanction of the power of provincial Government, impose any tax which the Provincial Legislature has power to impose in the province under the Government of India Act, 1935 : Provided that (a) the Provincial Government may empower any District Board to impose without such sanction one or more of such taxes subject to such limitations as it may prescribe ; (b) No tax imposed under this section shall be imposed in respect of any property subject to the local rate; and 2 (c) a District Board which immediately before the 3 commencement of Part III of the said Act was lawfully levying any tax under this section as then in force, may continue to levy that tax until provision to the contrary is made by the Central Legislature. Explanation. _ In this section "tax" includes any duty, cess or fee.] Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for the original section which, as amended by Punjab Act II of 1922, s. 14, and Punjab Act 6 of 1925 , s. 4, read as follows:-"30. a district board may impose (1) with the previous sanction of the L. G. any tax scheduled as exempted from the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (3) of s. 80a of the Government of India Act by rules under the said Act or a tax on the holder of any office under the G. of I., the L. G. or a local authority: Provided that the L. G. may empower any district board to impose without such sanction one or more of such taxes subject to such limitation as it may prescribe. (2) With the previous sanction of the G. G. in C. any other tax :Provided that no tax imposed under this section shall be imposed in respect of any property subject to the local rate". Cf. s. I43 (2) of the G. of I. Act, I935. I.e., the Ist April, I937.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 31--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) A district may resolve, at a meeting convened and constituted in such a manner as the 1 [Provincial Government] may prescribe,to propose the imposition of any tax under section 30. (2) When a resolution has been passed under sub-section (I), the board shall publish a notice defining the class of persons or description of property proposed to be taxed,the amount or rate of the tax to be imposed and the system of assesment to be adopted. (3) Any person likely to be directly affected by the proposed tax, and objecting to the same, may, within thirty days from the publication of the notice, send his objection in writing to the board; and the board shall,at a meeting convened and constituted as aforesaid ,take his objection into consideration. (4) If no objection is sent within the said period of thiry days,or if the objection received, having been considered as aforesaid, are deemed insufficient,the board may submit its proposals to the 2 [Provincial Government],with the objections (if any) which have been sent in and with its decision thereon. (5) The 3 [Provincial Government], on receiving proposals under sub section(4), may section the same, or refuse to sanction them, or return them to the board for further consideration. 4 [(6) When the proposals of a district board in respect of a tax have been sanctioned by the Provincial Government, then- (a) in the Punjab, the Provincial Government shall notify the imposition of the tax in accordance with the proposals, and shall in the notification specify a date not less then three months from the date of notification on which the tax shall come into force; (b) elsewhere the board may, at a meeting convened and constituted as aforesaid, direct the imposition of the tax in accordance with those proposals, so however that in giving such a direction the Board shall fix a date on which the tax shall come into force, not being less then three months from the date of the meeting, and the direction shall be notified in the Official Gazette for the Province. (7) A notification of the imposition of a tax under this Act shall be conclusive evidence that the tax has been imposed in accordance with law.] Subs. by the A.o. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. by the A.o. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. by the A.o. 1937 for "L.G.". Subs. by the A.o. 1937 for the original sub-sections.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 32--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification and the district board may, with the sanction of the 2 [Provincial Government], by a resolution passed at a meetin convended and constituted as the 3 [Provincial Government] may prescribe, abolish or reduce any tax imposed under section 30 and 31. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 33--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab With the previous sanction of the 1 [Provincial Government], or of such offer as the 2 [Provincial Government] may authorize in this behalf, a district board or local board may fix and levy school-fees and fees for the use of, or benefits derived from, any of the work specified in section 20, clauses (c), (e), (h), (i) and (j) 3 [fees for the registration of marriages] and fees at fairs, agricultural shows and industrial exhibitions held under this authority. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1919 (Punjab 5 of 1919), s. 2.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 34--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When the control and administration of any matter is by or under this Act transferred to a district board, and at the time of the transfer of cost of that control and administration is defrayed from Provincial revenue, the 1 [Provincial Government] shall from time to time, allot to the district board such funds, or place at the disposal of the board such sources of income, as may, in the opinion of the 2 [Provincial Government] and of the board, be sufficient for maintaining the control and administration of the said matter in the state of efficiency existing at the date of transfer. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 35--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab There shall be formed for each district a fund, to be called the district fund, and there shall be placed to the credit thereof- (a) the balance (if any) of the allotments made for the district under section 7 of the Punjab Local Rates Act,18781 and of the road school cesses which may be available for expenditure in the district on the day on which the district board comes into existence; (b) all proceeds of rates allotted to the district board under section 9; (c) the proceeds of all taxes imposed in the district under section 30 and 31; (d) the amount of all the fees levied by the district board or by local boards in the district under section 33; (e) all funds allotted to the district board and the income arising from all source of income placed at its disposal section under section 34; (f) all rents and profits accruing from property vested in the district board or managed by the district board or a local board in the district; (g)all sums contributed to the fund by 2 [the central or any provincial Government] or by any committee board or private person; (h) all sums received by the district board or by a local board in the district in the discharge of functions exercised by it under this Act ; and (i)the proceeds of all sources of income which the 3 [Provincial Government ] may order to be placed at the disposal of the district board :Provided that the 4 [Provincial Government] may revoke any order made under clause (I) Repealed by this Act Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "Govt." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 36--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) The district fund shall be vested in the district board, and the balance standing at the credit of the fund shall be kept in the Government treasury or sub-treasury or in the bank of which Government treasury business has been made over, unless the 1 [Provincial Government] in any cases otherwise permits. (2)Subject to such rules as the 2 [Provincial Government] may make in this behalf, the district board may 3 [from time to time, with the previous commissioner] or invest any portion of the district fund in securities of the 4 [Central Government] or invest it in such other securities or place it in such other manner as the 5 [Provincial Government]may approve in this behalf, and with the previous sanction of the commissioner, may vary such investment or placement for another or others of like nature]. The income resulting from 6 [such] securities 7 [or placements] and the proceeds of the sale of the same shall be credited to the district fund. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." The original words at this place were "G.G. in C." The words "L. G. subject to the control of the" were ins. Before them by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (4 of 1914). s. 2 and Schedule, Pt. I: the words "subject to the control of the G. G. in C." were then rep. by the Devolution Act. 1920 (38 of 1920). s. 2 and Schedule I: and the words "Provincial Govt." were subs. by the A. O. 1937 for L. G.". Subs. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1925 ( Punjab Act 6 of 1925 ), s. 6, for "with the previous sanction of the L. G. invest any portion of the district fund in securities of the G. of I. or such other securities as the L. G. subject to the control of the G. G. in C. may approve in this behalf and very such investments for others of the same nature, or dispose of them". Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "G. of I.". Subs. by the Punjab Act 6 of 1925 , s. 6, for "the". Ins. by s. 6, ibid
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 37--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) The district fund shall be charged with the payment of the Application expenses of the district-post, the payment of the expanses of pauper of district fund. lunatics sent to public asylums from the area under the authority of the district boards and local boards, and such portion of the cost of provincial Department of education, sanitation, vaccination, medical relief and public works as may be held by the 1 [Provincial Government ] to be equitably debitable to the district board in return for services rendered to the board by those Departments. (2) Subject to the charges specified in the sub-section (I), and to such rules as the 2 [Provincial Government] may make with respect to the priority to be given to several duties of the board or otherwise, the district fund shall be applicable to the payment, in whole or in part, of the charges and expenses incidental 3 [(a) to the matters specified in section 20,27, 28 and 29; (b) to grants-in-aid to educational and medical institution within the area subject to authority of district board : and (c) with the sanction of the commissioner and subject to the control of the 4 [Provincial Government] to any charges and expanses incurred outside that area when such application of the fund is in the opinion of the board for the benefit of the inhabitants of that area.] Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. By s. 7, ibid., for "to the matters specified in sections 20, 27, 28 and 29 and to the provision of grants-in-aid to educational and medical institutions, within the area subject to the authority of the district board, and with the sanction of the Commissioner outside that area, when such application of the fund is for the benefit of the inhabitants of that area".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 38--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab in the case of works or undertakings which benefit more districts works or than one, when the district boards cannot agree, the Commissioner or undertaking benefiting Commissioner of the division or divisions and Commissioner cannot agree, the 1 [ Provincial Government] may determine what proportion of the expanses of the work or understanding shall be borne by each of the districts funds of the district funds of the district benefited thereby ; and such proportion shall be payable out of the several district funds accordingly. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 39--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) Every district board shall appoint a finance committee consisting of not less than three of its members. (2) Every district board shall, on or before a prescribed day in each year, hold a meeting at which the finance committee shall submit to the board estimate of the income and expenditure of the board for the next financial year, in such from as the 1 [Provincial Government ] may, by a rule made under this Act, Prescribe. (3) The board shall consider the estimate, and may provisionally approve of it with or without modification. (4)The board shall, on or before a prescribed day, cause copies of the estimate, as provisionally approved by it, to be sent to the Deputy Commissioner. (5)The deputy Commissioner shall, on or before a prescribed day,signify in writing to the board his approval or disapproval of the estimate. When he disapproves of the estimate, he shall state the nature off his objection. The board shall then consider the matter, and either modify the estimate, so as to remove the objection, or refer it through the Deputy Commissioner to the Commissioner of the division. If the Commissioner concurs in objection, he shall make such modification in the estimate as may, in his judgment, be necessary to remove the objection, he shall pass the estimate, and his order shall be final and binding on the board. (6)When the Deputy Commissioner has signified his approval of an estimate or the board has modified an estimate so as to remove the deputy Commissioner's objection, or when the Commissioner has passed orders as provided in the estimate as approved or modified, shall be incurred during the year to which the estimate relates without the previous sanction of the Deputy Commissioner. (7)When the Deputy Commissioner is a member of the district board, the commissioner and the 2 [Provincial Government] shall take the place of the Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner, respectively, for the purposes of this section. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 40--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Accounts of the receipts and expenditure of every district board shall be made up periodically to such days and in such form as the 1 [Provincial Government] prescribes, and shall be examined and audited as soon as may be after they are so made up by such persons as the [2 Provincial Government] appoints in this behalf. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 41--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)Every local board shall submit annually to the district board of its district, on or before such date as the district board of its district, on or before such date as the district board ma appoint in this behalf, a statement of the requirements, and estimate of the probable expenditure, of the local board for the coming financial year, and shall submit, as often as the district board may require, accounts of its receipts and expenditure. (2)The district board shall signify in writing to the local board its approval or disapproval of an estimate submitted under this section, and powers similar to those conferred on the Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner by section 39, clauses (5) and (6), shall be exercised, in regard to the estimate, by the district board and the Deputy Commissioner, or (When the Deputy Commissioner is a member of the district board) the Commissioner, respectively : Provided that, during the currency of any financial year, the Deputy Commissioner may inconvenience or undue delay would be caused by a previous reference to the district board. (3)The district boards shall make arrangements, subject to the approval of the Deputy Commissioner, for the examination and audit of accounts submitted to it under this section, and may arrange for the publication of such accounts.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 42--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Every district board shall cause a copy of every annual estimate provisionally or finally approved under section 40, to be kept at its office ; and any person paying rates or taxes under this Act may, at all reasonable times, inspect any such estimate or account without payment of any fee.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 43--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab A statement of the accounts of district board for each head of receipt, the charges for establishment, the works undertaken, the sums expended on each work, and the balance, if any, of the fund remaining unspent at the end of the year, shall be prepared by the board inn such form as the 1 [Provincial Government] prescribes ; and an abstract of the same shall be published in the English and vernacular Official Gazettes, or in such other manner as the 2 [Provincial Government] may direct. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for ?L. G.?. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for ?L. G.?.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 44--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)The Commissioner of the division, or the Deputy Commissioner of the district, when he is not a member of the district board, may--- (a)enter on and inspect, or cause to be entered on and inspected, any immovable property within the limits of the division or district, respectively, occupied by any local board, district board or joint committee, or any work in progress within those limits under the direction of any such board or committee ; (b)By order in writing call for and inspect any document in the possession or under on control of any such board or committee having authority within those limits ; (c)By order in writing require any such board or committee to furnish such statements, accounts, reports and copies of documents relating to the proceedings or duties of the board off committee as he may think fit to call for ; and (d)Record in writing, for the consideration of any such board or committee, any observations he may think proper in regard to the proceedings or duties of the board or committee. (2)If any difference of opinion arises between officers exercising the powers conferred by sub-section (I), it shall be referred--- (a)if it arises between two or more Deputy Commissioners in the same division, to the Commissioner ; and (b)if it arises between two or more Deputy Commissioners in different divisions or between two or more Commissioners, to the 1 [Provincial Government];and the decision thereon of the Commissioner or of the 2 [Provincial Government], as the case may be, shall be final. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 45--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The commissioner of the division or the Deputy Commissioner of the district may, by order in writing, suspend, within the division or district, respectively, the execution of any resolution or order of a district board or local board or joint committee, or prohibit the doing of any act within the said limits which is about to be done,or prohibit the doing of any act within the said limits which is about to be done, or is being done, in pursuance of or under cover of this Act, if, in his opinion, the resolution, order or act is in excess of the powers conferred by law, or the execution of the resolution or order, or the doing of the act, is likely to lead to a breach of the peace, or to cause injury or annoyance to the public or to any class or body of person.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 46--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab [Extraordinary powers of Deputy Commissioner in case of emergency.] Repealed By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act 1922 (Punjab Act XI of 1922), s.15.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 47--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I)When the Commissioner, after due inquiry, is satisfied that a district board has made default in performing any duty imposed upon it by or under this Act, he may, by an order in writing, fix a period for the performance of that duty, and, if it is not performed within the period so fixed, he may appoint some person to perform, it and may direct that the expense of performing it shall be paid, within such time as he may fix, by the board to that person. (2)If the expense is not so paid, the commissioner may make and order direction the persons having the custody of the balance of the district fund to pay the expense or so much thereof as is, form time to time, possible, from that balance in priority to all other charges against the same.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 48--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When the control and administration of any public work is, by or under this Act, transferred to a district board, and at the time of the transfer the cost of that control and administration is defrayed from Provincial revenue, the 1 [ Provincial Government ] may invest any officer with respect to that work with the powers of Commissioner under section 44 of section 47, or with the powers of a Deputy Commissioner under section 2 [19B]. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922) s. 15, for "46".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 49--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When the Commissioner makes any order under section 45 or section 47, he shall forthwith forward to the1 [Provincial Government], and when the Deputy Commissioner makes any order under section 45 or section 2 [19B] or an officer empowered under section 48 makes any order under section3 [19B]or section 47, he shall forthwith forward to the Commissioner, for submission to the 4 [Provincial Government ]a copy of the order, with a statement of the reasons for making it, and with such explanation, if any, as the board or committee concerned may wish to offer.The 5 [Provincial Government ] may thereupon confirm, modify or rescind the order. Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922) s. 15, for "46". Ins. By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922) s. 15, for "46".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 50--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)It shall be the duty of the 1 [Provincial government ] and of all Commissioners and deputy Commissioners action under its orders to require that the proceeding of district boards and local boards shall be in conformity with law and with the rules in force thereunder. (2)The 2 [Provincial Government] may exercise all power necessary for the purpose of sub-section (I), and may, amongst other things, by order in writing, annul any proceeding which kit considers not to be in conformity with law and with the said rules. (3)The Commissioner of the division and the Deputy Commissioner of the district may, within their jurisdiction, for the same purpose, exercise such powers as may be conferred upon them by rules made in this behalf by the 3 [Provincial Government ]. Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 51--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab If a district board or local board is not competent to perform, or persistently make default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or under this or any other Act, or exceeds or abuses its powers, the 1 [Provincial Government] may 2 [...] by notification, in which the reasons for so doing shall be stated, declare the board to be superseded.3 [...] The words "with the previous approval of the G. G. in C." repealed by the Decentralization Act, 1914 (4 of 1914), s. 2 and Schedule, Pt. I. The proviso was repealed ibid.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 52--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When a district board or local board is superseded under section 51, the following consequences shall ensue--- (a)All members of the board shall from the date of the notification vacate their offices as such members ; (b)All powers and duties of the board may, until the board is reconstituted, be exercised and performed by such person as the 1 [Provincial Government ] appoints in that behalf ; (c)Where a district board is superseded, all property vested in it shall, until it is reconstituted, vest in 2 [His Majesty for the purposes of the Province]. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "Her Majesty".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 53--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)When a district board is superseded, the 1 [Provincial Government] shall, as soon as in its judgment conveniently may be, constitution another district board in its place, (2)When a local board is superseded the 2 [Provincial Government may either constitute another local board in its place, or transfer its functions to the district board, or, by a notification under section 10, to any other local board. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 54--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)If any dispute, for the decision of which this Act does not otherwise provide, arises, between two or more boards constituted under this Act, or between a municipal committee or cantonment authority 1 [or small town committee] and any such board, the matter shall be referred--- (a)to the Deputy Commissioner, if the local authorities concerned are in the same district ; (b)to the Commissioner of Commissioners of the division or divisions, if the local authorities concerned are in different districts ; and (c)to the 2 [Provincial Government], if the local authorities concerned are in different divisions and the Commissioners of those divisions cannot agree. (2)The decision of the authority to which any dispute is referred under this section shall be final : 3 [Provided that if one of the parties to a dispute referred to the Provincial Government is a cantonment authority, the decision of the Provincial Government shall not nave effect until it is concurred in by the central Government.] (3)If, in the case mentioned in clause (a), the Deputy Commissioner is a member of one of the boards or committees concerned, his functions under this section shall be discharged by the Commissioner. (4)"Local authority" in this section means a district board, local board, municipal committee, or cantonment authority 3[or shall town committee.] Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922). s. 16. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Ins. by the A. O. 1937.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 55--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab So far as may be consistent with the provisions of this Act --- 1 [(I)] the 2 [Provincial Government] may 3 [by notification] for any district of local board, or any class of such boards, make rules for--- (a)4 [prescribing the manner in which the oath or affirmation of allegiance under section IIA shall be administered ;] (b)regulating the powers of district boards to make, vary and dispose of investments ; (c)dividing boards into classes, and fixing the powers of boards of each class ; (d)determining the mode and time of appointment or election of member of boards, the term of office, allowance (if any), and the qualifications and disqualifications of such members, and the qualifications and disqualifications of voters, and generally for regulating all elections under this Act ; (e) regulating the powers of boards to transfer property ; (f) regulating the powers of boards to contract and do other things necessary for the purposes of their constitution and the mode of executing contracts; (g) determining the intermediate offices, if any, through which correspondence between boards or members of boards and the [5 Provincial Government] or its officers shall pass ; (h) determining the language in which business shall be transacted ;  (I) the employment, payment, suspension and removal of officers and servants under section 27 ; (j) the apportionment of the district fund between the general purposes of the district and the purpose of particular parts of district ; [6 (k) the application of district funds, and the management and regulation of Provident Funds established under sub-section . (3) of section 29 ;] (l) the form of estimates of income and expenditure under section 39 ; (m) the form of accounts and the manner of periodical audit under section 40 ; (n) the publication of abstracts of accounts under section 43 ; (o) the preparation of plans and estimates for works which are to be partly of wholly constructed at the expense of boards, and as to the authority by which, and the conditions subject to which, such plans and estimates may be sanctioned , (p) the powers of supervision to be exercised by Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners under section 50, (q) the conduct of proceedings of boards, including the fixing of a quorum, the appointment or election of a chairman, and the term of office of a chairman and vice-chairman, (r) the appointment and payment of auditors of the accounts of boards , (s) the guidance of district boards when suits or other proceedings are intended to be or have been instituted by or against them in Civil Courts, and (t) generally determining the relations between district boards and local boards, and guiding boards and government officers in all matters connected with the carrying out of the provisions of this Act. 7 [...] 8 [(3) Rules under clause (d) of sub-section (I) may among other matters provide- (i)for the definition of the practices at elections held under the provisions of this Act which are to be deemed to be corrupt , (ii)for the investigation of allegations of corrupt practices , (iii)for making void the election of any person proved to the satisfaction of the 9 [provincial Government] to have been guilty of a corrupt practice or to have connived at or abetted the commission of a corrupt practice or whose agent has been so proved guilty or the result of whose election has been materially affected by the breach of any law or rule for the time being in force , (iv) for rendering incapable of district board office either permanently or for a term of years any person who may have been proved guilty as aforesaid of a corrupt practice or of conniving at or abetting the same , (v)for prescribing the authority by which question relating to the matters referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (I) shall be determined , and (vi)for authorising courts to take cognizance of the Deputy Commissioner.] Sub-section (1) was repealed and sub-section (2) re-numbered sub-section (1) by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922), s. 17 (1). Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G.". Ins. by Punjab Act II of 1922, s. 17 (2). Subs. by Punjab Act I of 1905 for the original clause. The following paragraphs were repealed by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922), s. 17 (4) :-"All such rules and alterations of rules shall be notified, and no rules or alteration of rules under clause (2) (d) shall come into operation until three months after they have been notified. Rules made under cl. (2) (b) shall be subject to the control of the G. G. in C." Subs. By the Punjab District Board (Amendment) Act, 1925 (Punjab Act 6 of 1925)s.8. For the sub-section ins. by Punjab Act II of 1922, s.17 (3).
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 55A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [55A. The 2 [provincial Government] may invest any person or persons authorised by it to hold an inquiry into the conduct of an election or into allegations of corrupt practices or intimidation at an election with all or any of the powers conferred upon Commissioners appointed to held an inquiry into an election by the provisions of part II of the indian Election Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920 , and may prescribe the procedure to be followed and provide for the execution of any order as to costs passed by such person or persons in such inquiry.] Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1925 (Punjab Act 6 of 1925) s. 9. Subs. by the A.O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 56--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (Every district board or local board empowered in this behalf by the 1 [Provincial Government] may make regulations for carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act. (2) A regulation made under this section shall not have effect until it has been confirmed by the 2 [Provincial Government] and published in such manner and for such time as the 3 [Provincial Government] may direct. Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G." Subs. By the A.O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 57--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) In making any regulation under section 56 a board may direct that a breach of the same shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees , and in the case of a continuing breach with a further fine which may extend to five rupees for every day during which the breach is continued after the offender has been convicted of such breach. (2)In default of payment of any fine imposed under this section, the defaulter shall be liable to simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to eight days.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 58--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) Prosecutions under this Act for breach of regulations may be instituted by any board or by any person authorised 1 [by name or office] by the board in this behalf. (2) A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be within the meaning of section 555 of the Code of Criminal Procedure2 a Party to x of 1882. personally interested in any case under this section merely because he is a member of the board. See now the code Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), s. 556. Ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922) s. 18.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 58A--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab 1 [Any person wilfully obstructing the board, or any officer or servant of the board, or any person authorised by the board, in the exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to fifty rupees. Ss. 58A to 58D were ins. by the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act II of 1922), s.19.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 58B--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) Save as Provided in section 70 all moneys claimable by a district board under this Act may be recovered on application to a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the district, or in any other place where the person from whom the money is claimable may for the time being be resident, by the distress and sale of any moveable property within the limits of his jurisdiction belonging to such person. The cost of such proceedings shall be recoverable in same manner as the said moneys. (2) An application made under sub-section (I) shall be in writing and shall be signed by chairman or the secretary of the board but it shall not be necessary to present it in person.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 58C--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The district board may make compensation out of the district fund to any person sustaining damage by reason of the exercise of any of the powers vested in the board, its officers and servants, under this Act, and shall make such compensation when the damage was caused by the negligence of the board, its officers or servants and the person sustaining the damage was not himself in default in the matter in respect of which the power was exercised.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 58D--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)The district board or with the authorisation of the board its chairman, vice-chairman, or secretary may accept from any person against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed an offence against this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, a sum of money by way of composition for such offence. (2)On payment of such sum of money the suspected person if in custody shall be discharged, and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in regard to the offence or alleged alleged offence so compounded. (3)Sums paid by way of composition under this section shall be credited to the district fund. (4) Authorisation under sub-section (I) to accept composition for alleged offences may be given by the board either generally in regard to all offences against this Act or the rule made thereunder or particularly only in regard to a specified offence or offences of a specified class and may be at any time withdrawn by the board.]
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 59--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Every person shall be liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property belonging to the district board, if such loss, waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct while a member of a local board or of the district board, and a suit for compensation for the same may be instituted against him in such Courts as the 1 [Provincial Government] directs, by the district board with the sanction of the Commissioner, or by the 2 [ Provincial Government]. Subs. By the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. By the A..O.1937 for "Secretary of State for india in Council".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 60--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1)The 1 [Provincial Government], before making any rules under section 55 or section 67, and a district or local board, before making any regulations under section 56, shall publish, in such manner as the 2 [Provincial Government] may deem sufficient for giving information to persons interested, a draft of the proposed rules or regulations, together with a notice specifying a date on or after which the draft will be taken into consideration, and shall, before making the rules or regulation,receive and consider any objection or suggestion which may be made by any person with respect to the draft before the date so specified. (2) Every such rule or regulation shall be published in the Official Gazette in English and in such other language as the 3 [Provincial Government] directs, and such publication shall be conclusive evidence that the rule or regulation has been made as required by this section. Subs. by the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.". Subs. by the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 61--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Where any land is required for the purposes of this Act, the 1 [Provincial Government] may, at the request of a district board, proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 18703,and , on the payment by the board of the compensation awarded under that Act, and of the charges incurred by the Government in connection with the proceedings, the land shall vest in the board . Subs. by the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 62--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) if any member, officer or servant of a district or local board or joint committee appointed under this Act is, otherwise than with the permission in writing of the Commissioner, directly or indirectly interested in any contract made with that board or joint committee, he shall be deemed to have committed and offence under the Indian Penal Code , section 168. (2) A person shall not, by reason of being a shareholder in, or a member of, any incorporated or registered company, be held to be interested in any contract entered into between the company and a board or committee ; but he shall not take part in any proceedings of the board or committee relating to any such contract.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 63--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Nothing in this Act shall affect the Local Authorities Loans Act, XI of 1879.1 See now the Local Authorities Loans Act,1914 (9 of 1914)
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 64--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab In all matters connected with this Act, the 1 [Provincial Government] shall have and exercise over commissioners and Deputy commissioners, the same authority and control as they respectively have and exercise over them in the general and administration. Subs. by the A. O., 1937 for "L. G.".
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 65--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Repealed By the Punjab District Boards (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act XI of 1922), s. 20.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 66--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Repealed By the Punjab District Board (Amendment) Act, 1922 (Punjab Act XI of 1922) , S. 21.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 67--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) If the circumstances of any district or part of a district are, in the opinion of the 1 [Provincial Government] , such that all or any of the previous of this chapter are unsuited thereto , the 2 [Provincial government] , may by notification in the official gazette , except the district or apart from the operation of those provisions : and thereupon those provisions shall not apply to the excepted districted or part until again applied thereto by a like notification (2) while any notification under this section is in force the 3 [Provincial Government] may make rules to provide for any matter dealt with by the provisions to which the notifications applies. Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. By the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 68--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When a district is excepted , under section 67 from all the provisions of this chapter, a committee shall except where the 1 [Provincial Government] for special reasons otherwise directs,be constituted for the control and administration in that district of that matter mentioned in section 20,or of such of them as the2 [Provincial Government] may,from time to time , specify ; and the 3 [Provincial Government] shall ,from time to time determine the manner in which the members of the committee shall be appointed and removed , define the functions and authority of committee , place at its disposal, subject to such control as the4 [Provincial government] thinks fit- (a) the balance standing at the credit of the district fund at the time when the district is excepted or , as the case may be, the balance of the allotment made for the district under section 7 of the 5 Punjab Local Rents Act , 1878, and of the road and school cases , which may be available for expenditure in the district at that time; (b) all proceeds of rates which, but for the district being excepted , would be allotted to the district board under section 9 of this Act ; and (c) such other sources of income mentioned in section 35 of this act as the 6 [Provincial Government] thinks fit: Provided that not less than one half of the members of the committee shall be person who own landed property or reside or carry one trade or business in the district and are not servants of7 [the Crown]. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G." Repealed By this Act. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "The Govt."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 69--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) When any local area in which Act XX of 1856 ( An Act to make better provision for the appointment and maintenance of Police Chaukidars in Cities, Town, Stations , Suburbs and Bazars in the Presidency of Fort William in Bengal ) is in force is included in any local area over which a district board established under this Act has Authorities , the 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification direct that that Act shall cease to be in force in the local area so included , and that every Panchayat constituted under that Act for that local area shall cease to exist. (2) When a direction is issued under this section in respect of any local area in which the said Act XX of 1856 is in force, the amount , if any , then available under section 36 of that Act for purposes of improvement in that local area , shall be expended therein by the Deputy Commissioner for such purposes. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 70--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab All Rates and taxes imposed under this Act, and all arrears of such rates and taxes, may be recovered as if they were arrears of land-revenue.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 71--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) The 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification determine the person by whom the local rate or any tax imposed under this Act shall be assessed and collected, and make rules for the assessment and collection of the rate or tax, and direct in what manner persons employed in the assessment or collection shall be remunerated. (2) The provisions of section 60 shall apply to all rules made under this section. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 72--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (I) In matters connected with the assessment and collection of any rate or tax leviable under this act, an appeal shall lie from the order of any person authorized under this act to make assessments or collection to such persons as the1 [Provincial Government] appoints:provided that the appeal shall be presented within thirty days from the date of the order. (2)The order passed on an appeal under this section shall be final. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 73--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab (1) The 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, prescribe by what installments and at what times any rate or tax livable under this Act shall be payable: Provided that every installment of the local rate livable under section 5 shall be payable with an installment of the land- revenue. (2)In any local area subject to the authority of district board the 2 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, delegate to the board, subject to such conditions as it thinks fit, its powers under this section. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 74--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab The 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, remit or reduce any rate or tax imposed under this Act: or exempt any person or class of persons, or any description of property, wholly or in any part from liability to any such rate or tax, and cancel any such remission, reduction or exemption. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 75--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab When measurement are necessary for the assessment of the local rate or of any tax imposed under this Act, the 1 [Provincial Government] may, by notification, direct such measurement to be made. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L. G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 76--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab Suits for the recovery from co-sharers, tenants or others of any sum on account of any rate or tax imposed under this Act, and suits on account of illegal exaction of any such rate or tax, or for settlement of accounts connected therewith, shall unless the 1 [Provincial Government] otherwise directs, be cognizable by the Courts which for the being have cognizance of suits for rent due on land. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "L.G."
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 77--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab All rates for the maintenance of roads, schools or the district- post, for the payment of which provision has been made in any settlement record previous to the passing of this Act, or which have been habitually levied by Government, shall be deemed to have been and to be legally imposed, and to have been and to be legally recoverable as if they were arrears of land-revenue payable directly to Government and due on the land in respect of which they are payable.
Punjab District Boards Act, 1883_Section 78--> State(s): Delhi, Punjab [Repealed by the Repealing Act, 1938 (I of 1938), s. 2 and Schedule] 
