East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to provide for the salaries of Ministers of the East Punjab Government. It is hereby enacted as follows :-
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor of Punjab on the 23rd November, 1947, and was first published in the East Punjab Government Gazette (Extraordinary) of 1st December, 1947
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 1A--> State(s): Punjab (a) "House" includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto. (b) "Maintenance" in relation to a house shall include the payment of local rate and taxes, and charges for electricity and water. Added by Punjab Act 3 of 1952, Section 2. It was deemed to be added w.e.f. 17th April, 1952
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab (1) There shall be paid to each Minister a salary at the rate of fifteen hundred rupees per mensem, 2 [and in addition thereto a sumptuary allowance in the case of Chief Minister at the rate of two thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem and in the case of a Minister one thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem.] (2) Each Minister shall be provided with a free furnished house, the maintenance charges of which shall be borne by the State Government: or, in lieu of such house, shall be paid an allowance not exceeding three hundred rupees per mensem, as the Government may in each case fix. 3 The State Government may also allow him to continue in free occupation of the house provided to him for a period not exceeding fifteen days from the date of his ceasing to be a Minister. (3) Each Minister shall also be paid conveyance allowance at the rate of three hundred rupees per mensem or, in lieu thereof, a State car, the expenses on the maintenance and propulsion of which shall be borne by the State Government. 4 Provided that the maintenance and propulsion expenses of the State car in use by the Minister shall not be subject to the limit of three hundred rupees. 5 [4(a) Each Minister shall be entitled to have a telephone installed at any place within his Constituency or at Chandigarh and all charge, in respect of installation and security deposit shall be paid by the Minister himself and the amount so paid shall be reimbursed to the Minister, by the Government on production of receipts obtained from the Posts and Telegraph Department. 4(b) The charges in respect of rental, local and outside calls made by a Minister from one or more telephones installed in his name within the State of Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh shall be paid initially by the Minister himself and the amount so paid shall also be reimbursed to the Minister by the Government on production of receipts from the Posts and Telegraph Department. Provided that the reimbursement of charges referred to in subs- sections (a) and (b) shall not exceed 6 [fourty eight thousand rupees] per annum.] Substituted by Act 15 of 1953 Substituted vide Act 5 of 1992 Added by Punjab Act 35 of 1953, Section 2. These words shall be deemed always to have been so added Proviso added by Punjab Act 33 of 1957, Schedule Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 20 of 1995 Substituted vide Act No. 21 of 1998
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-A--> State(s): Punjab (1) The travelling allowance of the Ministers, including the Chief Minister, shall be regulated in accordance with such 2 rules as may be framed or adopted by the State Government from time to time : Provided that no mileage or travelling allowance shall be chargeable in respect of journey performed in a State car. (2) Any expenditure incurred in relation to the travelling allowance of Ministers before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have been incurred in accordance with such rules as if the said rules were framed and adopted under this Act. Section 2-A added by Punjab Act 3 of 1952, Section 4 For rules framed under this Act see Punjab Govt. Notification No. 4436 P. 53/32824, dated 1st June, 1953
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-B--> State(s): Punjab No person in receipt of a salary or allowance under this Act shall be entitled to receive any sum out of the funds provided by the State Legislature by way of salary or allowance in respect of his membership 2 of the State Legislature. Section 2-B inserted by Punjab Act 33 of 1957, Schedule The words either House of, were omitted by the Adaptation of Punjab Laws Order, 1970
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-BB--> State(s): Punjab (1) Every Minister along with his spouse and his dependent children accompanying either of them and an attendant accompanying him to look after and assist him shall, during the course of a financial year, be entitled to travel by any railway in India or within or outside India by an air- conditioned coach or by air and an amount equivalent to the expenses incurred on such journey shall be reimbursed to him : Provided that where a Minister travels by his own motor car and furnishes a cash receipt from a licensed dealer indicating the name of the Minister, quantity of petrol or diesel purchased by him for propulsion of his motor car, the date on which it was purchased, the cost thereof and the registration number of his motor-car, the expenses so incurred shall be reimbursed to him : Provided further that the total expenses incurred for the facilities specified in this section shall not exceed die amount of 2 [fifty thousand rupees] in a financial year.] Substituted vide Punjab Act 5 of 1992 Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 20 of 1995
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-BBB--> State(s): Punjab There shall be paid to the Minister consistuency, secretarial and postal facilities allowance at the rate of 2 [five thousand rupees per mensem.] Added vide Punjab Act No. 5 of 1992 Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 21 of 1998
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-C--> State(s): Punjab The salary and allowance payable to a Minister, and for furnished house and other perquisites admissible to him, under this Act, shall be exclusive of the income tax which shall be payable by the State Government. See Punjab Act 9 of 1982
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-D--> State(s): Punjab (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed by rules, there may be paid to each Minister by way of a repayable advance- (a) A sum of money not exceeding 2 [six lac rupees] for building or purchasing a house; and 3 (b) a sum of money not exceeding 4 [three lacs rupees] or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor-car or a Jeep or for conversion of a petrol driven Motor-car or a Jeep to a diesel driven vehicle, or a sum of money not exceeding ten thousand rupees or the anticipated price, whichever be less, for purchase of a Motor- cycle or a Scooter. (2) On the acceptance of an application for an advance, the Minister shall execute a deed in the form prescribed by rules, undertaking to use the advance for the purpose for which, and to fulfill the conditions on which, the advance is sanctioned, rendering himself and such property as may have been specified in the deed as security, including the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance liable for the repayment of the loan and interest due there on : Provided that no advance for building the house shall be sanctioned unless the plot or land on which the house to be built, is exclusively owned and possessed by the Minister applying therefore, and is free from all encumbrances. (3) No transfer, assignment or charge made or created after the execution of the deed under sub-section (2), in relation to the property specified therein or the house purchased or built with the aid of the advance, shall be valid against the State Government, unless it has been made or created with its previous consent in writing. (4) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this section. Subs, by Punjab Act 11 of 1979 Substituted vide Act No. 21 of 1998 See Punjab Act 16 of 1983 Substituted vide Punjab Act No. 21 of 1998
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 2-DD--> State(s): Punjab A Minister may be paid second repayable advance for the purchase of a motor-car if he has repaid the entire previous advance subject to the conditions specified in section 2-D.] Added vide Punjab Act No. 21 of 1998
East Punjab Ministers Salaries Act, 1947_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The Punjab Ministers Salary Act, 1937, and the East Punjab Ministers Salaries Ordinance, 1947, are hereby repealed. 
