East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to remove the religious and social disabilities of certain classes and castes in [principal territories]1 It is hereby enacted as follows :- Substituted for the words "Punjab" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1968.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the [principal territories]2 Received the assent of His Excellency the Governor on the 8th April, 1948, and was first published in the East Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 10th April, 1948. Substituted for the words "Punjab" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1968.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (a) "Hindu" includes a Budhist, Jain, a follower of Arya Samaj or Brahmo Samaj and a convert to Hinduism; (b) "excluded class" means any caste or class of the Hindu or Sikh community which, by reason of any custom or usage, is excluded from entering any temple or gurdwara or offering worship therein and includes a class, caste or tribe mentioned in the Schedule to this Act or which the 1 [State] Government may by notification add to the Schedule; (c) "place of public amusement" means any place, enclosure, building tent, boioth or other erection, whether permanent or temporary, where music, singing, dancing or any diversion or game or the means of carrying on the same, is provided and to which the public are admitted either on payment of money, or with the intention that money to be collected from those admitted and includes a race course, circus, theatre, cinema-hall, music-hall, billiard-room or gymnasium; (d) "place of public entertainment" means any place, whether enclosed or open, to which the public are admitted, and where any kind of food or drink is supplied for consumption on the premises for the profit or gain of any person owning or having an interest in or managing such place; and includes a refreshment-room, eating-room, Coffee-house, boarding-house, lodging-house or hotel; (e) "Sikh" has the meaning given to it in section 2 of the Sikh Gurdawaras Act, 1925; (f) "shop" means any premises where goods are sold either by retail or wholesale or both and includes a laundry, a hair cutting saloon or such other place where services are rendered to customers; (g) "temple" means a place, by whatever name known, which is dedicated to, or for the benefit of, or used as of right by, the Hindu community in general, as a place of public religious worship, and includes subsidiary shrines attached to such place; (h) "gurdwara" means a place, by whatever, name known, which is dedicated to, or for the benefit of, or used as of right by the Sikh community in general, as a place of public religious worship, and includes subsidiary shrines attached to such place; (i) "worship" means such religious service as the bulk of the worshippers may offer, or participate in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be made under this Act. Substituted for the word "Province" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) Not-withstanding any law, custom or usage to the contrary, persons belonging to the excluded classes shall be entitled to enter any temple or gurdwara and offer worship therein in the same manner and the same extent as Hindus or, as the case may be, Sikhs in general: and no member of any excluded class shall, by reason only of such entry or worship, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, be deemed to have committed any actionable wrong dr offence or be sued or prosecuted therefore. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions; it is hereby declared that the right conferred by sub-section (1) shall include the following rights if, and to the extent to which, they are enjoyed by Hindus or, as the case may be, Sikhs in general, not belonging to the excluded classes (a) the right to bathe in, or use the waters of, any sacred tank, well, spring or water course appurtenant to the temple or gurdwara whether situated within or outside the precincts thereof; (b) the right of passage over any sacred place, including a hill or hillock or a road, street or pathway, which is requisite for obtaining access to the temple or gurdwara;
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab The trustee or other authority in charge of a temple or gurdwara shall have the power, subject to the control of the 1 [State] Government and to any rules which may be made by them, to make regulations for the maintenance of order and decorum and the due observance of the religious rites and ceremonies performed therein, but such regulations shall not discriminate in any way against the members of the excluded classes. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) No suit for damages, injunction or declaration or for any other relief, no prosecution for any offence, and no application or other proceeding under any other law, shall be instituted in respect of any entry into or worship in any temple or gurdwara whether before or after the commencement of this Act, on the sole ground that such entry or worship is against the custom or usage which excludes certain classes of Hindus or Sikhs from such entry or worship. (2) No suit, prosecution, application or proceeding of the nature aforesaid, instituted before the commencement of this Act, shall be continued thereafter, without the sanction of the 1 [State] Government. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab If any question arises as to whether a place is or is not a temple or gurdwara as defined in this Act, the question shall be referred to the State Government and their decision shall be final, subject, however, to any decree passed by a competent civil court or tribunal in a suit filed before it within six months of the date of the decision of the [State] Government.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab Notwithstanding anything contained in any instrument or any law, custom or usage to the contrary, no member of an excluded class shall merely on the ground that he is a member of such a class - (a) be intelligible for office under any authority constituted under any law; or (b) be prevented from - (i) having access to or using any river, stream spring, well, tank, cistern, water-tap or other watering place or any bathing place, burial or cremation ground, any sanitary convenience, any road or pathway which the members of all other castes and classes of Hindus or Sikhs have a right to use or have access to; (ii) having access to or using any public conveyance licensed by the 1 [State] Government or local authority to ply for hire; (iii) having access to or using any building or place used for charitable or public purposes maintained wholly or partially out of the revenues of the 2 [State] or the funds of a local authority; (iv) having access to a place of public amusement or a place of public entertainment; (v) having access to a shop to which the members of all other castes and classes of Hindus or Sikhs are ordinarily admitted; (vi) having access to or using any place set apart or maintained for the use of Hindus or Sikhs generally but not for the use of any particular section or class thereof. Substituted for the word "Province" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Province" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab No person in charge of any of places referred to in sub-clauses (i), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) or any conveyance referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of section 7, shall impose any restriction on a member of an excluded class or act in a manner as to result in discrimination against him merely on the ground that he is such a member.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab No court shall in adjudicating any matter or executing any order or recognise any custom or usage imposing any civil disability on any member of an excluded class merely on the ground that he is such a member.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab No local authority shall in carrying out the functions and duties entrusted to it under any law recognise any custom or usage referred to in section 9.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 11--> State(s): Punjab Whoever - (a) prevents any person belonging to any excluded class from exercising any right conferred by section 3, or (b) prevents any person, by reason of his being a member of an excluded class, from having access to or using any of the plates referred to in sub-clauses (i),(iii), (iv), (v) and (vi), or any conveyance referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of section 7 or abets the prevention thereof; or (c) contravenes the provisions of section 8 or abets the contravention thereof, shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to Rs. 200 or with both.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 12--> State(s): Punjab If any person who has been convicted of an offence punishable under this Act is again guilty of the same offence he shall be punished on the second conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to Rs. 500 or with both and if he is again so guilty shall be punished on a third or any subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and also shall be liable to fine which may extend to Rs. 1000.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 13--> State(s): Punjab Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, an offence punishable under this Act shall be cog-nizable by the police.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 14--> State(s): Punjab If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act the 1 [State] Government, as occasion requires, may, by order, do anything which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section 15--> State(s): Punjab The 1 [State] Government, may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
East Punjab Removal of Religious and Social Disabilities Act, 1948_Section Sch.--> State(s): Punjab 1. Aheria 2. Balai 3. Banetwala 4. Bangali 5. Banjara 6. Barar 7. Batwal 8. Bawaria 9. Bazigar 10. Bhabulia 11. Balmiki 12. Chuhra 13. Bhanjra 14. Chamar 15. Cheengh 16. Chirimar 17. Daiya (Chhaj Bananewala) 18. Dhanak 19. Dhinwar or Jhinwar 20. Dhobi 21. Dom 22. Godaria 23. Gawala 24. Ghasiara 25. Herhi 26. Jatya or Jatav Chamar 27. Julaha (Weaver) 28. Kabirpanthi 29. Kabirpanthi (Sikh) 30. Kuchbandh 31. Kanjar 32. Khatik 33. Kori 34. Kurmi 35. Lal Begi 36. Madari 37. Mehashas 38. Mallah 39. Marija or Maredha 40. Mazhabi (Sikh) 41. Megh or Meghowal 42. Mochi 43. Nai (Barber) 44. Naribut 45. Nat (Rana) 46. Nayak 47. Od 48. Pasi 49. Perna 50. Ramdasia 51. Ramdasia (Sikh) 52. Ravidasi or Rai Dasi 53. Ragar 54. Sais 55. Sansi 56. Santhia 57. Sapera 58. Sarera 59. Singiwala or Kalbalia 60. Siqligar 61. Sikligar (Sikh) 62. Sirkiband 63. Teli 
