East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to amend the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act (East Punjab Act No. 3 of 1949). Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1956.1 Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 20th September 1956.
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act - (i)(a) In sub clause (i), the words or a schedule shall be omitted. (b) In sub-paragraph (b), the words or a schedule and the words as the case may be shall be omitted. (ii)(a) In sub-clause (ii) the words a non-residential building or shall be omitted. (b) In sub-paragraph (b), the words building or and the words as th case may be shall be omitted. (c) In sub-paragraph (c), the words a building or shall be omitted. (iii) For sub-clause (iii), the following shall be substituted, namely:- (iii) In the case of any building or rented land, if he requires it to carry out any building work at the instance of the Government or local authority or any Improvement Trust under some improvement or development scheme or if it has become unsafe or unfit for human habitation. (iv) In sub-clause (iv), for the words any building, where they first occur, the words any residential building shall be substituted. (v) In the second proviso, for the words a residential, a scheduled or non-residential building or rented land, the words a residential building or rented land shall be substituted.
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In section 15 of the principal Act - (i) to clause (b) of sub-section (I), the following words shall be added, namely:- In computing the period of fifteenth days the time taken to obtain a certified copy of the order appealed against shall be excluded. (ii) In sub-section (4), for the words whether in a suit or other proceedings by way of appeal or revision, the words except as provided in sub-section(5) of this section shall be substituted. (iii) After sub-section (4) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- (5) The High Court may, at any time, on the application of any aggrieved party or in its own motion, call for and examine the records relating to any order passed or proceedings taken under this Act for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of such order or proceedings and may pass such order in relation thereto as it may deem fit. 
