Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1959_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to amend the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, in its application to the State of Punjab. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab This Act may be called the Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 19591 . (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the 11th April, 1959, and was first published in the Punjab Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 16th April, 1959.
Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab After section 27 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, in its application to the State of Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "27-A. Transfer of electrical work of Bhakra-Nangal Project to Board - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government of Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the "State Government)" may transfer to the Board, for the purposes of this Act, its right and interests relating to the management and control of the electrical portion of the Bhakra-Nangal Project and all works connected therewith, including common pool works and works, if any, under taken by the State Government on behalf of the Government of Rajasthan and on such transfer the Board shall assume the control and management of such rights and interests subject to the terms of any agreement relating the common pool works as may have been or may be executed in that behalf by the State Government with the Government of Rajasthan. Explanation - For the purposes of this section the expression "common pool works" shall mean the following works:- (i) Bhakra Power-house including the Set-up Sub-section. (ii) Nangal Power-houses at Ganguwal and Kotla including the Set-up Sub-Stations at these places. (iii) Double-circuit 132 KV Transmission Line between Ganguwal powerhouse and Ludhiana, including the connected Grid Sub-station at Ludhiana. (iv) 132/220 KV Double-circuit Transmission Line between Bhakra and Delhi, and the connected Grid sub-stations at Dhulkote (Ambala), Panipat and Delhi. (v) Single-circuit 132 KV Transmission Line between Ludhiana and Jullundur including the connected Grid Sub-stations at Jullundur. (vi) Single-circuit 132 KV Transmission Line between Ludhiana and Mukstar including the connected Sub-stations at Moga and Muktsar. (vii) Single-circuit 132 KV Transmission Line between Panipat and Hissar including the connected Grid Sub-sections at Hansi and Hissar. (viii) Three-circuit 66 KV Transmission Line from Bakra Power House to the Nangal Fertiliser Factory".
Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab After sub- section (2) of section 60 of the Principal Act, the following sub-section shall be added, namely :- ("2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may in declaring the expenditure on capital account under sub-section (2), include there in all expenditure incurred by it on capital account in connection with the purposes of this Act on the electrical portion of the Bhakra-Nangal Project, and on such inclusion, such expenditure shall be deemed to be a loan advanced to the Board under section 64 on the date of the said declaration, and all the assets acquired by such expenditure shall thereupon vest in the Board subject to the provisions of any agreement as may have been or may be executed in this behalf by the State Government with the Government of Rajasthan.
Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Ordinance, 1959 (Punjab Ordinance No. 2 of 1959) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Electricity (Supply) (Punjab Amendment) Ordinance, 1959, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 28th day of January, 1959. 
