Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab [Fn. 1] An Act further to amend the Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Act, 1954. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Forty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows :- FOOTNOTES : 1. Punjab Act No. 20 of 1994 (Punjab Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Part I, dated September 27, 1994, Page 295.) (Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the September 23, 1994), dated September 27, 1994.
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for section 2, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or the context, - (a) 'admission' includes admission as spectator or as one of an audience to any place in which a cinematograph show is being held or is to be held; (b) 'cinematograph' includes any apparatus for the representation of moving pictures or series of pictures; (c) 'cinema house' includes a building or any other place equipped for the exhibition of a cinematograph show and includes a touring cinema; (d) 'class' means an enclosure or a section within a cinema house, admission to which is permitted at the same rate; (e) 'Commissioner' means the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Punjab, or any other officer empowered by the State Government by notification, to exercise the powers of the Commissioner under this Act; (f) 'fortnight' means a period of fourteen days consisting of two consecutive weeks; (g) 'gross collection capacity per show' means the notional aggregate of all payments for class-wise admission, to a cinematograph show, which the proprietor would realise, if all seats as determined by the District Magistrate, are occupied in a cinema house and calculated at the rates specified by the District Magistrate for admission to a class; (h) 'old cinema house' means a cinema house which has been functioning in the Punjab State for the last twenty-five years or more; (i) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (j) 'proprietor' in relation to this Act includes any person responsible for the management of the premises where the show is held; (k) 'seating capacity' means the classwise total number of seats approved by the District Magistrate in the case of a cinema house existing on the first day of June, 1994 and in the case of a cinema house coming into operation thereafter, that classwise total number of seats, as may be approved by the District Magistrate; (l) 'show' means a cinematograph exhibition; (m) 'State Government' means the Government of the State of Punjab; (n) 'touring cinema' includes a cinema, which can be taken from place to place for the purpose of displaying cinematograph shows; (o) 'week' means a period of seven days commencing from Friday and ending on Thursday; and (p) the expression 'Municipality, Municipal Corporation', 'Cantonment Board' shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 and the Cantonments Act, 1924."
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 3, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "3. Levy of tax -Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, there shall be levied, charged and paid to the State Government an entertainment tax on the gross collection capacity of a cinematograph show held in a cinema house, specified in column 2 of the Table given below and located in the areas specified in the corresponding entry in column 1 of the said Table and calculated at the rates specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 or column 4 of the said Table, as the case may be. Area where the cinema house is situated Type of cinema house Amount of tax leviable as a percentage of the gross collection capacity per show Amount of tax leviable as a percentage of the gross collection capacity per show in the case of old cinema house 1 2 3 4 Category 'A'  1. Cinema house in a municipal corporation. (i) Air-conditioned; Twenty per cent Eighteen per cent (ii) Air-cooled; Eighteen per cent Sixteen per cent (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Fifteen per cent Thirteen per cent Category 'B'  2. Cinema house in a municipality of the first class or in a Cantonment Board. (i) Air-conditioned; Eighteen per cent Sixteen per cent (ii) Air-cooled; Fifteen per cent Thirteen per cent (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Twelve per cent Ten per cent Category 'C'  3. Cinema house in a municipality of the second class. (i) Air-conditioned; Fifteen per cent Thirteen per cent (ii) Air-cooled; Twelve per cent Ten per cent (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Ten per cent Eight per cent Category 'D'  4. Cinema house in a municipality of the third class or in any other area not falling in categories 'A', 'B' and 'C'. (i) Air-conditioned; Fourteen per cent Twelve per cent (ii) Air-cooled; Eleven per cent Nine per cent (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Nine per cent Seven per cent
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 3A, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:- "3A. Option to pay tax in lieu of tax payable under section 3 - (1) In lieu of the tax payable under section 3, in the case of cinematograph shows held in cinema houses specified in column 2 of the Table given below and located in the area specified in the corresponding entry in column 1 of the said Table, the proprietor may, at his option and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed, pay entertainment tax to the State Government, fortnightly, as specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 or column 4 of the said Table, as the case may be. Area Type of cinema house Amount of tax Amount of tax in the case of old cinema house 1 2 3 4 Category 'A'  (1) Cinema house in a municipal corporation. (i) Air-conditioned; Seventeen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Fifteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. (ii) Air-cooled; Sixteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Fourteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled) Thirteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Eleven per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Category 'B'  (2) Cinema house in a municipality of the first class or in a Cantonment Board. (i) Air-conditioned; Sixteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Fourteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. (ii) Air-cooled; Thirteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Eleven per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled) Ten per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Eight per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by forty-two. Category 'C'  (3) Cinema house in a municipality of the second class. (i) Air-conditioned; Thirteen per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. Eleven per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. (ii) Air-cooled; Ten per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. Eight per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Eight per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. Six per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by thirty-six. Category 'D'  (4) Cinema house in a municipality of the third class and other area not falling in categories 'A', 'B' and 'C' (i) Air-conditioned; Twelve per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. Ten per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. (ii) Air-cooled; Nine per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. Seven per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. (iii) Ordinary (other than air-conditioned and air-cooled). Seven per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. Five per cent of the gross collection capacity per show multiplied by twenty-eight. (2) The amount of tax under sub-section (1), shall be paid by the proprietor irrespective of the actual number of cinematograph shows held by him in the cinema house in a fortnight. (3) Any proprietor who opts to pay tax under this section, shall apply in the prescribed form, to the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District to be permitted to pay the tax under this section. On being so permitted, such proprietor shall pay the tax every fortnight as laid down in sub-section (1). (4) The option so permitted under sub-section (3), shall continue to be in force till it is revoked by an order in writing by the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District. (5) Every proprietor who has been permitted under sub-section (3), shall intimate to the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District, forthwith any increase in the gross collection capacity per show on account of increase in the seating capacity or in the rates of admission. The proprietor, thereafter, shall be liable to pay tax at the increased rates from the date of such increase. If the proprietor fails to inform the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District, about the increase in gross collection capacity per show or fails to pay tax at the corresponding increased rates, the Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District, may, after giving him an opportunity of being heard, by and order in writing, revoke the option permitted under sub-section (3). 3B. Tax not to be charged in certain exceptional circumstances - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no entertainment tax shall be levied and charged from a proprietor of a cinema house for the period for which the cinema house remains closed due to curfew or due to law and order situation : Provided that the entertainment tax shall not be levied and charged only if the cinema house remains closed for the said reasons for a minimum period of three consecutive days. 3C. Liability of proprietor in case of exemptions - Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 and 3A, of this Act, the proprietor of a cinema house, in case of any exemption granted by the State Government by order under sub-section (2) of section 6 of this Act, shall be liable to pay tax in accordance with that order. 3D . Prohibition to reduce seating capacity.-No proprietor of a cinema house shall be allowed to reduce the seating capacity once permitted at the time of grant of licence by the District Magistrate except with the prior approval of the Commissioner. 3E. Determination of gross collection capacity per show - The Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District shall by an order in writing, determine the gross collection capacity per show of every cinema house falling in his jurisdiction and communicate the same to the proprietor within a fortnight from the commencement of the Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994.
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 5, - (i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) The proprietor of a cinema house shall deposit into the concerned treasury, an amount by way of security by the 30th June, 1994, which shall be, as given below :- Sr. No. Area Amount of security to be deposited (in rupees) 1 Cinema house falling in Category 'A' 50,000 2 Cinema house falling in Category 'B' 40,000 3 Cinema house falling in Category 'C' 30,000 4 Cinema house falling in Category 'D' 20,000."; and (ii) to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that before passing an order of forfeiture, the proprietor shall be given an opportunity of being heard.".
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 6, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "6. Exemption - (1) No entertainment tax shall be levied on a public cinematograph exhibition where the Commissioner is satisfied on application made in this behalf in the prescribed manner that the whole of the net proceeds of the tax will be devoted to philanthropic, charitable, educational or scientific purposes which have been approved, as such by the State Government. (2) The State Government may, by a general or special order, exempt any show or class of shows or any proprietor or class of proprietors from liability to pay either whole or any portion of entertainment tax under this Act.".
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, for section 7, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "7. Payment of tax and furnishing of returns - (1) Every proprietor shall be required to furnish a return in the prescribed form and manner in respect of his cinema house, every fortnight within a period of seven days of the close of the fortnight. (2) Before any proprietor furnishes the return as required under sub-section (1), he shall deposit into the concerned treasury, the full amount of tax payable by him, for the period covered by the return.".
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 15, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "15A. Appeal - (1) An appeal from every original order passed under this Act or the Rules made thereunder shall lie, - (i) if the order is made by an assessing authority or an Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, incharge of the District, to the Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner; (ii) if the order is made by the Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner, to the Commissioner. (2) No appeal shall be entertained unless it is filed within thirty days from the date of communication of the order appealed against, or within such longer period as the appellate authority may allow, for reasons to be recorded in writing. (3) No appeal shall be entertained by an appellate authority unless such appeal is accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax or of the penalty, if any, imposed or of both, as the case may be : Provided that if such authority is satisfied that the proprietor is unable to pay the tax assessed or the penalty, if any, imposed or both, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, entertain an appeal without the tax or penalty or both having been paid or after part payment of such tax or penalty or both.".
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, to section 16, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that the Commissioner may, before deciding such application, direct the applicant to deposit, whole or in part, the amount of entertainment tax or penalty, if any, or both imposed on him under this Act.".
Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Act, 1994_Section 10--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Entertainments Tax (Cinematograph Shows) Amendment Ordinance, 1994 (Punjab Ordinance No. 2 of 1994 (See [1994] 94 STC Statutes 38)), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
