Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section Preamble--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab An Act to provide for the control of the sale of timber and the establishment of sale depots for such timber in 1 [Haryana]. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the control of the sale of timber and the establishment of sale depots for such timber in 2 [Punjab]. It is hereby enacted as follows :- Substituted for the word "Punjab" by Haryana Adoption of Laws Order, 1968. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by Adaptation of Laws (Third Amendment) Order, 1951.
Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section 1--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab This Act may be called the Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913. It shall extend to such local areas as the 1 [State] Government may by notification in the 2 [Official Gazette] direct; and it shall come into force in each of such areas on such day as the 3 [State] Government in the like manner directs in this behalf. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1951. Substituted for the words "Local Official Gazette" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1951.
Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section 2--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab In this Act all expressions have the meaning assigned to them by the Indian Forest Act, 1878.
Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section 3--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab (1) The State Government may by notification in the 1 [Official Gazette] makes rules to regulate the sale of timber and the establishment of sale depots for such timber. Such rules may among other matters - (a) prescribe the classes of timber to which the rules shall apply; (b) define what shall be deemed to be a sale depot; (c) provide for the establishment, registration, regulation and inspection of sale depots, and the levy of fees for registration; prescribe the period for which registration shall hold good and the condition under which timber may be brought to, stored at, sold at, and removed from sale depots; and prohibit the sale of timber at, or the establishment or maintenance of, unregistered sale depots; (d) regulate the use of sale depot, marks and the registration of such marks; prescribe the time for which registration shall hold good; and provide for the levy of fees for registration; (e) prescribe the registers to be maintained at sale depots, and provide for the production of such registers before, and for their examination by, any Forest or Police Officer authorized in this behalf by the Divisional Forest Officer or by the District Superintendent of Police respectively; (f) prescribe as penalties for the infringement of any rule made under this section, imprisonment which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to Rs. 500 or both. Double penalties may be inflicted where the offence is committed after sunset and before sunrise, or after preparation for resistance to lawful authority, or if the offender has been previously convicted of a like offence. (2) All rules made under sub-section (1) shall be so made after previous publication in the 2 [Official Gazette]. Substituted for the words "Local Official Gazette" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1951.
Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section 4--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab The provisions of Chapter X of the Indian Forest Act, 1878, with the exception of section 67, shall apply so far as may be to any infringement of the rules made under this Act as if such infringement were a forest-offence under the Indian Forest Act.
Punjab Forest (Sale of Timber) Act, 1913_Section 5--> State(s): Haryana, Punjab No suit shall lie against any public servant for anything done by him in good faith under this Act. 
