Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1995. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, after section 10-A, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "10-B. Deemed payment of tax. - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government or the Commissioner or any person appointed to assist him under sub-section (1) of section 3, not below the rank of an Assistant Excise and Taxation Commissioner, may pass order, with regard to a unit, which came into production for the first time on or after the first day of April, 1989 or wherein modernisation, expansion or diversification has been carried out and to whom incentives by way of deferment of tax, under the Industrial Policy, 1989 of the State Government, have been granted by virtue of deferment certificate, and where a loan liability equal to the amount of any such tax as aforesaid payable by such unit, has been raised by the appropriated authority of the Department of Industries of the Government of Punjab, that the tax payable by such unit shall in public interest, be deemed, to have been paid. Note. - The expressions and terms, used in this section, but not defined in the Act, shall have the same meaning as have been assigned to them under the Punjab General Sales Tax (Deferment and Exemption) Rules, 1991 (See 1991 81 STC Statutes 115), as amended from time to time.".
Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1995 (Punjab Ordinance No. 1 of 1995), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
