Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act to amend the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th December, 1975.
Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In section 5 of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the first proviso, the word "luxury" shall be and shall always be deemed to have been omitted.
Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In Schedule A appended to the principal Act, the word "LUXURY" shall be and shall always be deemed to have been omitted.
Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, any tax levied or collected or purported to have been levied or collected on the sale of goods as specified in Schedule A appended to the principal Act immediately before the commencement of the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976, shall for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been levied or collected in accordance with law, and accordingly - (a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of any tax so paid; (b) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax so paid; (c) any tax levied or purported to have been levied on the sale of goods as specified in Schedule A appended to the principal Act immediately before the commencement of the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976, but not collected, may be recovered in the manner provided in the principal Act; and (d) any tax due on the sale of goods as specified in Schedule A appended to the principal Act immediately before the commencement of the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976, but not assessed, may be assessed and collected in the manner provided in the principal Act, notwithstanding the period of limitation provided therein. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person - (a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act and Rules made thereunder, the assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of such tax; (b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the principal Act as amended by the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976.
Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1975 (Punjab Ordinance No. 14 of 1975) (See 1976 37 S.T.C. Statutes 22.), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 1976 (Punjab Government Gazette, Extraordinary, dated 5th February, 1976, page 200.), runs as follows : "The Bill is designed to replace the Punjab General Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1975 (Punjab Ordinance No. 14 of 1975) (See 1976 37 S.T.C. Statutes 22.), which was promulgated to omit the word 'luxury' appearing in section 5 and Schedule A of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, and to validate the tax levied or collected or purported to have been levied and collected under the Act. Hence the Bill." 
