I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab AN ACT further to amend the I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University Act, 1996. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty- sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University Act, 1996, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for section 14, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "14. Constitution of the Board of Governors - (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, seven ex-officio members and six nominated members. (2) The Chief Secretary of the State of Punjab shall be the Chairman. (3) The Principal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Technical Education and Industrial Training shall be the Vice-Chairman. (4) (a) The Chairman shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board. (b) The Chancellor shall preside over the convocation of the University and if he is unable to preside over the same then the Chairman shall preside over the convocation. (5) (a) The Chancellor shall nominate the following members of the Board for a period of three years and they shall be eligible for re-nomination for another term of the same period, namely:- (i) two members from amongst the eminent Industrialists; (ii) two members from amongst the eminent technologists; (iii) one principal of the college by rotation from amongst the colleges affiliated with the University; and (iv) one head of the department by rotation from amongst the heads of the departments of the University. (b) The following shall be the Ex-officio members, namely:- (i) Vice-Chancellor, I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar; (ii) Vice-Chancellor, Maharaja Ranjit Singh State Technical University, Bathinda; (iii) Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Finance; (iv) Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab; (v) Chairman of the North-West Committee, All India Council for Technical Education, Chandigarh; (vi) President of the Confederation of Indian Industry or his nominee; and (vii) Director of Indian Institute of Technology, Ropar. (6) When a vacancy occurs in the Board due to resignation or death of a member or otherwise, the same shall be filled up in the manner provided in sub-section (5): Provided that the person who fills such vacancy shall hold office for the un-expired portion of the term for which the person in whose place he becomes a member would have otherwise continued in office. (7) The Board shall be the supreme authority of the University and shall have the following powers and functions, namely:- (a) to superintend and control the affairs of the University; (b) to recommend the emoluments and terms and conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor; (c) to approve academic programmes; (d) to frame and approve regulations; (e) to create Departments/Centres/Schools/ Boards of studies for running various academic programmes; (f) to create posts of faculty and staff positions in the University; (g) to approve the University budget; (h) to administer and control the funds of the University and to authorize the opening and operation of the Bank Accounts; (i) to accept, transfer and otherwise control the moveable, immoveable and intellectual property of the University; (j) to decide upon the form and use of common seal of the University; (k) to appoint such committees as may be required for the efficient functioning of the University; (l) to approve the emoluments and terms and conditions of service of the faculty and staff of the University; and (m) to approve the performance of works and services on contract. (8) An annual meeting of the Board shall be held on a date to be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the Chairman. In such annual meeting, report of working of University during the previous year together with the statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance sheet and financial estimates shall be presented. (9) Special meeting of the Board may be convened by the Chairman as and when necessary. (10) The members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, and the sitting fee from the University as may be provided in the regulations, but no member other than the persons referred to in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause (a) and sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (5) of this section shall be entitled to any salary. (11) Five members, including the Chairman, shall constitute the quorum at any meeting of the Board. (12) In case of difference of opinion amongst the members, the opinion of the majority shall prevail. (13) Each member of the Board, including the Chairman, shall have one vote. If there shall be equality of votes on any question to be determined by the Board, the Chairman shall, in addition, has power to exercise a casting vote. (14) Every meeting of the Board shall be presided over by the Chairman and, in his absence the Vice-Chairman shall preside over the meeting. (15) Any resolution, except such which is placed before the meeting of the Board, may be adopted by circulation amongst all its members. Any resolution so circulated and adopted by a majority of the members, who have given their approval or disapproval of such resolution, shall be as effectual and binding as if such resolution had been adopted in a meeting of the Board: Provided that for any decision by such circulation at least four members of the Board must support the resolution in writing.
I.K. Gujral Punjab Technical University (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 14 so substituted, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "14-A. Powers of the State Government - (1) The State Government shall have the powers to make a reference to the University with regard to any matter of policy or in respect of any act done by the University in contravention with the provisions of this Act or the regulations made thereunder. (2) The University shall report to the State Government about the action, if any, as it proposes to take or has taken upon the reference made under sub-section (1), and shall submit an explanation to the State Government, if it fails to take action. (3) If, the University fails to take action on such reference to the satisfaction of the State Government within a reasonable time, it may after considering explanation submitted by the University, issue such directions consistent with this Act, as the State Government may consider necessary and the University shall comply with such directions. (4) The State Government may, at any time, arrange for an inspection or enquiry into the affairs of the University by such authority or person as it may specify, to satisfy about the proper and effective functioning of the University and also upon any matter connected with the administration and finances of the University. (5) The University may authorize any person to represent it on the inspection or enquiry referred to in sub-section (4). (6) On receipt of the report of inspection or enquiry referred to in sub- section (4), the State Government may examine the same and give such directions, as it may consider necessary, to the University. (7) The Vice-Chancellor shall within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the directions given under sub-section (6), send an intimation to the State Government about the action taken by the University in pursuance of the said directions. (8) On the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (7), the State Government may, after considering the intimation, if any, received from the Vice-Chancellor, issue such directions to the University, as it may consider necessary and the University shall comply with such directions. H.P.S. Mahal, Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
