Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the existing preamble, the following preamble shall be substituted, namely:- "to provide for creation, development, maintenance and operation of infrastructure and for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 5, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) The Authority, shall consist of a Chairperson and two other Members, duly appointed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 23, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(5) A contract, after it is sanctioned by the competent authority, shall be signed by the Managing Director, on behalf of the Board: Provided that where the sanctioning authority of any contract or class of contracts is the Managing Director, such contracts may be signed on behalf of the Board by the Managing Director himself or by any other officer duly authorized by him in this behalf.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 28, for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) Where the State Government decides not to take up an infrastructure project out of its own funds or it fails to decide in this regard within the period as specified in sub-section (3), then such project shall automatically revert back to the Board. (5) Upon receipt of the projects referred to in sub-section (4), the Board, shall decide as to whether a public private partnership project, is to be executed completely on private participation basis and partly out of development fund or totally funding the same out of the development fund and thereafter the Board, in due consultation with the Project Management Team or the Sectoral Sub-Committee, as the case may be, shall,- (i) publish the notice containing details of the infrastructure project, in the leading newspapers, inviting objections and suggestions; (ii) assist the Authority in conducting public hearing on objections and suggestions received to finalize the scope of the infrastructure project; (iii) notify infrastructure project inviting bids or placement of request for proposal; (iv) conduct pre-bid processes; (v) conduct evaluation of bids; and (vi) conduct negotiations and recommend the grant of concession by the Board. (6) The Board, may take up any engineering, procurement, construction projects or such projects, which do not involve private participation and can be taken up by it out of the development fund or partly out of the development fund and partly from the funds made available by the State Government or any other source (including Centrally or State sponsored Schemes), as the case may be. (7) The Board may assign the work of conceptualization, identification, execution and monitoring of any urban or rural infrastructure project, to the district level Urban Infrastructure Committee or the Rural Infrastructure Committee, as the case may be, duly constituted by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time. The Board, shall release the funds directly to the Deputy Commissioner concerned, for execution of such final projects so recommended by the said Committees.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, after section 30-A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "30-AA. The State Government may for the reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt any project or class of projects, from public hearing, if the same involves larger public interest.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 32, in sub-section (1), the words and sign "once every week for three consecutive weeks," shall be omitted.
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 43, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) In case the public infrastructure agency considers that it is necessary to terminate any concession, it may terminate the same strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Concession Agreement signed between the parties by passing a speaking order in this behalf, after affording reasonable opportunity of being heard, to such concessionaire. If such concessionaire feels aggrieved of any such terminations order, he may file an appeal before the Authority, in this behalf stating the reasons, for setting aside of such order.".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2015(Punjab Ordinance No. 8 of 2015), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act. Vivek Puri Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
