Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab An Act further to amend the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013. (2) It shall come into force on and with effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In the Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 18, in sub-section (2),- (i) for the words and signs "Chairman, Vice-Chairman", the words and signs "Chairman, Co-Chairman, Vice-Chairman" shall be substituted; and (ii) after clause (a), the following clause and entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:- "(aa) The Deputy Chief Minister of Punjab : Co-Chairman".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab In the principal Act, in section 19, for item (ii), the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "(ii) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairman or Co-Chairman or Vice-Chairman or Member of the Board; or".
Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab (1) The Punjab Infrastructure (Development and Regulation) Amendment Ordinance, 2013 (Punjab Ordinance No. 1 of 2013), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. H. P. S. Mahal Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Legal and Legislative Affairs. 
