Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section Preamble--> State(s): Punjab [Received the assent of the Governor of Punjab on the 6th June and was first published for general information in the PUNJAB GOVERNMENT GAZETTE (extraordinary), dated the 7th June, 1968.] AN ACT to control the price of ice Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Punjab in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 1--> State(s): Punjab (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 2--> State(s): Punjab In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context :- (a) 'dealer' means any person who deals in ice and holds stocks of ice exceeding five quintals at a time for sale and includes his representative or agent ; 'District Magistrate' means the District Magistrate of the district and includes District Food and Supplies Controllers and District Food and Supplies Officers in their respective jurisdictions; (c) 'ice' means frozen water used for human consumption; (d) 'retail' means a transaction which is not wholesale; (e) 'wholesale' means a transaction involving a quantity of more than fifty kilograms.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 3--> State(s): Punjab The District Magistrate may, by an order, published in the Official Gazette, fix the maximum wholesale and retail price which may be charged by a dealer or any other seller and in fixing such prices may fix different maximum prices for different categories of dealers or sellers.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 4--> State(s): Punjab No dealer or any other seller shall sell or agree to sell or offer to sell ice at a price exceeding the maximum price fixed, therefore, under section 3.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 5--> State(s): Punjab The District Magistrate may by an Order- (a) require any dealer to produce for inspection such accounts or other documents and record relating to his business and to furnish such information relating thereto as may be specified in this behalf; and (a) (b) prescribe the manner in which the accounts of sale and purchase of ice may generally be kept by the dealers.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 6--> State(s): Punjab Every person who sells or offers for sale ice to the public shall cause to be conspicuously displayed on a board to be maintained for this purpose as near to the place of business as possible in Punjabi or Language in Gurmukhi Script the price per kilogram or per quintal as the case may be, at which he offers ice for sale.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 7--> State(s): Punjab No person having stock of ice for sale shall withhold the same from sale.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 8--> State(s): Punjab If any person contravenes any provision of this Act or any Order issued thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both.
Punjab Ice Price Control Act, 1968_Section 9--> State(s): Punjab No court shall take cognizable of an offence punishable under this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a person who is a public servant as defined in Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, who is authorised in this behalf by designation or name by the District Magistrate. 
