Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend and provide for the extension of the Northern India Takkavi Act, 1879.WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Northern India Takkavi Act, 1879, and provide for its extension to 1 other2 Part A States or Part C States ;It is hereby enacted as follows: Substituted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 , for "any part of British India" Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 , for provinces of India "
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1884 ; and (2) It shall come into force on the first day of August , 1884.(Commencement.)
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 2--> (1) This section and section 3 extend to the whole of India except Part B States. (2) The rest of this Act extends in the first instance only to 1 Bombay, Uttar Pradesh , Punjab, the Central , Provinces , Assam , Delhi and Ajmer-Merwara. (3) But any State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the rest of this Act to the whole or any part of the territories under its administration. Substituted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 , for original words.
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 3--> Rep.by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s.2 and Sch.
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 4--> (1) State Government 1 or, in a State for which there is a Board of Revenue or Financial Commissioner, such Board or Financial Commissioner, Subject to the control of the State Government may, from time to time, 2 make rules as to loans to be made to owners and occupiers of arable land, for the relief of distress, the purchase of seed or cattle, or any other purpose not specified in.the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 , but connected with agricultural objects. (2) All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette. Inserted by the Act 4 of 1914 , Section 2 and Schedule Pt.I. The words "subject to the control of the Governor-General in Council " Repealed ibid.
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 5--> Every loan made in accordance with such rules, all interest (If any) chargeable thereon, and costs (if any) incurred in making or recovering the same, shall, when they become due, be recoverable from the person to whom the loan and made, or from any person who has become surety for the repayment thereof, as if they were arrears of land-revenue or costs incurred in recovering the same due by the person to whom the loan was made or by his surety.
Agriculturists Loans Act, 1884_Section 6--> When a loan is made under this Act, to the members of a village community or to any other persons such terms that all of them are jointly and severally bound to the Government for the payment of the whole amount payable in respect thereof, and a statement showing the portion of that amount which as among themselves each is bound to contribute is entered upon the order granting the loan and is signed , marked, or sealed by each of them or his agent duly authorized in this behalf and by the officer making the order, that statement shall be conclusive evidence of the portion of that amount which as among themselves each of those persons is bound to contribute. 
