Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Railways Act, 1989 Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of January, 2008.
Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> ln 1 [...] of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act)2 [in section 2],- (a) after cl.(7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(7-A) "competent authority" means any person authorised by the Central Government, by notification, to perform the functions of the competent authority for such area as may be specified in the notification;': (b) after cl.(29), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(29-A) "person interested" includes,- (i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the acquisition of land under this Act; (ii) tribals and other traditional forest dwellers, who have lost any traditional rights recognized under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007); (iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land; and (iv) persons having tenancy rights under the relevant State laws;'; (c) after cl.(37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(37-A) "special railway project" means a project, notified as such by the Central Government from time to time, for providing national infrastructure for a public purpose in a specified time-frame, covering one or more States or the Union territories;'. Omitted by Repealing and Amending (Second ) Act, 2015 (19 of 2015) w.e.f. 14-5-2015. Prior to the omission the text read as ‘S. 2’. Inserted by Repealing and Amending (Second ) Act, 2015 (19 of 2015) w.e.f. 14-5-2015.
Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following chapter shall be inserted, namely:- 'CHAPTER IV-A LAND ACQUISITION FOR A SPECIAL RAILWAY PROJECT 20-A. Power to acquire land, etc - (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for a public purpose any land is required for execution of a special railway project, it may, by notification, declare its intention to acquire such land. (2) Every notification under sub-s. (1), shall give a brief description of the land and of the special railway project for which the land is intended to be acquired. (3) The State Government or the Union territory, as the case may be, shall for the purposes of this section, provide the details of the land records to the competent authority, whenever required. (4) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notification to be published in two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language. 20-B .Power to enter for survey, etc - On the issue of a notification under sub-s. (1) of S. 20-A, it shall be lawful for any person, authorised by the competent authority in this behalf, to- (a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or enquiry; (b) take levels; (c) dig or bore into sub-soil; (d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work; (e) mark such levels, boundaries and lines placing marks and cutting trenches; or (f) do such other acts or things as may be considered necessary by the competent authority. 20-C .Evaluation of damages during survey, measurement, etc - The damages caused while carrying out works on land such as survey, digging or boring sub-soil, marking boundaries or cutting trenches or clearing away any standing crop, fence or forest or doing such other acts or things which may cause damages while acting under S.20-B particularly relating to land which is excluded from acquisition proceeding, shall be evaluated and compensation shall be paid to the persons having interest in that land, within six months from the completion of the said works. 20-D .Hearing of objections, etc - (1) Any person interested in the land may, within a period of thirty days from the date of publication of the notification under sub-s. (1) of S. 20-A, object to the acquisition of land for the purpose mentioned in that sub-section. (2) Every objection under sub-s. (1), shall be made to the competent authority in writing, and shall set out the grounds thereof and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of being heard, either in person or by a legal practitioner, and may, after hearing all such objections and after making such further enquiry, if any, as the competent authority thinks necessary, by order, either allow or disallow the objections. Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "legal practitioner" has the same meaning as in cl.(i) of sub-s.(1) of S. 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961). (3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub-s. (2) shall be final. 20-E .Declaration of acquisition- (1) Where no objection under sub-s. (1) of S.20-D has been made to the competent authority within the period specified therein or where the competent authority has disallowed the objections under sub-s. (2) of that section, the competent authority shall, as soon as may be, submit a report accordingly to the Central Government and on receipt of such report, the Central Government shall declare, by notification, that the land should be acquired for the purpose mentioned in sub-s. (1) of S.20-A. (2) On the publication of the declaration under sub-s. (1), the land shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free from all encumbrances. (3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been published under sub-s. (1) of S.20-A for its acquisition, but no declaration under sub-s. (1) of this section has been published within a period of one year from the date of publication of that notification, the said notification shall cease to have any effect: Provided that in computing the said period of one year, the period during which any action or proceedings to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued under sub-s. (1) of S.20-A is stayed by an order of a court shall be excluded. (4) A declaration made by the Central Government under sub-s. (1) shall not be called in question in any court or by any other authority. 20-F .Determination of amount payable as compensation - (1) Where any land is acquired under this Act, there shall be paid an amount which shall be determined by an order of the competent authority. (2) The competent authority shall make an award under this section within a period of one year from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that period, the entire proceedings for the acquisition of the land shall lapse : Provided that the competent authority may, after the expiry of the period of limitation, if he is satisfied that the delay has been caused due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, he may make the award within an extended period of six months: Provided further that where an award is made within the extended period, the entitled person shall, in the interest of justice, be paid an additional compensation for the delay in making of the award, every month for the period so extended, at the rate of not less than five per cent of the value of the award, for each month of such delay. (3) Where the right of user or any right in the nature of an easement on, any land is acquired under this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other person whose right of enjoyment in that land has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such acquisition, an amount calculated at ten per cent of the amount determined under sub-s. (1), for that land. (4) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub-s. (1) or sub-s. (3), as the case may be, the competent authority shall give a public notice published in two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular language inviting claims from all persons interested in the land to be acquired. (5) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land and shall require all persons interested in such land to appear in person or by an agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub-s. (2) of S. 20-D, before the competent authority, at a time and place and to state the nature of their respective interest in such land. (6) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub-s. (1) or as the case may be, sub-s. (3) is not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by either of the parties, be determined by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply to every arbitration under this Act. (8) The competent authority or the arbitrator while determining the amount of compensation under sub-s.(1) or sub-s.(6), as the case may be, shall take into consideration- (a) the market value of the land on the date of publication of the notification under S. 20-A; (b) the damage, if any sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the land, by reason of the severing of such land from other land; (c) the damage, if any, sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property in any manner, or his earnings; 
