Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section Preamble--> In exercise of powers conferred by section 34 read with section 33 of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Act, 2012 (35 of 2012), the Academic Council hereby makes the following Ordinances of the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development, namely:-
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 1--> (1) These Ordinances may be called the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016. (2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 2--> (1) In these Ordinances, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Act" means the Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Act, 2012 (35 of 2012); (b) "hostel" means a building for resident of students, and includes Halls of residence. (c) "ragging" means any act, conduct or practice by which dominant power or status of senior students is brought to bear on junior students, especially those freshly enrolled or students who are in any way considered inferior by other students and includes individual or collective acts or practices which may- (i) involve physical assault or threat to use of physical force; (ii) violate the status, dignity and honour of women students; (iii) violate the status, dignity and honour of students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; (iv) expose students to ridicule and contempt and thus affect their self-esteem; (v) take the form of verbal abuse, aggression, indecent gestures and obscene behaviour. (d) "Student" means a person admitted to an undergoing a Programme of Study in the Institute, and includes research scholars wherever relevant; (e) "Sexual harassment" means commission of any verbal, physical or other conduct including comment, gesture or conduct of sexual nature, individually or collectively by men against women and includes: (i) eve teasing, (ii) unwelcome remarks, (iii) jokes causing or likely to cause awkwardness or embarrassment, (iv) innuendos and tauntry, (v) gender based insults or sexist remarks, (vi) unwelcome sexual overtone in any manner such as over telephone and the like, (vii) touching or brushing against the body, and the like, (viii) displaying pornographic or other offensive or derogatory picture, cartoons, pamphlets or sayings, (ix) forcible physical touch or molestation, (x) physical confinement against one's will and other acts is tentative to violate ones privacy. (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Act and the Statutes shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act and the Statutes.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 3--> (1) Without prejudice to the provisions specified in the Act and Statutes, the admission procedures shall be made in accordance with the Academic Calendar as approved by the Academic Council from time to time. (2) The number of students to be admitted for various programmes shall be specified by the School Boards of Studies from time to time on the recommendations of the Departments concerned. (3) The eligibility qualifications for admission to all academic programmes shall be the same as fixed by the Academic Council on the recommendations of various School Boards of Studies. (4) For admission to the two years Master's Degree Programme, the candidates, who have appeared for Senior Secondary i.e., (+2) or any other examination approved as equivalent thereto, may be considered for provisional admission to the first year of five-year integrated Master's programme, provided they satisfy all other requirements prescribed by the School Boards of Studies and approved by the Academic Council. (5) Candidates studying in the final year of their qualifying degree programme may be considered for provisional admission to the Master's Degree programme, provided they satisfy all other requirements prescribed by the School Boards of Studies and approved by the Academic Council. (6) Every student, admitted provisionally to the Master's Degree Programme of the Institute, shall submit copies of the qualifying degree or provisional certificate and such other documents within the specified period, as prescribed by the Academic Council. (7) For Integrated Master's Degree Programme, students shall be admitted only to the first year of the Programme: Provided that, lateral extra students may also be considered based on the recommendations of the respective School Boards of Studies. (8) The admission, provisional or otherwise, of a student who either does not submit the required documents by the specified date or fails to meet any other specified requirement for admission shall be cancelled by the Director. (9) The admission of a student shall be cancelled by the Director immediately, anytime during the Programme of study, if it is found that the student had furnished false or forged certificates or incorrect statement and documents or suppressed such relevant information in her or his application or if any such irregularity is brought to the notice of authorities of the Institute through any means and after giving such and sufficient opportunity of being heard, the Director shall place a report of such matter before the Academic Council for its decision. (10) If a student who has been admitted is found medically unfit, his or her admission shall be cancelled. (11) Admission of students including those nominated by the National Service Scheme and Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan shall be on the basis of merit adjudged through entrance test wherever applicable aimed at assessing knowledge, comprehension and aptitude of the students to pursue their higher studies in the Institute and the School Board may stipulate cases when viva or personal interview are required: Provided that in the case of programmes where the intake of students is small, admission shall be made on the basis of merit adjudged through the marks obtained in the qualifying examination and the decision to this effect shall be taken by the Director on the recommendation of Admission Committee and a report shall be placed before the Academic Council. (12) The format of the entrance test shall be decided by the Institute and the entrance test shall be held at the headquarters and other places as specified and approved by the Institute from time to time. (13) The Heads of Departments concerned shall prepare the question bank for the written tests to be forwarded to the Controller of Examinations and the Controller of Examinations shall set the question paper(s) from the question banks received in confidential manner and conduct the written test. (14) All admissions shall be provisional in the first instance and shall be confirmed within a time limit, as fixed by the Director and no candidate shall claim admission as a matter of right. (15) No student shall ordinarily be admitted to more than one Programme at a time. (16) The medium of instruction shall be in english. Provided that the students admitted to part-time evening Post Graduate Diploma or Diploma or Certificate Programmes are permitted to pursue any regular Programme in Departments or Schools of the Institute or in other Institutions or in regular Programme of the Institute and vice-versa. (17) Notwithstanding anything contained with the provisions relating to admission, the Institute may make special provision for admission of students of weaker sections of the people and in particular, of the Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes and other Backward classes. (18) The Institute may make special provisions for admission of students from non-resident Indian community and foreign students.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 4--> (1) There shall be a centralized Admission Committee constituted every year for admission to all the Programmes to regulate the admissions to the Institute which shall consist of the following members namely:- (a) The Dean of any School to be appointed by the Director as Chairman. (b) Three teachers nominated by the Director, one each from amongst the Professors, Associate Professors and Assistant Professors by rotation on seniority basis as Members. (c) In case of non-availability of any teacher from any of the aforesaid categories, the Director may nominate another teacher from the Institute(Member) as alternate members in lieu of Member at clause (b) above. (d) One person representing the Schedule Castes or the Schedule Tribes or Other Backward Classes or Women faculty shall be nominated by the Director, if not already represented. Provided that not less than fifty per cent of the total number of Members of the Committee shall form the quorum.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 5--> (1) The Admission Committee shall have the following duties, namely:- (a) to scrutinise the Application forms for admission of the candidates in accordance with the eligibility conditions or criteria as prescribed by the respective School Boards from time to time; (b) to call, after the evaluation of the Entrance test(s), a reasonable number of candidates from each category for admission to the Programme of study concerned, subject to their scoring the minimum cut-off marks or dynamic cut of marks in the entrance test for admission, if any, as prescribed by the Admission Committee. (c) to prepare the merit list based on the marks obtained by the candidates in the entrance test or interview or both; (d) to prepare a list of the candidates selected for admission to be submitted by the Chairman of the Admission Committee to the Director for approval. (2) The Institute may make conditions for admission or enrolment of students to a Programme of research leading to the Doctor of Philosophy.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 6--> (1)Students who have discontinued their studies and who have not taken their Transfer Certificate shall be eligible for readmission in the respective year or semester provided that the total period of break in studies does not exceed two academic years and such students shall remit tuition fee and other dues for the break period and subject to the recommendations of the Admission Committee. (2) Students who have obtained the Transfer Certificate shall be considered only for fresh admission.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 7--> (1) Reservation of seats shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act 2006 in participant and the Circulars of Government of India issued in this regard from time to time and in particularly,- (i) applicants seeking admission under the reserved categories shall be required to fulfill the prescribed eligibility conditions for admission to the Programme of study leading to the degree concerned; (ii) if an applicant in the reserved category qualifies for admission in the general category she or he shall be transferred to the general category without prejudice to the number of seats already allocated in that category, and the seat falling vacant due to such transfer shall be offered to the next eligible candidate in that reserved category; (iii) if sufficient number of applicants are not available in any of the reserved category including Other Backward Classes or differently abled persons, such vacant seats shall be transferred to the general category. (2) The reservation is interchangeable, i.e., if sufficient number of applicants are not available to fill up the seats reserved for Scheduled Tribes, they shall be filled up by suitable applicants from Scheduled Castes and vice-versa. (3) applicants belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward classes and differently abled shall be given relaxation to the extent of five per cent in the aggregate of marks obtained in the qualifying examination. (4) The application Form of an applicant in aforesaid category shall be submitted along with a Caste Certificate from any one of the authorities prescribed by the Central Government. (5) An application Form (claiming reservation) without cast certificate shall be rejected. (6) The Institute shall implement the directives of the Ministry regarding the reservations from time to time.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 8--> The following shall be the specified provisional for various category for reservation, namely:- Outstanding Sports Persons: (a) A specified number of seats in both the under-graduate and post-graduate programmes shall be earmarked by the Academic Council for admission of outstanding players and sports persons, who have represented their Universities or Region or State, provided that they fulfill the minimum eligibility requirements prescribed for seeking admission to respective programmes. (b) Relaxation to the extent of five percent of aggregate marks in the qualifying examination shall be given to all such candidates. (c) The relaxation of marks on the basis of Sports Certificate shall be permissible only on the production of a certificate duly verified by the Physical Director and duly recommended by the Admission Committee. National Cadet Corps (N.C.C.) Cadets: (a) Relaxation to the extent of two per cent of aggregate marks in the qualifying examination shall be given to National Cadet Corps Cadets having the following National Cadet Corps Certificates for admission, namely:- (i) "A" Certificate for admission to an undergraduate Programme; (ii) "B" or "C" Certificate for admission to a postgraduate Programme. (b) The relaxation of marks on the basis of National Cadet Corps Certificate shall be permissible only on the production of a certificate duly verified by the National Cadet Corps Officer and duly recommended by the Admission Committee. National Service Scheme (NSS) Volunteers : (a) National Service Scheme volunteers who have attended ten days' Special Camps of ten day each and one National Integration Camp or Republic Day Camp shall be provided a relaxation of two per cent of aggregate marks in the qualifying examination for admission to all Programmes. (b) The relaxation of marks on the basis of National Service Scheme Certificate shall be permissible only on the production of a certificate duly verified by the National Service Scheme Officer or Coordinator and duly recommended by the Admission Committee. Provided that, such students may be considered by the Director over and above the seats allotted to each Programme, on the recommendation of the Admission Committee. Note: The relaxation in the minimum prescribed percentage of marks in the qualifying examination for admission to a Programme shall not exceed five per cent in any case. Foreign Students: (a) The admission of foreign students shall not exceed twenty per cent of the total number of students as supernumerary seats admitted to a Programme, subject to their qualifying in the Entrance Test and satisfying other conditions as laid down from time to time by the Academic Council. (b) In addition to the above provision, the foreign candidates sponsored by the respective countries and approved by the Government of India, shall also be admitted as per the conditions provided in various schemes. (c) Every foreign student shall have to undergo a medical test (including test for AIDS) within a week from the date of admission. (d) Foreign students admitted to a programme shall produce student visa at the time of admission or within one month after completion of admission and in case of failure to produce such a certificate within the stipulated period, the admission shall stand cancelled. (e) The foreign nationals shall submit their applications through the Government of India.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 9--> There shall be courses and a Programme of Studies in the Institute for awarding Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates as decided by Institute on the recommendation of the School Board of Studies concerned and approved by Academic Council from time to time.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 10--> (1) The programme of studies and their duration shall be as follows, namely:- (i) Bachelor's Programme: The duration of the Bachelor's Programme shall be of three years, consisting of six semesters. (ii) Five Year Integrated Masters Consisting of Programme: A Degree Programmes shall be of five years, consisting of ten semesters with exit option after three years (six semesters) leading to the award of the Undergraduate Degree and lateral entry option at the beginning of the fourth year (seventh semester). (iii) Master's Programme: The duration of the Masters Programme (under semester system) shall be such two years, consisting of four semesters; (iv) Doctor of Philosophy Programme: The duration of the Doctor of Philosophy Programme shall be such as prescribed by the University Grants Commission from time to time; (v) Diploma and Certificate Programmes: The duration of the Diploma or Certificate Programme shall be as determined by the Institute and approved by the Academic Council from time to time. (2) The Institute shall have the power to introduce, modify or discontinue a Programme or Programmes.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 11--> (1) All the Programmes of Study leading to award of Degrees or Diplomas or Certificates shall be conducted by the Schools or Departments established by the Institute. (2) The structure and regulations for the Programmes of Study shall be as approved by the Academic Council on the recommendations of the School Board concerned. (3) The syllabi and reading material for each of the courses shall be specified by the respective Departmental Boards.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 12--> A Student shall be required to attend at least ninety per cent of the classes actually held in each subject for any Degree or Diploma or Certificate Programme conducted by the School or Department. Provided that the Director of the Institute on the recommendations of the Dean of the School concerned may condone the shortage in attendance, not exceeding ten per cent on medical grounds on the production of medical certificate from authorised Medical attendant. Provided that the Director of the Institute on the recommendations of the Dean of the School concerned may condone the shortage in attendance, not exceeding five per cent for valid and convincing reasons other than medical grounds. Provided also that students deputed by the Institute to take part in the National or International events be given relaxation shall be available for the days of actual participation in the event, and period for journey for the events with the prior approval of the Director.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 13--> (1) The Executive Council on the recommendations of the Academic Council may institute such scholarships, fellowships, medals, endowments, stipends and prizes as it deems necessary. (2) The Academic Council shall specify conditions for the award of scholarships, fellowships, medals, endowments, stipends and prizes and the same shall be subject to the approval by the Executive Council and in case of endowments, the Executive Council shall consider the conditions put forth by the person or body offering the endowment and decide appropriately. (3) The institute shall have merit scholarships for the first and second rank holders in every Programme of Study and the quantum of amount in such scholarship shall be decided by the Institute from time to time. (4) All types of scholarships fellowships, free ships, stipends, etc. shall be administered at the Institute level by a Committee constituted by the Director.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 14--> (1) The panels of Examiners shall be proposed by the School Boards of Studies and recommended by the Academic Council and the selection and appointment of Examiners shall be made in accordance with such procedure, as may be specified by it from time to time. (2) There shall be two Boards of Examiners for each examination, one for setting and scrutinising the question papers (Board of Paper setters); and the other, for valuation of answer books and tabulating the results (Board of Valuators) and each Board shall have a Chairman. (3) The Board of Valuators shall forward the consolidated results consisting of continuous assessment and the end-semester examinations to the Controller of Examinations. (4) The Controller of Examinations shall submit such consolidated results to the Director before the publication of results. (5) The tenure of the question paper setters shall be for two years which may be considered for another term after an interval of two years. (6) The Board of Examiners shall be constituted with the Chairman of the Board and two other paper setters to scrutinize the question papers and certify the fulfilment of the requirements of the prescribed pattern and syllabus. (7) The Board of Valuators consisting of a Chairman and two valuators shall evaluate of the answer scripts of the end-semester examinations of the Institute. (8) There shall be a central evaluation or door evaluation of all the answer scripts as decided by the Director and the answer scripts shall be evaluated by internal examiner (faculty member who taught the course) and an external examiner nominated by the Director from the panel of examiners approved by the Academic Council.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 15--> (1) The Controller of Examinations shall notify the schedule of examinations and conduct the examinations as per the approved Academic Calendar and curriculum of the courses. (2) Examinations of the Institute shall be open to regular and eligible students, i.e. such students who have undergone a regular Programme of Study in the Institute for a period specified for that Programme of Study after fulfilling the minimum attendance and after successful completion of the course requirements in respect of the Programme. (3) The Controller of Examinations shall make all necessary arrangements for the smooth conduct of examinations, timely submission of evaluation and announcement of results, as decided by the Academic Council. (4) The Controller of Examinations shall follow in to, the instructions given in the "manual for conduct of examinations" for setting up of question papers, valuations, issuance of certificates, grievances, disciplinary proceedings etc.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 16--> (1) Every student of the Institute shall maintain discipline, including observance of good conduct and orderly behaviour in the Institute. (2) No student shall move around or visit places or areas declared by the Institute for which entry is restricted without proper permission. (3) Every student shall always carry on her or his Identity Card issued by the Registrar and produce or surrender the same when required by the authorities of the Institute
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 17--> All acts unbecoming of a student of the Institute shall be considered acts of indiscipline and which shall include the following, namely; (i) irregularity in attendance; (ii) indifference towards work assigned; (iii) causing disturbance in the class or in the office or in the Library or in the Auditorium or anywhere in the campus; (iv) disobeying instructions of the teachers or authorities of the Institute; (v) misconduct or misbehaviour of any kind at the time of election to student bodies or at meetings or during curricular, extra-curricular activities of the student; (vi) misconduct or misbehaviour at the examination hall towards a teacher or invigilator or employee or visitor to the Institute' (vii) causing damage to the movable or immovable properties of the Institute; (viii) inciting other students to indulge in any one or more of aforesaid acts; (ix) spreading rumours among the students and giving false publicity misleading fellow students; (x) any act and form of sexual harassment, ragging or discrimination on the basis of cast, category, religion, race and region; (xi) engaging in unlawful activities which includes membership of banned organizations, organizing meeting and processions without due permission of the competent authorities; (xii) possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages and contraband intoxicants in the premises of the Institute; (xiii) consumption of tobacco, Pan masala, Khaini, Gutkha, supari, Zarda and such other substances; (xiv) smoking in the campus of the Institute; and (xv) any other conduct anywhere which is considered to be unbecoming of a student.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 18--> (1) The Warden, Assistant Wardens and Resident Teachers shall look after the discipline in the hostel. (2) Shouting, whistling or otherwise causing disturbance in the hostel shall be deemed to be breach of discipline and register shall be maintained for the same in which the violator's name and her or his room number in the hostel shall be noted down and informed to Warden. (3) Smoking shall be strictly prohibited in the hostels. (4) Students shall be warned of consequences of possessing of liquor or drinks or being found under their influence and if the breath analyser proves the offence, it will lead to disciplinary action, including expulsion from the hostel. (5) Inmates shall not be permitted to convene meeting of any nature in the hostel without the Warden's written permission. (6) Inmates shall not allowed to put up notice without the Warden's written permission. (7) Inmates shall not interfere with the work of the hostel staff and cases of misconduct, if any, shall only be brought to the notice of the Warden for appropriate action. (8) Inmates shall not remain in the hostel during class hours and at other times when their presence is expected in the Institution, except with the permission of the Warden. (9) Audio system, computer and other electrical appliances shall be used only with the prior permission of the Warden and terms and conditions for the use of such appliances shall be stipulated from time to time and shall not be played beyond 9.00 p.m. (10) A student whose name has been removed from the rolls of the Institution shall by that very fact forfeit the hostel membership and shall vacate the room. (11) Students shall not possess any powered vehicles. (12) All inmates are to return to their respective rooms by 8.30 p.m. (13) The Warden shall exercise all powers to expel a student from the hostel if her or his presence is considered detrimental to the discipline of the hostel. (14) No male hostellers shall wander around the premises of girls' hostel or vice-versa.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 19--> (1) Mess charges shall be based on dividing system. (2) Inmates or their guests shall not enter the kitchen without permission. (3) Inmates shall have their food only in the respective messes allotted to them and they shall adhere to the prescribed timings of the mess as notified by the Warden. (4) Whenever a resident is away from the hostel on valid reason for a period exceeding seven days, reduction in mess charges shall be given only for the number of days in excess of two days, provided the resident shall make an application for reduction in the prescribed form well in advance. (5) The residents shall pay all the dues in time failing which they have to vacate the hostel: Provided that they shall be permitted to stay on payment of the dues with such fine for late payment as may be prescribed from time to time in this behalf. (6) The residents shall have to pay the mess fees and room rent together of the previous month on or before the 10th of succeeding month without fine and with a fine prescribed from time to time on or before the 15th of succeeding month and such defaulters after the 15th shall have to vacate from the hostel and their dues to the hostel shall be adjusted from their deposit amount. (7) Every student who is staying inside the campus may join the mess regardless of her or his interest. (8) Mess bills shall be sent to the parents or guardians or student every month, so that they share the responsibility of paying the dues in time. (9) Mess bill shall have to be paid through the office of Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 20--> (1) No person other than those admitted as residents of the hostel shall stay in the hostel premises. (2) Any one falling sick should use Government Hospital facilities or the nearest health centre at her or his own cost and also inform the warden or resident teacher. (3) The hostel authorities shall not be held responsible for any loss or theft of the belongings of the residents. The residents shall make their own arrangements for safe custody of the same. (4) The inmates shall strictly ensure the safety and security of the property of the Institution.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 21--> I. Entrance test: (a) During written test for admissions, the candidates shall be under the disciplinary control of the Chief Superintendent of Examinations of the Centre who shall issue the necessary instructions and if a candidate disobeys instructions or misbehaves with any member of the supervisory staff or with any of the invigilators at the Centre, she or he may be expelled from the test for that session. (b) The Chief Superintendent shall immediately report the facts of such case with details of evidence to the Controller of Examinations who shall refer the matter to the Director for necessary action. II. End semester examinations: (a) The end-semester examinations shall be conducted by the Controller of Examinations under the supervision of the Chief Superintendent of Examinations and she or he shall be responsible for the fair and orderly conduct of the examinations. (b) In case of detection of use of unfair means, the same shall be brought to the notice of the Controller of Examinations for further action who shall refer the matter to the Discipline Committee through the Director for necessary action.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 22--> (1) The following activities shall be deemed to be unfair means, namely:- (i) possessing incriminating material related or unrelated to the subject of the examination concerned; (ii) trying to help other candidates in examination hall; (iii) consulting other candidates in the examination hall; (iv) consulting the invigilator for answering the questions in the examination; (v) pleading for favourable consideration or mercy; (vi) using of colour thread, or marking any identification with colour pencil; (vii) writing filthy and unwarranted words in the answer script; (viii) copying from the possessed material or from a neighbour or inter-changing of answer scripts; (ix) exchange of answer scripts or relevant materials; (x) writing candidate's name in any part of the answer script or writing Register number anywhere else other than the required place; (xi) making plea coupled with promise, if any, for consideration; (xii) using the help of another person in the malpractice; (xiii) changing seat for copying; (xiv) writing some other candidate's register number in the main answer script; (xv) Inserting pre-written answer sheets (main sheets or additional sheets); (xvi) threatening the invigilator or exhibiting insubordinate behaviour as reported by the Chief Superintendent or Hall Superintendent or both; (xvii) using electronic gadgets for the purpose of malpractice; (xviii) alluring with money (enclosing currency note, etc.); (xix) taking away the answer script from the Examination Hall wilfully; (xx) cases of impersonating; (xxi) tampering with spelling, name or initial, etc. in the certificates issued by other bodies and submission of such certificates at the time of admission in the Institute; (xxii) tampering with the date of birth in the certificate issued by other Bodies and submission of the same at the time of admission in the Institute; (xxiii) tampering with the grade certificates or any other certificates issued by the Institute. (2) Where the invigilator in charge is satisfied that one third or more students were involved in using unfair means or copying in a particular Examination Hall, it shall be deemed to be a case of mass copying. (3) The Academic Council may also declare any other act of omission or commission to be unfair means in respect of such other examinations conducted by the Institute as it may deem necessary. (4) If the Director is satisfied that there has been mass-scale copying or use of unfair means on a mass-scale, she or he shall cancel the examination of all the candidates concerned and order re-examination.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 23--> (1) The Chief Superintendent of the examination centre shall report to the Controller of Examinations without delay in each case where use of unfair means in the examination is suspected or discovered with full details of the evidence in support thereof and the statement of the candidate(s) concerned, if any, on the prescribed format for the purpose, with copy to the examiner, paper-setter, evaluator, moderator or the person connected with examination of the Institute as the case may be, with all the relevant materials. (2) A candidate shall not be forced to give a statement, but in case she or he refuses to make a statement, the Chief Superintendent shall record it and thereafter and shall record the statement of at-least two witnesses from the amongst members of the supervisory staff on duty at the time of occurrence of the incident.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 24--> (1) All cases relating to indiscipline and unfair means shall be referred to the "Disciplinary Committee" to be appointed by the Director. (2) The Committee shall consist of five members from amongst the teachers and officers of the Institute, out of whom one member shall be nominated as Chairman by the Director. (3) A member shall be appointed for a term of two years, and shall be eligible for re-appointment. (4) Three members of the disciplinary committee present shall constitute the quorum. (5) Ordinarily, all decisions shall be taken by the Committee by consensus or by simple majority and if the members are unable to reach a conclusion, the case shall be referred to the Director, whose decision shall be final thereon. (6) All decisions taken by the Disciplinary Committee shall be placed before the Director for approval; (7) A student, within one month of the receipt of the decision of the Institute, shall appeal to the Director, in writing, for a review of the case and if the Director is satisfied that there is sufficient reasons for consideration for representation, the Director shall refer the case back to the Disciplinary Committee for reconsideration. (8) The Disciplinary Committee may recommend one of the following punishments for cases referred to in sub-ordinance (I) and (II), namely: (I) Indiscipline: (1) Students found guilty of breach of discipline and acts of commission and omission during the Programme of study in the Institute shall be liable for punishment in the form of fine, rustication or expulsion. (a) Fine: The quantum of fine shall not exceed Rupees Five thousand. (b) Rustication: The student may be rusticated for one year from appearing in any examination provided from the date of rustication and student may with the permission of the Head of the Department, Dean and the Director re-join the Institute at the time of admission in the following year. (c) Expulsion: A student may be expelled from the Institute and shall not be allowed to appear for the Examination or for readmission in the Institute. (2) Each case of rustication or expulsion shall be reported to the Executive Council immediately after the order is passed and a certificate signed by the Head of the Department or Dean or any other competent person to the effect that the student concerned had been given adequate and reasonable opportunity to explain his position before such order was passed shall accompany the report. (II) Unfair means: Nature of unfair means Nature of Punishment Scale of punishment If the candidate has indulged in unfair means specified in clauses (i) to (vi) of sub-ordinances (1) of ordinances 22. Cancel the candidature of the student for the particular subject of the Institute Examination registered by her or him in that session. 1 If the candidate has repeated the unfair means shown in clauses (i) to (vi) of sub-ordinances (1) of Ordinances 22 for a second time. Cancel the candidature of the student for the Institute Examinations of all subjects registered by her or him in that Session and debar her or him for all Institute Examinations in the subsequent session. 2 If the candidate has repeated the unfair means shown in clauses (i) to (vi) of sub-ordinances (1) of Ordinances 22 for a third time. Cancel the candidature of the student for the Institute Examinations of all subjects registered by her/him for that session and debar her/him for two years from registering and appearing for the Institute Examinations. 3 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clauses (vii) to (x) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22. Cancel the candidature of the student for the Institute Examinations of all subjects registered by her or him during that semester and debar her or him from registering for the subsequent semester and appearing for the examination sessions thereof. 4 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clauses (xi) to (xviii) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22. Cancel the candidature of the student in the Institute Examinations of all subjects registered by her or him for that session and debar her or him from registering and appearing for the examination sessions for two subsequent semesters. 5 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clause (xix) and (xx) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22. Cancel the candidature of the student in the Institute Examinations of all subjects registered by her or him for that session and debar her or him for two years from registering and appearing for the Institute Examinations. Moreover, relevant legal action shall be initiated if an outsider is involved. 6 If the candidates indulged in unfair means given in sub- ordinance (2) of Ordinances 22. In case the incident occurred in a single examination hall: Cancel the relevant examination taken by the students of that hall. Debar the Superintendent of the hall and others involved directly or indirectly from the examination work such as invigilation, question paper setting, valuation, etc. for the next three years.  In case the incident occurred in the examination Centre: Cancel the relevant examination taken by the students of that Centre. Debar the Superintendent of the Centre and others involved directly or indirectly form the examination work such as invigilation, question paper setting, valuation, etc. for the next three years; and cancel the Centre for the next two years. 7 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clause (xxi) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22. Cancel the admission of the student. Moreover, relevant legal action shall be initiated if an outsider is involved. 8 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clause (xxii) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22 Debar the student from appearing in any Examination of the Institute for a period of two years from the date of production of the forged documents and from undergoing any Programme in the Institute for the corresponding period. Moreover, relevant legal action shall be initiated if an outsider is involved. 9 If the candidate indulged in unfair means listed in clause (xxiii) of sub-ordinance (1) of Ordinances 22 The tampered Certificate shall be retained in the Institute and no duplicate shall be given for five years from the date of presentation of document. Moreover, relevant legal action shall be initiated if an outsider is involved. 10
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 25--> Students admitted to the Programmes of Studies shall pay the following fees, namely: (A) Admission Process fees: (i) Application Form (with Brochure and Entrance test fee) Rs. 100 for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe and Rs. 200 for Others (ii) Admission fee Rs. 200/- (iii) Registration fee Rs. 500/- (B) Programme fees: (i) Tuition Fee Rs.3000/- per semester (ii) Computer Lab Fee Rs.1000/- per semester (iii) Library Fee Rs. 500/- (C) Students Welfare Fee: Medical Fee Rs. 100/- (D) Extra-Curricular Activities Fees: (i) Sports Fee Rs. 500/- (ii) NSS Fee Rs. 500/- (E) Deposits (Refundable): (i) Caution Money (Library) Rs. 1000/- (ii) Caution Money (Hostel) Rs. 1000/- (F) Miscellaneous Fees: (i) Fee for Statement of Marks Rs. 25/- (ii) Fee for Provisional Certificate Rs.200/- (iii) Fee for Degree Certificate Rs.500/- (iv) Fee for Transfer or Migration or Equivalence Certificate Rs.1000/- (a) Rank Certificate Rs.300/- (b) Transcript Rs.500/- (c) Verification of genuine Certificate Rs.1000/- (v) Fee for condonation of attendance Rs. 1000/- (vi) Fee for submission of dissertation (PG and Ph.D) Rs. 500/- (vii) Fee for change of Name Rs. 1000/- (viii) Fee for issuing Duplicate of the Copies of the Statement of Marks (on extra payment as specified by the Institute). Rs. 200/- per semester plus search fee (ix) Student aid fund Rs.500/-
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 26--> (1) Students admitted under the non-resident of India(NRI) category shall be required to pay a sum of US$ 2,000 (or an equivalent sum in Indian Rupees) per semester in addition to the normal fees as applicable to the Programme of Study to which the students admitted; (2) Students admitted under the Foreign National Category shall be required pay a sum of US$3,000 (or an equivalent sum in Indian Rupees) per semester in addition to the normal fees as applicable to the Programme of Study to which admitted; (3) Students admitted from South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries shall pay normal fee on par with Indian students; (4) For payment of any fees under "Miscellaneous fees", The candidates listed in categories (1) and (2) above shall be required to remit three times of the fees fixed in Indian Rupees for an Indian student; (5) A Committee constituted by the Director shall revise the fees for the Non-Resident of India and Foreign national category of students from time to time. (6) Students shall deposit tuition fee before 10th of the first month on the commencement of the semester. (7) Annual fees shall be paid at the commencement of each academic year and fees shall be payable in cash or by a Crossed Bank Draft drawn in favour of the Director of the Institute or money transfer through Bank. (8) If a student does not pay the fees on time, a fine shall be levied as fixed by time to time. (9) For non-payment of the even after twenty days' of the prescribed time, the names of the defaulters shall be displayed on the Notice Board and shall be removed from the rolls of the Institute with immediate effect. (10) A student whose name has been removed from the Institute under sub-ordinance (9) shall be readmitted on the recommendation of the Head of Department and Dean concerned with the approval of the Director on payment of the arrears of fees in full along with the fine and other dues and she or he shall, in addition, pay a fresh admission fee. (11) Whenever a student proposes to withdraw from the Institute, she or he shall submit an application to the Dean of the School concerned through the Head of the Department or Centre intimating the date of her or his withdrawal and if she or he fails to do so, her or his name shall continue to be kept on the rolls of the Institute for a maximum period of one month following the month up to which she or he has paid fees and she or he shall also be required to pay all fees or charges that may fall due during this period. (12) Visually Impaired students shall be exempted from payment of all fees except the deposits.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 27--> (1) Deposits are refundable, on an application from the student, on her or his leaving the Institute after deducting all dues, fines and other claims against her or him. (2) If any student does not claim the refund of any amount lying to her or his credit within one calendar year of her or his leaving the Institute, it shall be deemed to have been forfeited by her or him to the Students Aid Fund. (3) The period of one year shall be reckoned from the date of announcement of the result of the examination taken by the student. (4) If, after having paid fees, a candidate withdraws from the programme, he or she shall be refunded all the fees and deposits, except tuition fee for one month, admission fee and enrolment fee, provided her or his application for withdrawal is received within fifteen days of the payment of fees. (5) Applications for withdrawal received beyond fifteen days of the last date of the payment of fees shall entitle a student for the refund of deposits only. (6) If a student owes any money to the Institute on account of any damage which he or she may have caused to the Institute property, the said money shall be, along with outstanding tuition fee and fines, if any, deducted from the Deposits due to her or him.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 28--> Students shall not be issued hall tickets or allowed to appear at the examinations unless they have cleared their dues and produce a 'No dues certificate'.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 29--> (1) Save as otherwise provided in the statutes 33, the following shall be applicable to the inmates of the hostels, namely:- (a) The hostels shall be managed by the Hostel Committee consisting of Wardens, Assistant Wardens and Resident Teachers. (b) Admission to the hostels shall not be automatic to all persons admitted to any Programme in the Institute; (c) Application for admission to the hostel shall be made in the prescribed form and the admissions shall be made subject to the approval of the Warden; (d) Every effort shall be made to accommodate all the students in the hostel; (e) The following categories of students shall not be provided accommodation, namely:- (i) students who have not cleared the mess dues of the previous academic year; (ii) students who have not paid hostel deposit and establishment charges in full; (iii) students who are possessing powered vehicles, i.e. two wheelers and four wheelers. (2) Every student, before being admitted to the hostel, shall give an undertaking in writing, endorsed by the parents or guardian that she or he will abide by the Rules of the hostel; (3) Students admitted to the hostel shall be boarders thereof; (4) Before admission, each student has to pay hostel admission fee, hostel deposit, establishment and other charges, which may be revised from time to time.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 30--> (1) Ragging in any form is strictly prohibited in all premises of the Institute, within the premises of the Regional Centres as well as on public transport. (2) The Head of the Regional Centres or the Head of the Department of the Institute or Warden of the Institute hostel or hall of residence, as the case may be, shall take immediate action on any information of the occurrence of ragging and submit a report of the incident to the Director. (3) If the authority of the Institute or Warden of hostel or hall is satisfied that, for some reason, to be recorded in writing, it is not reasonably practical to hold such an enquiry, she or he may advise the Director accordingly. (4) When the Director is satisfied that it is not expedient to hold such an enquiry, she or he may take a decision based on the available facts and circumstances and her or his decision shall be final. (5) On the receipt of a report or a determination by the relevant authority disclosing the occurrence of ragging incidents, the Director shall direct or order rustication of a student or students for a specific period. (6) The action against those found guilty of the offence of ragging, depending on the severity of the offence, may be given any of the following punishments, or any combination of them, namely: (i) direct that any student or students be expelled; or (ii) any student or students be not, for a stated period, admitted to a Programme of study in the Institute / Regional Centre(s); or (iii) the results of the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which they appeared be cancelled. (7) In case any students who have obtained degrees of the Institute are found guilty of ragging, appropriate action for withdrawal of degrees conferred by the Institute shall be taken. (8) For the purpose of this Ordinance, abetment to ragging, whether by way of any act, practice or incitement of ragging, shall also amount to ragging.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 31--> There shall be no harassment of women members whether student, or employee within the Institute or in any place away from Institute, if such place has a relevance or any bearing on the relationship on the management of the Institute.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 32--> The Director or the appropriate authority of the institute shall, take every step to initiate action to identify spots or places and spheres of activity which are prone to harassment whether between students, or between students and employees (teaching and non-teaching staff) of the Institute or between themselves or between persons in charge of management and employee and shall make adequate arrangements with the view to prevent sexual harassment.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 33--> (1) The Director shall, for the purpose of implementing the discipline, constitute a Grievance Cell which shall consist of the following namely:- (i) a Woman Professor or Senior most Woman Reader in the Institute who shall be the Chairperson; (ii) one male member of the employee on the teaching side; (iii) one male member of the employee on non-teaching side; (iv) one female student; (v) one female representative of non-governmental organization actively engaged in the welfare of women or in the field of Education; (vi) one female member from Non-Teaching side; and (vii) Registrar shall be the Member Secretary (2) The members specified in clauses (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of sub-ordinance (1) shall be nominated by the Director in consultation with the Chairperson. (3) The term of office for the members shall be for two years and the members are eligible for re-nomination. (4) Any casual vacancy in the Grievance Cell shall be filled up by the Director in consultation with the Chairperson from the concerned category.
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development Ordinances, 2016_Section 34--> (1) Any person aggrieved of sexual harassment shall prefer a complaint before the Grievance Cell at the earliest point of time and in any case within fifteen days from the occurrence of the alleged sexual harassment. (2) The complaint shall contain all the material and relevant details concerning the alleged sexual harassment including the name of the harasser(s) and the complaint shall be addressed to the Chairperson of the Grievance Cell. (3) Where the complainant prefers not to disclose his or her identity, the complaint, shall be addressed to the Director handed over in person, or sent in a sealed cover and upon receipt of any such complaint, the Director shall retain the original complaint and send a gist of the complaint containing all material and relevant details other than the name of the complainant and other details which might disclose the identity of the complainant to the Grievance Cell. (4) The Grievance Cell upon receipt of any complaint or gist of complaint under sub-ordinance(3) may in case of a complaint addressed to the Grievance Cell and shall in the case of gist of complaint received from the Director, cause an enquiry to be made discreetly. (5) Where the Grievance Cell is satisfied that the complaint is justified it shall report the matter to the Director who shall institute disciplinary action under the relevant rules. (6) The following mode shall be followed for imposing penalty, namely:- (i) Warning, (ii) Serious warning, (iii) Suspension for specified period, (iv) Expulsion from the Institute for a specified period, (v) Lodging a complaint with Police for appropriate criminal action. (7) The Director shall give wide publicity regarding the arrangement made under the sub- ordinance (3) and the establishment of the Grievance Cell shall permanently affix copies thereof in the notice board: Provided that nothing in this ordinance shall preclude the Director from lodging a complaint directly to the police in respect of any act amounting to an offence under the Law. (Gaurav Agarwal), Director (Youth Affairs) 
