Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1959_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. BE it enacted by parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 1--> This Act may be calmed the Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1959.
Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1959_Section 2--> After section 28 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 , the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "28A.Issue of special bank notes and special one rupee notes in certain cases.- (1) For the purpose of controlling the circulation of bank notes without India, the bank may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, issue bank notes of such design, form and material as may be approved under sub-section (3) (hereinafter in this section referred to as special bank notes) of the denominational values of five rupees, ten rupees and one hundred rupees. (2) For the purpose of controlling the circulation of Government of India one rupee notes without India, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act or in the currency Ordinance, 1940, issue Government of India notes of the denominational value of one rupee of such design, form and material as may be adopted under sub-section (3) (hereinafter in this section referred to as special one rupee notes). (4 of 1940.) (3) The design, form and material of the special bank notes shall be such as may be approved by the Central Government after consideration of the recommendations made by the Governor and of the special one rupee notes shall be such as the Central Government may think fit to adopt. (4) Neither the special bank notes nor the special one rupee notes shall be legal tender in India. (5) The special one rupee note shall be deemed to be included in the expression "rupee coin" for all the purposes of this Act except section 39, but shall be deemed not to be a currency note for any of the purposes of this Act. (6) Where a special bank note is on its face expressed to be payable at a specified office or branch of the Bank, the obligation imposed by section 39 shall be only on the specified office or branch and, further, shall be subject to such regulations as may be made under this section. (7) The Bank may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make regulations to provide for all matters for which provisions is necessary or convenient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this section, and, in particular, the manner in which, and the conditions or limitations subject to which- (i) bank notes and one rupee notes in circulation in any country outside India may be replaced by special notes issued under this section; (ii) any such special notes may be exchanged for any other bank notes or one rupee notes.'. 
