Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> Whereas, the jurisdiction heretofore exercised by the Crown Representative in the Bangalore Civil Station, the Railway lands and the Indian Institute of Science area, Bangalore, has been restored to His Highness the Maharaja, and it is necessary to provide for certain matters hereinafter appearing. His Highness the Maharaja is pleased to enact as follows -
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947.1 (2) It extends to the whole of Mysore. (3) It shall have effect as if it were in force from the date of retrocession. Promulgated by His Highness the Maharaja on the 4th day of August, 1947
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 2--> In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (a) "Bangalore Civil Station" means the area, jurisdiction over which has been restored on the 26th day of July, 1947 under Political Department Notification No. 184 P., dated 23rd July, 1947 1 [x x x x] and published in the Official Gazette, dated 1st August, 1947; (b) "Civil and Military Station" means the area comprised within the boundaries of the Civil and Military Station, Bangalore, prior to the 19th day of July, 1947; (c) "Indian Institute of Science area" means the area, jurisdiction over which has been restored on the 19th day of July, 1947 under Political Department Notification No. 174 P., dated 16th July, 1947 2 [x x x x] and published in the Official Gazette, dated 21st July, 1947; (d) "Railway lands" means the lands in Mysore occupied by the Bangalore-Madras Branch of the Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway including the Hindustan Aircraft siding and the Hospital Town Extension, jurisdiction over which has been restored on the 2nd day of August, 1947 under Political Department Notification No. 197 P., dated 30th July, 1947 3 [x x x x] and published in the Official Gazette, dated 2nd August, 1947; 4 [(dd) "Bangalore Military area" means the area described in Schedule A annexed to the Political Department Notification No. 184 P., dated 23rd July, 1947 and published in the Official Gazette, dated 1st August, 1947, jurisdiction over which has been restored on the 14th day of August, 1947;] (e) "Retroceded area" means the Bangalore Civil Station, the Railway lands 5 [the Indian Institute of Science area and the Bangalore Military area;] (f) "Date of retrocession" means - (i) the 19th day of July, 1947 in respect of the Indian Institute of Science area; (ii) the 26th day of July, 1947 in respect of the Bangalore Civil Station 6 [x x x x]; (iii) the 2nd day of August, 1947 in respect of the Railway lands; 7 [and] 8 [(iv) the 14th day of August, 1947, in respect of Bangalore Military area;] (g) "Law" includes Act and any Regulation, rule, bye-law, notification or order having the force of law. Certain words omitted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Certain words omitted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Certain words omitted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Inserted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Substituted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Certain words omitted by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Added by Act No. XXIX of 1947 Added by Act No. XXIX of 1947
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 3--> All right to or interests in any immovable property situated in the Retroceded area which, prior to the date of retrocession, have been granted by or derived from the Crown, or a District, Station or Military Commander or any person authorised by the Crown in that behalf or granted by the Civil and Military Station Municipal Commission under powers conferred on the Commission by the Crown or by any law for the time being in force in the Civil and Military Station prior to the date of retrocession are hereby recognised by the Government and declared to have been validly granted or derived.
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 4--> The Government shall, from the date of retrocession, be entitled to all rights and privileges to any immovable property situated in the Retroceded area and be also subject to any obligations or liabilities in respect thereof to which the Crown, a District, Station or Military Commander or any other person authorised by the Crown in that behalf was, immediately prior to the date of retrocession, entitled or subject.
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 5--> The Government shall be entitled to all rights and privileges and be subject to all obligations and liabilities arising under any contract entered into in the Retroceded area by the Crown or, in exercise of any authority vested in him, by any officer of the Crown which, immediately prior to the date of retrocession, were subsisting.
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 6--> All laws passed by the Crown in the Civil and Military Station prior to the date of retrocession and all rules, regulations, notifications, bye-laws and orders made or issued prior to that date under any such law are hereby recognised by the Government and declared to have been duly passed, made or issued.
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 7--> Any document executed, document stamped, registration made, notification published, certificate issued, power conferred, form prescribed, local limits defined, office established, order, bye-law, regulation, rule or appointment made, licence or permit granted and any other thing whatsoever duly done under the provisions of any law in force immediately prior to the date of retrocession in the Civil and Military Station shall, if it pertains to the Retroceded area, continue after that date to be as effective and valid as if executed, stamped, made, published, issued, conferred, prescribed, defined, established, granted or done under the provisions of law in force in the Retroceded area after the date of retrocession.
Retrocession (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1947_Section 8--> Any document executed in the Retroceded area prior to the date of retrocession which is unstamped or not properly stamped shall, where it pertains to the Retroceded area, be deemed after that date to be a document executed in Mysore and the provisions of the India Stamp Act, 1899 (II of 1899) as in force in the Retroceded area after the of retrocession shall apply to such document as if from the date of its act execution. 
