Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Rubber Act, 1947. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> (1)This Act may be called the Rubber (Amendment)Act 1982. (2)It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> In section 3 of the Rubber Act, 1947 (24 of 1947.) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause(c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- (cc) "Executive Director" means the Executive Director appointed under this Act;'
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),- (a)in clause (e) the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted; (b)after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ee) the Executive Director, ex officio; and ".
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 4--> In section 6 of the principal Act,- (a)for the words "The Chairman", the words "A person appointed as the whole-item Chairman" shall be substituted; (b)after the words "Central Government", the words "and a person appointed as the part-time Chairman shall be entitled to such honorarium and allowances if any and such other conditions of service as may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government" shall be inserted.
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 5--> In section 6A of the principal Act,- (a)sub-section (1) shall be renumbered as sub-section (1A), and before sub-section (1A) as so renumbered the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(1)The Central Government may appoint an executive Director to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the direction of the Board as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman"; (b)in sub-section (3), for the words "The Rubber Production Commissioner", the words "The Executive Director, the Rubber Production Commissioner, shall be substituted. (c)in sub-section (4) for the words "The Chairman", the words "The Chairman, if whole-time, the Executive Director," shall be substituted.
Rubber (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 6--> In section 25 of the principal act,-(a)in sub-section (2) in clause (vi) after the words the powers and duties of" the words "the Executive Director.' shall be inserted.(b)in sub-section (3) for the words "two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following" the words "two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid", shall be substituted. 
