Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> In exercise of the powers vested in the High Court Section 25 of the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act LVI of 1951 (Central Act,), the following rules are framed:-
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 1--> These rules will come into force from the date of publication1 . Published in the Gazette dated 17-8-1954
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 2--> (a) When a Sessions Judge refers a case to the High Court under Section 21(2) of the Act, the whole records of the case together with 3 typed copies of the order of reference, duly indexed should be forwarded to the High Court. (b) Before despatching the records as, aforesaid, the Sessions Judge shall intimate both parties that he has made an order of reference to the High Court under the above sub-section. (c) The Sessions Judge may grant certified copies of the order of reference to either party on an application being made for the purpose and on production of the required number of copying sheets. (d) After the records have been despatched to the High Court, the Sessions Judge shall further give notice to that effect.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 3--> When the records are received in the High Court, it will be filed and numbered as a criminal reference and the Registrar will issue notice to both parties and to the Advocate General fixing a date for appearance.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 4--> (a) After the first hearing, the paper book shall be got ready, and the requisite papers printed at the cost of complainant before the Sessions Court: provided that the High Court may in any case dispense with the printing of records. (b) When records are to be printed, both sides may file a list of such records within 3 days of the issue of notice for the purpose.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 5--> After the paper books are ready, the case will be posted for hearing before a Division Bench.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 6--> After the disposal of the case by the High Court, a certified copy of the order of the High Court, together with the records of the case shall be forwarded to the Sessions Judge.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 7--> (a) Every appeal preferred to the High Court under Section 23 of the Act shall be in the form of a memorandum setting forth clearly and specifically the grounds of appeal and signed by the appellant or his advocate. It shall be accompanied by an attested copy of the order appealed from, (b) When the appeal is presented out of time, it shall be accompanied by a petition to excuse the delay supported by an affidavit showing sufficient cause.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 8--> (a) When the appeal is filed and numbered as a criminal appeal, notice shall be issued by the Registrar to the Appellant and Respondent and to the Advocate General fixing a day for the hearing of the appeal. (b) A notice will also be issued to the Sessions Court, which will on receipt of the same forward the records of the case to the High Court.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 9--> (a) After the issue of the notice, the paper book shall be prepared and the necessary papers printed at the cost of the appellant: provided that the High Court may in any case dispense with the printing and permit the appellant to produce 5 typed copies of the relevant papers. (b) When the records are to be printed notice should be issued to both sides to specify the list of records to be printed provided that the appeal memo and the order appealed from should always be included in the list of papers to be printed. (c) One copy of the printed or typed paper book will be supplied free to the respondent and also to the Advocate General, if the latter does not represent the respondent.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 10--> After the paper book is ready, the appeal will be boarded for hearing before a Division Bench and the same procedure will be followed as in the case of other criminal appeals preferred under the Indian Criminal procedure Code.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 11--> After the judgment has been pronounced by the High Court, a certified copy of the same along with the records received from the Sessions Court shall be returned to that court.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 12--> An application to the High Court under Section 24 of the Act should set forth clearly and concisely the grounds on which the order sought to be revised is attached and shall be signed by the party or his advocate. It shall also be accompanied by an attested copy of the order complained against.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 13--> After the petition has been filed and numbered as a Criminal Revision, the papers shall be placed before a single Judge for preliminary hearing, when the petitioner or his advocate may be present and urge the grounds in support of his application. The Judge after perusing the papers and hearing the arguments if any of the petitioner or his advocate may order the issue of the notice to the respondent if a prima facie case for interference by the High Court is made out.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 14--> (a) Notice when ordered by the Judge should be issued by the Registrar to the respondent and Advocate General and a date should be fixed for the return of the same. (b) Notice of the petition shall also be issued to the authority or court, which passed the order sought to be revised and such authority or court shall forward all the records of the case to the High Court.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 15--> (a) After the first hearing of the petition, the paper book shall be prepared and printed at the cost of the petitioner; provided that the High Court may dispense with the printing and order the production of typed copies in any case. (b) When printing is dispensed with, 5 typed copies of the paper book should be supplied by the petitioner (c) One copy of the paper book will be supplied free to the respondent and one copy to the Advocate General also if he does not represent the respondent.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 16--> (a) When the records are ready, the petition will be posted for hearing before a Division Bench and the same procedure will be followed as in the case of Criminal Procedure Code.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 17--> After the petition has been heard and orders pronounced thereon, the records together with a certified copy of the order of the High Court shall be returned to the authority or court, which forwarded such records.
Rules Under the Press (Objectionable Matter) Act, 1957_Section 18--> The printing rules in force in the High Court shall apply to the printing of the papers referred to in the previous rules. 
