Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> An Act to make provision for the payment of taxes before transfers of property are registered in certain cases.WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the payment of taxes before transfers of property are registered in certain cases; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949. (2) It extends to the whole of India 1 [...] The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir", omitted by Act 41 of 1954 , Section 2 and Sch
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 2--> This Act shall apply to any person -- (i) who, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances, leaves or has, since the 14th day of August, 1947, left any place in 1 India for any place outside India, or who, since the said date, has been residing in any place outside India; or (ii) who, in the opinion of any of the Income-tax authorities specified in sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 , or a Custodian of Evacuee Property or a Collector, is likely to leave 2 India with the intention of settling in any place outside 3 India, and in respect of whom a declaration that he is a person to whom this Act applies has been received from any such Income-tax authority, Custodian of Evacuee Property or Collector by the registering officer of the area in which any property belonging to such person is situate. 4 Substituted by Section 2 and Schedule , ibid., for "the States". Substituted by Section 2 and Schedule , ibid., for "the States". Substituted by Section 2 and Schedule , ibid., for "the States". The Explanation, added by the A .O. 1950, by s .2 and Schedule , ibid.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 3--> (1) Where any document required to be registered under the provisions of clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (e) of sub- section (1) of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 , purports to transfer, assign, limit or extinguish any right, title or interest in any property, other than agricultural land, belonging to any person to whom this Act applies, no registering officer appointed under the said Act shall register any such document, unless it is certified by Income-tax Officer of the area in which the property is situate in respect of the person whose right, title or interest in the property is to be so transferred, assigned, limited or extinguished under the terms of the document that- (a) such person is not liable to assessment or taxation under the Indian Income-tax Act, l922, the Excess Profits Tax 1 Act 1940 , or the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947 ; or (b) such person has either paid or made satisfactory provision for the payment of all existing or anticipated liabilities under any of the Acts specified in clause (a) of this sub-section; or (c) the Income-tax Officer is otherwise satisfied that the registration of the document will not prejudicially affect the recovery of all existing or anticipated liabilities referred to in clause (b) of this sub-section. (2) Every Income-tax Officer refusing to issue a certificate under the provisions of sub-section (1) shall make an order of refusal and record his reasons therefor and, on application made by any person claiming to be affected by such order, shall, subject to the payment of such fee as may be prescribed, furnish him with a copy of the order.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 4--> (1) Where in respect of the transfer made on or after the seventh day of February, 1948, 1 in the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in the States of Bombay, West Bengal, Punjab, Bihar, Delhi and Ajmer, and in any 2 other territory on or after the date on which the Transfer of Property (India) Ordinance, 1948 was made applicable to 3 that territory, of any right, title or interest in any immovable property, other than agricultural land, belonging to any person to whom this Act applies, the Income-tax Officer of the area where the property is situate is satisfied, after giving such person notice in this behalf for a period of not less than one month, that no certificate in the terms mentioned in section 3 would have been issued to him if this Act had been in force on the date the transfer an as made, he may forward a statement to the Collector showing the existing and anticipated liabilities by way of taxes in respect of all or any of the parties to the transfer. (2) On receipt of any statement under sub-section (1), the Collector shall proceed to recover the total amount shown in such statement as if it were an arrear of land revenue, and for the purpose of such recovery proceedings he may treat the property transferred as aforesaid as if it belonged to all or any of the persons named in the statement. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order. 1951; for "in the States". Substituted , ibid.. for "other State". Substituted , ibid., for "that State".
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 5--> An appeal shall lie against the order of any Income-tax Officer refusing to issue a certificate under the provisions of sub-section 2 section (2) of section 3 to the Commissioner of Income-tax to whom the Income-tax Officer is subordinate, if presented to such Commissioner within thirty days from the date of the order, and the Commissioner may pass such orders thereon as he may think fit.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 6--> The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 7--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any person or authority in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 8--> The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects of this Act, and, in particular, prescribe the fee payable under sub-section (2) of section 3.
Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Act, 1949_Section 9--> On the expiry of the Payment of Taxes (Transfer of Property) Ordinance, 1948, section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall apply as if the Ordinance had then been repealed by a Central Act. 
