Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of February, 2008.
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 2--> In section 6 of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990,- (a) for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) The Chairman shall be Part-time Member and shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier: Provided that any person holding office as a Chairman immediately before the commencement of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008, shall, in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the provisions of this sub-section, cease to hold office on such commencement as such Chairman and shall not be entitled to any compensation because of his ceasing to hold such office."; (b) in sub-section (2), the words 'The Executive Member,' shall be omitted; (c) after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(2A) The Executive Member shall be a Whole-time Member and shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier: Provided that any person holding office as an Executive Member immediately before the commencement of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008, shall, in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the provisions of this sub-section, cease to hold office on such commencement as such Executive Member and shall not be entitled to any compensation because of his ceasing to hold such office.".
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 3--> (1) The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Ordinance, 2008, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the said Act, as amended by this Act. K. D. SINGH, Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
