President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the President's Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008. (2) The provisions of section 2 and clause (i) of section 3 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January, 2006 and remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force at once.
President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> In section 1A of the President's Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "fifty thousand rupees", the words "one lakh fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> In section 2 of the principal Act, - 1 (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "of three lakh rupees per annum", the words "at the rate of fifty per cent. of the emoluments of the President per month" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (2), for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) to the use of a furnished residence (including its maintenance), without payment of rent, two telephones (one for internet and broadband connectivity), one mobile phone with national roaming facility and a motor-carefree of charge or to such car allowance as may be specified in the rules; (b) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, one Additional Private Secretary, one Personal Assistant, two Peons and office expenses up to sixty thousand rupees per annum.". sub-section (i)commences on 01/01/2006
President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 4--> In section 3A of the principal Act, for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) after ceasing to hold office as President, either on the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, shall be entitled,- (i) to the use of furnished residence (including its maintenance) without payment of licence fee; (ii) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary and a Peon and office expenses as per actuals, the total expenditure on which shall not exceed twelve thousand rupees per annum; (iii) to a telephone and a motor-car, free of charge or such car allowance for the remainder of his life, as may be specified in the rules; (iv) to travel anywhere in India, in a calendar year to twelve single journeys, by the highest class, by air, rail or steamer, accompanied by a companion or a relative.".
President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 5--> After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "6. Power to remove difficulties:-(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, as amended by the President's Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date on which this Act comes into force. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament". T.K.VISWANATHAN, Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
