Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section Preamble--> Preamble. Whereas; it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to the Courts of Small Causes established in the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 1--> 1 This Act may be called the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 ; and it shall come into force on the first day of July 1882. But nothing herein contained shall affect the provisions of the Army Act 1950 (44 and 45 Vict. c.58), 2 [...] section 151, 3 or the rights or liabilities of any person under any decree passed before that day.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 2--> Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s. 2 and Sch.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 1--> Rep. Ibid. 3. Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (I of 1938), s.2 and Sch.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 4--> In this Act, "the Small Cause Court" means the Court of Small Causes constituted under this Act in the town of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay, as the case may be, [and the expression" Registrar" includes a Deputy Registrar].
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 5--> There shall be in each of the towns of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay a Court, to be called the Court of Small Causes of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay as the case may be.---------------------------------------------------------------------- 1 For portions of the Code of Civil Procedure extended to the Presidency Small Cause Court at Calcutta, see Schedule A to Rules of Practice, Calcutta Gazette, 1910, Pt. I, p. 814. 2 The figures " 1881 were rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2, and Sch. I. 3 Coll. Stat., Vol. I. 4 Ins. by Act 3 of 1899, s. 2. 5 Am. in W. Bengal by W.Bengal Act 111 of 1955; 16 of 1958. 6 Am. in Madras by Madras Act 16 of 1956. 7 Amended in Bombay by Bombay Act 11 of 1959. 8 Amended in Maharashtra by Maha. Act 19 of 1976. 9 Amended in West Bengal by W.B. Act 32 of 1969. 10 Amended in Gujarat by Guj. Act 5 of 1969. 11 Am. in Madras by Mad. 9 of 1960. 12 Am. in its application to the ----- of Ahmedabad by Gujrat Act 19 of 1961 (when notified) 13 Am in Maharashtra by Mah. Act 35 of 1961. 14 Am. in Tamil Nadu by T.N. act 20 of 1973. 15 Am. in Gujarat by Guj. Act 28 of 1973. 16. Am. in Gujarat by Guj. Act 31 of 1973.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 6--> The Small Cause Court shall be deemed to be a Court subject to the superintendence of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William, Madras or Bombay, as the case may be, within the meaning of the Letters Patent, respectively, dated the twenty-eighth day of December, 1865, for such High Courts, and within the meaning of the [ Code of Civil Procedure, 1882 (XIV of 1882) [and to be a Court subordinate to the High Court within the meaning of section 6 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 (XVIII of 1879)], and the High Court shall have, in respect of the Small Cause Court, the same powers as it has under the [twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth of Victoria, Chapter 104, section 15, in respect of Courts subjects to its appellate jurisdiction.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 7--> [(1)There shall be appointed from time to time a Chief Judge of the Small Cause Court and as many other Judges as the [State] Government thinks fit]. [(2) The State Government may also appoint any person to be an Additional Chief Judge; and the Additional Chief Judge; and the Additional Chief Judge shall exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Chief Judge under this Act or under any law for the time being in force as the State Government may direct].
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 8--> The Chief Judge shall be the first of the Judges in rank and precedence. The other Judges shall have rank and precedence as the [State] Government may, from time to time, direct. [8A. (1)Performance of duties of absent Judge. During any absence of the Chief Judge or any Judge of the said Court, or during the period for which any Judge is acting as Chief Judge, the 11[State] Government may appoint any person, having [the requisite qu(2)Every person so appointed shall be authorized to perform the duties of the Chief Judge or a Judge of the said Court until the return of the absent Chief Judge or Judge, or of the Judge acting as Chief judge, or until the 11[State] Government sees cause to cancel the appointment of such acting Chief Judge or Judge, as the case may be.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 9--> (1) The High Court may, from time to time, by rules, having the force of law,- (a) prescribe the procedure to be followed and the practice to be observed by the Small Cause Court either in super-session of or in addition to any provisions which were prescribed with respect to the procedure or practice of the Small Cause Court on or before the thirty-first day of December, 1894, in or under this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force; and [ (aa) empower the Registrar to hear and dispose of undefended suits and interlocutory applications or matters ; and] (b) cancel or vary any such rule or rules. Rules made under this section may provide, among other matters, for the exercise by one or more of the Judges of the Small Cause Court of any powers conferred on the Small Cause Court by this Act or any other enactment for the time being in force. (2) The law, and any rules and declarations made, or purporting to be made, there under, with respect to procedure or practice, in force or treated as in force in the Small Cause Court on the thirty-first day of December, 1894, shall be in force, unless and until cancelled or varied by rules made by the High Court under this section.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 10--> Subject to such rules, the Chief Judge may, from time to time, make such arrangements as he thinks fit for the distribution of the business of the Court among the various Judges thereof.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 11--> Save as hereinafter otherwise provided, when two or more of the Judges sitting together differ on any question, the opinion of the majority shall prevail ; [and if the Court is equally divided, the Judges shall state the point upon which they differ, and the case shall then be heard upon that point by another Judge nominated by the Chief Judge and the point shall be decided, according to the opinion of the majority of the Judges, who have heard the case, including those who first heard.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 12--> The Small Cause Court shall use a seal of such form and dimensions as are for the time being prescribed by the [State] Government.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 13--> There shall be appointed an officer to be called the Registrar of the Court who shall be the chief ministerial officer of the Court; there shall also be appointed a Deputy Registrar and as many clerks, bailiffs and other ministerial officers as may be necessary for the administration of justice by the Court and for the exercise and performance of the powers and duties conferred and imposed on it by this Act or any other law for the time being in force. The Registrar and other officers so appointed shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties, of a ministerial nature, as the Chief Judge may, from time to time, by rule direct.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 14--> The [State] Government may invest the Registrar with the powers of a Judge under this Act for the trial of suits in which the amount or value of the subject-matter does not exceed one hundred rupees. And subject to the orders of the Chief Judge, any Judge of the Small Cause Court may, whenever he thinks fit, transfer from his own file to the file of the Registrar any suit which the latter is competent to try.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 15--> No Judge or other officer appointed under this Act shall, during his continuance as such Judge or officer, either by himself or as a partner of any other person, practice or act, either directly or indirectly, as an advocate, attorney, vakil or other legal Practitioner, or be concerned, either on his own account or for any other person, or as the partner of any other person, in any trade or profession. Any such Judge or officer so practicing, acting or concerned shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860). Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit any such Judge or officer from being a member of any company incorporated or registered under Royal Charter, Letters Patent, [Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or Central Act or Provincial Act or [State Act]].
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 16--> All questions, other than questions relating to procedure or practice, which arise in suits or other proceedings under this Act in the Small Cause Court shall be dealt with and determined according to the law for the time being administered by the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 17--> The local limits of the jurisdiction of each of the Small Cause Courts shall be the local limits for the time being of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 18--> Subject to the exceptions in section 19, the Small Cause Court shall have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature-when the amount or value of the subject-matter does not exceed [ten thousand] rupees; and- (a) the cause of action has arisen, either wholly or in part, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Small Cause Court, and the leave of the Court has, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, been given before the institution of the suit ; or (b) all the defendants, at the time of the institution of the suit, actually and voluntarily reside, or carry on business or personally work for gain, within such local limits; or (c) any of the defendants at the time of the institution of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or personally works for gain, within such local limits, and either the leave of the Court has been given before the institution of the suit, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution: [Provided that where the cause of action has arisen wholly within the local limits aforesaid, and the Court refuses to give leave for the institution of the suit, it shall record in writing its reasons for such refusal.]@[ Provided further that the Chief Judge may, subject to the direction and control of the High Court and to such conditions and limitations as he deems fit to impose, empower the Registrar to entertain and dispose of the applications for the purpose of giving such leave under clauses (a) and (c) and, when so empowered, the Registrar shall be deemed to be the Court for that purpose.] Explanation I.-When in any suit the sum claimed is, by a set-off admitted by both parties, reduced to a balance not exceeding [ten thousand rupees], the Small Cause Court shall have jurisdiction to try such suit. Explanation II.-Where a person has a permanent dwelling at one place and also a lodging at another place for a temporary purpose only, he shall be deemed to reside at both places in respect of any cause of action arising at the place where he has such temporary lodging. Explanation III.-A Corporation or Company shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office in [India], or, in respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 18A--> The Small Cause Court may allow a plaintiff at or before the first hearing of a suit in which a joint and several liability is alleged on a cause of action arising either wholly or in part within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to abandon the suit as against any defendant who does not reside or carry on business or personally work for gain within such local limits, and to sue for a decree against such defendants only as do so reside, carry on business or personally work for gain.]
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 19--> The Small Cause Court shall have no jurisdiction in- (a) suits concerning the assessment or collection of the revenue; [(b) suits concerning any act done by or by order of the Central Government, [...] or the [State] Government;] (c) suits concerning any act ordered or done by any Judge or judicial officer in the execution of his office, or by any person in pursuance of any judgment or order of any Court or any such Judge or judicial officer; (d) suits for the recovery of immovable property; (e) suits for the partition of immovable property; (f) suits for the foreclosure or redemption of a mortgage of immovable property; (g) suits for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property; (h) suits for the specific performance or rescission of contracts; (i) suits to obtain an injunction; (j) suits for the cancellation or rectification of instruments; (k) suits to enforce a trust ; (l) suits for a general average loss and suits on policies of insurance on sea going vessels ; (m) suits for compensation in respect of collisions on the high seas ; (n) suits for compensation for the infringement of a patent, copy-right or trade-mark ; (o) suits for a dissolution of partnership or for an account of partnership-transactions ; (p) suits for an account of property and its due administration under the decree of the Court; (q) suits for compensation for libel, slander, malicious prosecution, adultery or breach of promise of marriage; (r) suits for the restitution of conjugal rights, [...]or for a divorce ; (s) suits for declaratory decrees; (t) suits for possession of a hereditary office; (u) suits against Sovereign Princes or Ruling Chiefs, or against Ambassadors or Envoys of Foreign States; (v) suits on any judgment of a High Court ; (w) suits the cognizance whereof by the Small Cause Court is barred by any law for the time being in force.
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882_Section 19A--> Whenever the Court finds that for want of jurisdiction it cannot finally determine the question at issue in the suit, it may at any stage of the proceedings, return the plaint to be presented to a Court having jurisdiction to determine the question. When the Court so returns a plaint, it shall comply with the provisions of the second paragraph of section 57 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1882 (14 of 1882) and make such order with respect to costs as it may think just, and the Court shall for the purposes of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877 , (15 of 1877) be deemed to have been unable to entertain the suit by reason of defect of jurisdiction. When a plaint so returned is afterwards presented to a High Court, credit shall be given to the plaintiff for the amount of the court-fee paid in the Small Cause Court in respect of the plaint in the levy of any fees which according to the practice of the High Court are credited to the Government. 
