Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1957) for the purposes, hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of June, 1984. Received the assent of the Governor of Karnataka on the Twenty- fifth day of April, 1985
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1957), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(1) (a) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely - (i) one person from each district of the State, appointed by the State Government; (ii) the Additional Director Of Industries and Commerce and ex officio Additional Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Directorate of Industries and Commerce; (iii) an Officer of the Finance Department not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary nominated by the State Government; (iv) an Officer of the Department of Commerce and Industries not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary nominated by the State Government; (v) the State Director, Khadi and Village Industries Commission; (vi) the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer of the Board; and (vii) the Chief Executive Officer of the Board. (b) one of the members shall be appointed by the State Government as the Chairman of the Board."
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Sections 5, 6, 7 and 7-A of the principal Act, for the word "member" wherever it occurs, the words "non-official member" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "in consultation with the Board, appoint the Secretary to" the words "appoint an Officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of a District to be the Chief Executive Officer of" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), the words "and may, from among its Officers, also appoint an Accounts Officer to the Board" shall be omitted; (3) in sub-section (3), for the words "Secretary, the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer and the Accounts Officer", the words "Chief Executive Officer and the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (i) of sub-section (2) of Section 31 of the principal Act, for the words "Secretary, the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer and the Accounts Officer" the words "the Chief Executive Officer and the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Ordinance, 1985 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 4 of 1985) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the Karnataka Ordinance Nos. 6 of 1984, 11 of 1984 and 4 of 1985 shall be deemed to have been done, or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
