Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Kannada University Act, 1991. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Kannada University Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 23 of 1991) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fiftieth year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Twenty-ninth day of April, 1999. Received the assent of the Governor on Thirty-first day of July, 1999
Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the Kannada University Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 23 of 1991) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words "The Chief Minister of Karnataka", the words "The Governor of Karnataka" shall be substituted.
Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act- (i) for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(1) Appointment of the Vice-Chancellor shall be made by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Government under sub-section (2)"; (ii) for sub-section (2), excluding the proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(2) The Government shall, for the purpose of sub-section (1), constitute a Search Committee, consisting of three persons of whom, one shall be nominated by the Executive Committee, one shall be nominated by the University Grants Commission and one shall be nominated by the Government. The Search Committee shall submit to the Government a panel consisting of names of three persons in alphabetical order. Such panel shall not contain the name of any member of the said Committee. The Government shall recommend to the Chancellor, the name of one of the three persons in the said panel for being appointed as the Vice Chancellor. The Government may, if necessary, obtain a new panel from the Search Committee. Accordingly, upon such requisition by the Government, the Search Committee shall submit to the Government a new panel of names of three persons".
Kannada University (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Kannada University (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999 (Karnataka Ordinance 2 of 1999) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
