Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Eleventh day of May, 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the Eighth day of August, 1978
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1957), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in sub-section (1), for the word "fifteen", the word "nine" shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely - "(4) Subject to the pleasure of the State Government and sub-section (4-A), the term of office and the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. (4-A) The State Government may, from time to time grant to the Chairman such leave as may be prescribed and may appoint any other member to act for the Chairman during such leave and such member shall, while so acting, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be the Chairman."
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "7-A. Filling of a casual vacancy -Where a vacancy occurs on account of removal, resignation, death or otherwise of a person appointed as a member, the vacancy shall be filled by the State Government by appointment of a new member and the person so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is appointed."
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (3) of Section 21 of the principal Act, after the words "in the State", the words, brackets and figures "or a bank included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 or a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, or a corresponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 31 of the principal Act, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(a) the term of office and the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of the Board under Section 4."
Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Act, 1978_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries (Amendment) Ordinance, 1978 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 4 of 1978) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
