Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962). Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Fifteenth day of January, 1970. Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-fifth day of February, 1970
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in sub-section (A) - (i) after clause (9), the following clause, shall be inserted, namely - "(9-A) "Court" means the Court of Munsiff within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the land is situated;" (ii) clause (35) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Principal Act, except in Sections 62, 66, 67, 69, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79, 124, 128, 130, 131, 132 and 134 for the word "Tribunal" wherever it occurs, the word "Court" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 50 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 62 of the Principal Act, for the word "Tribunal", the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 66 of the principal Act, (i) for the word "Tribunal" wherever it occurs, the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "it has", "its jurisdiction" and "to it", the words "he has", "his jurisdiction" and "to him" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 67 of the Principal Act - (i) for the word "Tribunal" wherever it occurs, the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (1), for the words "as it deems fit", the words "as he deems fit" shall be substituted; (iii) in sub-section (4), for the words "itself", the word "himself" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 69 of the Principal Act, for the words "Tribunal within the jurisdiction of which", the words "Tahsildar within whose jurisdiction" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 74 of the Principal Act, for the word "Tribunal", the word "Tahsildar" and for the words "by it", the words "by him" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Sections 76, 77, 78 and 79 of the Principal Act, for the word "Tribunal", wherever it occurs, the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Section 111 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 112 of the Principal Act - (i) in clause (b), the words and figure "under section 4 and make declaration accordingly" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (ii) clauses (z), (zb) and (zc) shall be omitted; (iii) in clause (zd), the words "or as may be directed by the State Government" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 113 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "113. Application of the Code of Civil Procedure - Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) shall be applicable in respect of all applications and proceedings under this Act before the Court."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 116 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "116. Execution of orders for payment of money or for restoring possession - Every order of the Court shall be executed as if it were a decree of a Civil Court: Provided that an order for possession or restoring the possession or use of any land shall be executed by the Deputy Commissioner in the same manner as an order made by a Revenue Officer under the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka Section 117 of the principal Act, shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka Section 118 of the principal Act - (i) in sub-sections (1), (3) and (4), for the words "Appellate Authority" the words "District Court" shall be substituted; (ii) after sub-section (2-A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2-B) From every order passed by the Tahsildar, an appeal shall lie to the Assistant Commissioner and the order of the Assistant Commissioner on such appeal shall be final."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 118 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "118-A. Review by the Deputy Commissioner - If the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied that any order passed by the Prescribed Authority referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 8, requires to be reviewed with reference to any new and important matter which has since come to his notice, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or for any other sufficient reason, he may suo motu revise such order: Provided that no such revision shall be made unless the persons likely to be affected thereby have been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation, in regard thereto in writing."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 119 of the Principal Act, after the words "the Assistant Commissioner", the words "or the Tahsildar" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 120 of the Principal Act, for the words "Appellate Authority", the words "District Court" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 121 of the Principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1) - (a) for the words "Appellate Authority", the "District Court" shall be substituted; and (b) after the words "appellate Tribunal", the words "or the Assistant Commissioner" shall be inserted; (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "Appellate Authority", the words "District Court" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 122 of the Principal Act, after the words "Assistant Commissioner", the words "or the Tahsildar" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 123 of the Principal Act - (i) before the words "Assistant Commissioner", the word "Tahsildar" shall be inserted; and (ii) for the words "Appellate Authority", the words "District Court" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 124 of the Principal Act - (i) the words "the Tribunal" shall be omitted; and (ii) for the words "the Appellate Authority", the words "the Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 128 of the Principal Act, for the words "Tribunal", in the two places where it occurs, the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (b) of Section 130 of the Principal Act, for the words "Tribunal", and "as it deems fit", in the two places where they occur, the words "Tahsildar" and "as he deems fit" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 131 of the Principal Act - (i) for the word "Tribunal" wherever it occurs, the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted; and (ii) in sub-section (1), for the words "as it may", the words "as he may" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 132 of the Principal Act - (i) for the words "the Tribunal", the words "the Court" shall be substituted.; and (ii) for the words "the Appellate Authority", the words "the Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 133 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "133. Suits involving issues required to be decided under this Act - (1) If any suit instituted in the Court as defined in this Act, involves any issues which are required to be settled, decided or dealt with by that Court under this Act the same shall be tried as preliminary issues and the suit shall be proceeded with after deciding such preliminary issues. (2) (a) If any suit instituted in any Civil Court (that is, other than the Court as defined in this Act) involves any issues which are required to be settled, decided or dealt with by the Court then the Civil Court shall stay the suit and refer such issues to the Court for decision. (b) On receipt of such reference the Court shall deal with and decide such issues in accordance with the provisions of this Act and shall communicate its decision to the Civil Court which has made the reference."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 134 of the Principal Act, the words "the Tribunal and" shall be omitted for and the words "other authorities", the words "other officers" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka For clause (xxix) of sub-section (2) of Section 137 of the Principal Act, the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(xxix) the returns to be furnished by the Deputy Commissioner and other officers entrusted with powers or functions under this Act, the forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the Deputy Commissioner and such other officers."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka In Schedule II to the Principal Act, after Item 8, the following items shall be added, namely - "9. The Bombay Pargana and Kulkarni Watans (Abolition) Act, 1950 (Bombay Act LX of 1950). 10. The Karnataka Village Offices Abolition Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1961)."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka (1) All statements, applications and proceedings pending before a Tribunal, or other Judicial Officer exercising the powers and performing the duties and functions of a Tribunal before the date of commencement of this Act, shall as from the said date stand transferred to the Court as defined in the Principal Act as amended by this Act or the Tahsildar as the case may be, and shall be continued and disposed of by such Court or Tahsildar, as the case may be, in accordance with the Principal Act as amended by this Act, as if such statements, applications and proceedings had been filed or commenced before such Court or Tahsildar. (2) As from the date of commencement of this Act, all appeals and proceedings connected with it pending before the Appellate Authority specified under sub-section (1) of Section 118 as the Appellate Authority before the commencement of this Act shall on that date stand transferred to the District Court having jurisdiction over the area and shall be continued and disposed of by it as if such appeals had been filed before it.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka (1) All proceedings taken and decrees and orders passed before the commencement of this Act by a Tribunal exercising or purporting to exercise jurisdiction to decide whether a person is a tenant or not shall notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, be deemed to be as good and valid in law as if the Tribunal exercising or purporting to exercise such jurisdiction had been duly conferred with such jurisdiction by the Principal Act. Explanation - For purposes of this section "tenant" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Principal Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Principal Act, where before the date of commencement of this Act, statements and application filed or proceedings pending before a Tribunal or Munsiff have been transferred to a Munsiff or a new Tribunal, as the case may be such statements, applications or proceedings shall be deemed to have been validly transferred and no order made by such Munsiff or Tribunal in respect of such statements, applications or proceedings shall be questioned in any Court only on the ground that such transfer was not in accordance with law. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Principal Act prior to the date of commencement of this Act; no order made by a member of a Tribunal acting or purporting to act as a Tribunal under the Principal Act shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only that the Tribunal consisting of such member had not been validly constituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka The amendments to clauses (6), (7), (13) and (32) of Section 2, Section 42, sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 63 and Schedule I to the Principal Act, made by the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970 (Karnataka Ordinance 1 of 1970) shall be deemed never to have been made and the provisions of the above said clauses of Sections 2, 42, 63 and Schedule I to the Principal Act as they stood prior to the said amendments shall and shall be deemed to continue to be in force.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka The Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 1 of 1970) is hereby repealed: Provided that anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
