Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Fourteenth day of October, 1974. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirteenth day of March, 1975
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "three thousand and five hundred rupees", the words "six thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "six thousand and five hundred rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-sections (2) and (2-A) of Section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "Chairman or the Speaker" and "Speaker or the Chairman" wherever they occur, the words "Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act - (1) for the words "the Chairman and the Speaker", the words "the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker" shall be substituted; (2) for the words "the Chairman or the Speaker", the words "the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 10-A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "10-B. Residences of the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker - (1) The Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker shall each be entitled without payment of rent to the use of a furnished residence in the City of Bangalore throughout the term of their office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter, or, in lieu of such furnished residence, to a house rent allowance at the rate of three hundred and fifty rupees per mensem. The furnishing of the residence provided under this sub-section shall be on such scales as may be prescribed. (2) In a residence used by the Deputy Chairman or the Deputy Speaker who is entitled to a house rent allowance in lieu of furnished residence, three rooms shall be furnished by the State Government on such scale as may be prescribed, to be used for official purposes. 10-C. Conveyances of the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker - The State Government may provide a suitable motor car each for the use of the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker. 10-D. Charges payable by the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker and the Government - (1) The Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker shall, in respect of their respective residences and the motor cars allotted for their use under sub-section (1) of Section 10-B and Section 10-C, be liable to pay the following charges, namely - (a) cost of petrol and oil required for their respective motor cars; and (b) when the monthly charges for the consumption of electricity in the residence exceed one hundred and twenty-five rupees in any month, the charges in excess of such sum. (2) All other charges for the maintenance and upkeep of the residence provided under sub-section (1) of Section 10-B and the motor car provided under Section 10-C including the cost of repairs thereof, the salaries and allowances of the drivers and cleaners of such motor cars, rates and taxes, and all expenditure for the layout and the maintenance of the gardens included in such residences shall be borne by the State Government".
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12-A of the principal Act - (i) in the heading, for the word "Constituency", the word "Contingency" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "meeting expenditure", the words "meeting contingency expenditure" shall be substituted and the words "in their constituency" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "the Chairman or the Speaker", the words "the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker", shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "Chairman or the Speaker" in the two places where they occur, the words "Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker" shall be substituted; (3) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1974 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 7 of 1974) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
