Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1965. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 15 of 1965) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Eighth day of October, 1976. Received the assent of the Governor on the First day of December, 1976
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 15 of 1965) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(1-A) "Contribution" means the sum of money comprising the employers contribution, employees contribution and State Governments contribution, payable to the Board in accordance with the provisions of Section 7-A".
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely - "(bb) the contribution paid under Section 7-A; (bbb) any penal interest paid under Section 7-B."
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "7-A. Contribution - (1) In respect of every employee in an establishment there shall be paid contribution to the Board comprising the employers contribution, employees contribution and State Governments contribution, payable respectively by the employer, the employee and the State Government and the contributions so paid shall form part of the Fund. (2) In respect of every employee whose name stands in the register of an establishment on 31st December of a year sum of one rupee, two rupees and one rupee respectively shall be payable as contribution for that year by the concerned employee, the employer and the State Government. (3) The employers contribution and the employees contribution in respect of a year shall be paid by the employer to the Board on or before 15th January of the following year by cheque, money order or in cash and the expenses of remitting the contribution shall be borne by the employer himself. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment but subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder the employer shall be entitled to recover the employees contribution from the employee by deduction from his wages and not otherwise and such deduction shall be deemed to be a deduction authorised by or under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936: Provided that, no such deduction shall be made in excess of the amount of the contribution payable by such employee, nor shall it be made from any wages other than the wages for the month of December of the year to which the contribution relates: Provided further that, if through inadvertence or otherwise, no deduction has been made from the wages of an employee for the month aforesaid, such deduction may be made from the wages of such employee for any subsequent month or months with the permission in writing of the Inspector appointed under this Act. (5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any agreement or contract no employer shall deduct the employers contribution from any wages payable to an employee or otherwise recover it from the employee. (6) Any sum duly deducted by an employer from the wages of an employee under this section shall be deemed to have been entrusted to him by the employee for the purpose of paying the contribution in respect of which it was deducted. (7) The Welfare Commissioner shall submit to the State Government as soon as possible after the end of January every year, in the prescribed form, a statement showing the total amount of each employers contribution in respect of his establishment. On receipt of the statement from the Welfare Commissioner, the State Government shall pay to the Board its contribution in respect of each such establishment. 7-B. Interest on unpaid accumulation or fines after notice of demand -(1) If any employer does not pay to the Board any amount of unpaid accumulations or fines realised from the employees or the amount of the employers and employees contributions under Section 7-A within the time he is required by or under the provisions of this Act to pay it, the Welfare Commissioner may cause to be served a notice on such employer to pay the amount within the period specified therein, which shall not be more than thirty days from the date of service of such notice. (2) If the employer fails to pay any such amount within the period specified in the notice, he shall, in addition to that amount, pay to the Board simple interest,- (a) for the first three months at twelve per cent per annum of the said amount for each complete month after the last date by which he should have paid it according to the notice; and (b) at eighteen per cent per annum of that amount for each complete month thereafter, during the time he continues to make default in the payment of that amount."
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 17 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "17-A. Penalty for obstructing Inspector in the discharge of his duties or for failure to produce documents, etc -Any person who wilfully obstructs an Inspector in the exercise of his powers or discharge of his duties under this Act or fails to produce for inspection on demand by an Inspector any registers, records or other documents maintained in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or to supply to him on demand true copies of any such documents, shall, on conviction, be punished, for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; and for a second or subsequent offences, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both: Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the Court, in any case where the offender is sentenced to fine only, the amount of fine shall not be less than fifty rupees. 17-B. Penalty for contravention of any provisions of the Act -Any person who wilfully contravenes any provision of the Act shall on conviction be punished for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and for the second and subsequent offences, with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with both. 17-C. Cognizance of offences -No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except on a complaint filed by an Inspector with the previous sanction of the Welfare Commissioner."
Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 26 of 1976) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
