Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Nineteenth day of July, 1976. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the First day of December, 1976
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the long title and preamble to the Karnataka Legislature Salaries Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words "the Deputy Speaker" a comma and the words "the Leaders of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whips" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act - (1) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(bb) "Government Chief Whip" means a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council designated by the Chief Minister as the Government Chief Whip in the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council"; (2) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(cc) "Leader of the Opposition" means the member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council who is for the time being recognised as the Leader of the Opposition by the Speaker or the Chairman as the case may be;"
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka To sub-section (2-A) of Section 8 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be and shall always be deemed to have been added, namely - "Provided that, save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2-B), when no motor car is taken with him while on tour outside the State in India, the Chairman, the Deputy Chairman, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall be entitled at his option, in lieu of conveyance allowance and to any road mileage to which he is entitled, to the actual hire charges of the motor car, hired by him in the interest of public service. Certificate to the effect that the hiring of the motor car was necessary in public interest shall be furnished by the Chairman, Deputy Chairman, Speaker and Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, along with the bill".
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10-B of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the fourteenth day of October, 1974 namely - "Provided that the Deputy Chairman or the Deputy Speaker may intimate the State Government that he does not wish to avail the aforesaid facility and may at any time cancel such intimation".
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 10-D of the principal Act, the following sections shall be Inserted, namely - "10-E. Salary to the Leader of the Opposition - There shall be paid to each Leader of the Opposition a salary of one thousand and two hundred rupees per mensem. 10-F. Residence of the Leader of the Opposition - (1) The Leader of the Opposition shall each be entitled, without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence in the City of Bangalore throughout his term of office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter, or, in lieu of such furnished residence, to a house rent allowance at the rate of three hundred and fifty rupees per mensem. The furnishing of the residence provided under this sub-section shall be on such scales as may be prescribed: Provided that the Leader of the Opposition may intimate the State Government that he does not wish to avail the aforesaid facility and may at any time cancel such intimation. (2) In a residence used by the Leader of the Opposition who is entitled to a house rent allowance in lieu of furnished residence, three rooms shall be furnished by the State Government on such scales as may be prescribed, to be used for official purposes. 10-G. Conveyance for the Leader of the Opposition - (1) The State Government may provide a suitable motor car for the use of each Leader of the Opposition. (2) There shall be paid to each Leader of the Opposition a Conveyance allowance at the rate of five hundred rupees per mensem. 10-H. Certain other facilities to the Leader of the Opposition - The State Government shall provide one Stenographer and one peon to each Leader of the Opposition. 10-I. Charges payable by the Leader of the Opposition and the Government - (1) Each Leader of the Opposition shall in respect of the residence and the motor car allotted for his use under sub-section (1) of Section 10-F and Section 10-G, be liable to pay the following charges, namely - (a) cost of petrol and oil required for the motor car; and (b) when the monthly charges for the consumption of electricity in the residence exceed one hundred and twenty-five rupees in any month, the charges in excess of such sum. (2) All other charges for the maintenance and upkeep of the residence provided under sub-section (1) of Section 10-F and the motor car provided under Section 10-G including the cost of repairs thereof, the salaries and allowances of the drivers and cleaners of such motor cars, rates and taxes and all expenditure for the layout and the maintenance of the gardens included in such residence, shall be borne by the State Government. 10-J. Salary to the Government Chief Whip - There shall be paid to each Government Chief Whip a salary of one thousand rupees per mensem. 10-K. Residence of the Government Chief Whip - (1) The Government Chief Whip shall each be entitled without payment of rent to the use of a furnished residence in the City of Bangalore throughout his term of office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter, or in lieu of such furnished residence to a house rent allowance at the rate of three hundred and fifty rupees mensem. The furnishing of the residence provided, under this sub-section shall be on such scales as may be prescribed: Provided that the Government Chief Whip may intimate the State Government that he does not wish to avail the aforesaid facility and may at any time cancel such intimation. (2) In a residence used by the Government Chief Whip who is entitled to a house rent allowance in lieu of furnished residence, three rooms shall be furnished by the State Government on such scales as may be prescribed, to be used for official purposes. 10-L. Conveyance for the Government Chief Whip - (1) The State Government may provide a suitable motor car for the use of each Government Chief Whip. (2) There shall be paid to each Government Chief Whip a conveyance allowance at the rate of five hundred rupees per mensem. 10-M. Certain other facilities to the Government Chief Whip - The State Government shall provide one stenographer and one peon to each Government Chief Whip. 10-N. Charges payable by the Government Chief Whip and the Government - (1) Each Government Chief Whip shall in respect of the residence and the motor car allotted for his use under sub-section (1) of Section 10-K and Section 10-L be liable to pay the following charges, namely - (a) cost of petrol and oil required for the motor car; and (b) when the monthly charges for the consumption of electricity in the residence exceed one hundred and twenty-five rupees in any month, the charges in excess of such sum. (2) All other charges for the maintenance and upkeep of the residence provided under sub-section (1) of Section 10-K and the motor car provided under Section 10-L including the cost of repairs thereof, the salaries and allowances of the drivers and cleaners of such motor cars, rates and taxes and all expenditure for the layout and the maintenance of the gardens included in such residence, shall be borne by the State Government."
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act - (i) in clause (a), the following shall be added at the end, namely - "and where such accommodation is not provided, the member shall be paid an allowance of rupees fifteen per diem during the period of the meeting and for two days before the commencement of meeting and for two days after the day of conclusion of meetings."; (ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(c) every member shall be entitled - (i) free of charge to such accommodation in hospitals and dispensaries maintained by the State Government and to such medical attendance and treatment as may be prescribed; (ii) subject to rules made by the State Government to reimbursement of expenses incurred by him for medical attendance and treatment obtained at any other place."; (iii) for clause (e), the following clause shall be Substituted, namely - "(e) there shall be paid to the members of a committee, in respect of journeys undertaken by the committee - (i) with the approval of the Chairman, where the committee is a committee of the Members of the Legislative Council only; (ii) with the approval of the Speaker, where the committee is a committee of the Members of the Legislative Assembly only; and (iii) with the approval of the Chairman and the Speaker, where the committee is a committee of members of both Houses of the Legislature, travelling allowance for journeys by train and for journeys by road whether within the State or outside the State in India, at the rates specified in clause (a) and for journeys by air outside the State in India at the rate of one and one-fifth times the single air fare paid for such journeys and such insurance premium as may be prescribed for insurance against accidents during such journeys by air and daily allowance of rupees fifteen per diem for the days of halt at any place within the State and at rupees twenty-five per diem for the days of halt at any place outside the State: Provided that where one-fifth of the single air fare payable under this clause exceeds rupees thirty, the amount so payable shall be limited to rupees thirty."
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act - (i) in the heading for the words "Speaker and Deputy Speaker", the words "Speaker, Deputy Speaker, the Leaders of the Opposition and the Government Chief Whips", shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (1) - (a) after the words "Deputy Speaker", the words "or the Leaders of the Opposition or the Government Chief Whips" shall be inserted; (b) the following provisos shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted with effect from the fourteenth day of October 1974, namely - "Provided that the Deputy Chairman or the Deputy Speaker who does not avail the facility provided under Section 10-B shall be entitled to the allowances specified in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 12 as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council, as the case may be: Provided further that he shall also be entitled to the allowances admissible under Section 8 or under clause (f) of Section 12, as the case may be"; (iii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the Leader of the Opposition or the Government Chief Whip who does not avail the facility provided in Section 10-F or Section 10-K as the case may be, shall be entitled to the allowances specified in clauses (a), (b), (e), (f) of Section 12 as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council or as a Chairman of any Committee of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council or of both"; (iv) in sub-section (2), for the words "Speaker or the Deputy Speaker" in two places where they occur, the words "Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the Leaders of the Opposition or the Government Chief Whips" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (a) of Section 3 of the Karnataka Legislature (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 4 of 1957) for the words "a Chief Whip or a Deputy Chief Whip", the words "the Leaders of the Opposition or the Government Chief Whips" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Legislature Salaries (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 16 of 1976) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
