Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Third Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-sixth Year of Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Third Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Third Amendment) Act, 1985.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1985. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-fifth day of October, 1985
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Third Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956 (hereinafter refered to as the principal Act) in clause (h) for the words "five hundred and fifty rupees", the words "one thousand three hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Third Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 13 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "13-A. Grant of advances for the purchase of Motor Car or Motor cycle - Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, every member shall be entitled to the grant of an advance for the purchase of a motor car or a motor cycle. 13-B. Recovery of dues - Any amount due to the Government or the Legislature Secretariat from a person who is or was a member of the Legislature may, without prejudice to any other mode of collection be recovered - (a) from his salary payable under Section 11, (b) from his pension payable under Section 11-A, (c) as if it were an arrear of land Revenue." Explanation - For the purpose of this section, a member of the Legislature includes a Minister, Minister of State, Deputy Minister, Chairman, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Leader of the Opposition and a Government Chief Whip." 
