Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000. 1 (2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of December 2000. First published in the Karnataka Gazette in Extra-ordinary on the 12th day of April, 2001.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words "five thousand rupees" the words "six thousand rupees" and for the words "fifty thousand rupees" the words "seventy five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "five thousand rupees" the words "ten thousand rupee" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (i) in clause (d), for the words "five hundred" the words "eight hundred" shall be substituted. (ii) in the proviso to clause (d), for the words "six hundred and fifty" the words "one thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10A of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (2) for the words "four thousand and five hundred rupees" the words "five thousand five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words " five thousand rupees" the words " ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10E of the principal Act, for the words "four thousand and five hundred rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10F of the principal Act, for the words " five thousand rupees" the words " ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10K of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "five thousand rupees" the words " ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "three thousand five hundred rupees" the words "four thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In section 11A of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1),- (i) in clause (a), for the words "two thousand five hundred rupees" the words "three thousand rupees" shall be substituted. (ii) in the first proviso, for the words "rupees two hundred" and "rupees four thousand" the words "rupees three hundred" and "rupees five thousand" shall respectively be substituted. (iii) in sub-section (1A), for the words "four thousand" the words "five thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In section 11C of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1) for the words "fifty thousand rupees" the words "seventy five thousand rupees" shall be substituted. (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "thirty thousand rupees" the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Legislature Salaries, Pensions and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In section 12 of the principal Act,- (i) in clause (b), for the words "four hundred rupees" and "five hundred rupees" the words "five hundred rupees" and "six hundred rupees" shall respectively be substituted. (ii) in clause (ccc), for the words "thirty thousand rupees" the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted. (iii) for clause (h), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(h) every member shall be paid an allowance of,- (i) five thousand rupees per month towards meeting the expenditure incurred by him on telephone calls, (ii) three thousand five hundred rupees per month as constituency allowance, (iii) one thousand rupees per month on postal charges, (iv) two thousand rupees per month as salary of the Personal Assistant and the room boy of the member, in the discharge of his duties as a member. 
