Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981.1 (2) This section, Sections 6(2), 11, 13, 14, 17, 18 and 22 shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-fifth day of November, 1980 and Sections 3, 7, 15, 16 and 20 shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of March, 1974 and Sections 4, 6(1), 8, 9, 10, 12, 19 and 21 shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of January, 1979 and Sections 2 and 5 shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the First day of March, 1982
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962), (hereinafter referred as the Principal Act), in clause (2) of sub-section (A), at the end, the following shall be inserted, namely - "and includes an artisan whose principal means of livelihood is preparation of agricultural implements."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the word "created" in the two places where it occurs, the words "created or continued" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (b), excluding the provisos thereto the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(b) such rent shall be the aggregate of ten times the land revenue and ten times the water rate, if any, payable in respect of such land."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 38 of the Principal Act - (1) in clause (a), the words "not exceeding five cents (2.024 acres) in extent" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (2) in clause (b), for the words "on or before the 31st day of December, 1971", the words "on or before the 31st day of December, 1981" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 47 of the Principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), in the beginning the words and figures "Save as provided in Section 106" shall be inserted; (2) in clause (iii) of the proviso to sub-section (1), in item (5), for the words physical or mental disability", the words such physical or mental disability as may be prescribed" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 48-A of the Principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: "Provided that the Tribunal may, on the application of any of the parties, for reasons to be recorded in writing, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by it."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 48-C of the Principal Act, after the words "or appointment of receiver concerning", the words "the dwelling house in respect of which an application is made under Section 38 or" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 50 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words, "in respect of such land shall", the words and figures "save as provided in Section 106" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 51 of the Principal Act - (1) in the beginning, the words and figures "Save as provided in Section 106" shall be inserted; (2) for the second proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely - "Provided further that the amount payable shall, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, be paid, (i) in the case of a minor, a woman who has never been married, a small holder, a person subject to the prescribed physical or mental disability and subject to clause (ii), a widow - (a) in a lump sum where the amount payable does not exceed fifty thousand rupees; and (b) where the amount payable exceeds fifty thousand rupees, the first fifty thousand rupees in a lump sum and the balance in non-transferable and non-negotiable bonds carrying interest at the rate of five and half per cent per annum and of guaranteed face value maturing within a specified period not exceeding twenty years; (ii) in the case of a widow, if she so elects in writing, in the form of annuity during her lifetime, a sum determined in such manner as may be prescribed, which shall not be less than the net annual income referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 72. Explanation - For the purpose of this clause widow, minor and a person subject to physical or mental disability include, a woman who is a widow, a person who is a minor, a person subject to physical or mental disability respectively at the time when the amount payable is determined: Provided also that in relation to a small holder the second proviso shall have effect as if it was in force on and from the First day of March, 1974."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 53 of the Principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1) - (a) for clauses (i) and (ii) excluding the proviso the following clauses shall be substituted, namely - "(i) where the amount payable does not exceed two thousand rupees, in a lump sum; (ii) in other cases - (a) either in lump sum; or (b) where the amount is paid by him out of his own funds, in annual instalments of such number not exceeding twenty as he may intimate, with interest at five and half per cent per annum, from the date of the order under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) of Section 48-A and where the money is advanced by the State Land Development Bank or a credit agency, in annual instalments of such number not exceeding the number permitted as maximum for the recovery of term loan granted by such bank or agency without interest thereon." (2) The proviso to sub-section (1-A) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 53 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "53-A. Establishment of a separate fund - (1) There shall be constituted for the State of Karnataka a fund called the Karnataka Religious and Charitable Institutions Annuity Fund. (2) The fund specified in sub-section (1) shall consist of - (a) the amount of premium collected from the tenants or sub-tenants of land belonging to the institutions referred to in Section 106; (b) the interest earned on the amounts in the said fund; (c) such amount transferred from the Consolidated Fund of the State as may be necessary to make up the deficit, if any, where the amounts referred to in the above clauses are insufficient to pay the annuities to such institutions. (3) The amount specified in clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State. Such Amount and the amount referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2), shall thereafter, under appropriation duly made by law in this behalf, be entered in and transferred to the said fund. The amount at credit in the said fund may be invested in such manner as the State Government may direct. (4) The annuities payable to the said institutions shall be paid from out of the said fund."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 55 of the Principal Act - (1) for the words "On payment of premium in lump sum or the first instalment thereof, as the case may be", the words, figures, brackets and letter "On receipt of the final orders passed under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) of Section 48-A, subject to such rules as may be prescribed", shall be substituted. (2) the proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 67 of the Principal Act, after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(aa) Where a portion of the holding declared before a Tahsildar is situated within the jurisdiction of another Tahsildar, the former shall send a copy of the declaration to the latter, who shall make the verification and determination specified in items (i) and (ii) of clause (a) in respect of such portion and send the copy of the declaration and the connected records to the former Tahsildar, who shall place them before the Tribunal."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 74 of the Principal Act, the words "by the Tahsildar" and "by him" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 78 of the Principal Act - (1) In sub-section (3), after the words "per cent, per annum" the following shall be inserted, namely - "if the purchase price is paid by the grantee out of his own funds and no interest where the money for payment of the purchase price is advanced by the State Land Development Bank or a credit agency." (2) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely - "(5) Every grantee, who is granted surplus land shall be entitled to obtain assistance from the State Land Development Bank or from a credit agency as defined in the Karnataka Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1974 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1975) for the payment of the purchase price in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) the amount advanced to the grantee by the State Land Development Bank under sub-section (5) may be recovered by the State Government in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue and credited to the said Bank. (7) The amount advanced to a grantee by the credit agency shall be deemed to be financial assistance within the meaning of the Karnataka Agricultural Credit Operations and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1974 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1975) for the purpose of recovery of dues under Section 12 of the said Act and the provisions thereof shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in respect of the amount so advanced."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 80 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word "valid", the word "lawful" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 83 of the Principal Act, after the words, "in contravention of", occurring in two places, the words, "or is unlawful or invalid under" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 105 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "106. Amount payable to religious institutions, etc - (1) In respect of the amount payable to a religious, charitable or other institution capable of holding property the provisions of Sections 47, 50 and 51 shall have effect subject to the modifications specified in sub-section (2). (2) In respect of lands held by such institution and vesting in the State Government under the provisions of this Act the amount payable shall be an annuity, to be paid so long as the institution exists, of a sum equal to the net annual income referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 72. Towards the annuity so payable, the State Government shall issue a non-transferable and non-negotiable annuity bond. (3) Where the land in respect of which the annuity payable under sub-section (2) is subject to encumbrances - (a) if the value of the encumbrance is less than the amount of the annuity the holder of the encumbrance shall be paid in full from out of the amount of annuity and the balance shall be paid to the institution; (b) if the value of the encumbrance is more than the amount of the annuity, five per cent of such value shall be paid from out of such amount till the value of the encumbrance is fully paid and the balance shall be paid to the institution; (c) if there are more encumbrances than one, the amount under clauses (a) and (b) shall be distributed according to priority."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 107 of the Principal Act in sub-section (1) - (i) after clause (iv), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "iv-a granted by the State Government to a Research Institution affiliated to a University established by law in India." (ii) in clause (v), after the words, "the State Government" a comma and the words, "subject to such rules as may be prescribed" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 122-A of the Principal Act, for the words, "a period of one year from the date of commencement of Section 1 of the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978", the words and figures "the 31st day of December, 1981" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1980 (Karnataka Ordinance 16 of 1980) and the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 9 of 1981) are hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinances shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
