Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act No. 10 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-sixth year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995.1 (2) Section 8 shall come into force from such date as the State Government may by notification appoint and remaining provisions shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twentieth day of October, 1995
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act No. 10 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in sub-section (A) - (i) in clause (1), sub-clause (a) shall be renumbered as sub-clause (aa) thereof and before sub-clause (aa) as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely - (a) "acquaculture." (ii) clause (14) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to - (a) a tenancy created or continued by a soldier or seaman if such tenancy is created or continued while he is serving as a soldier or a seaman or within three months before he became a soldier or a seaman; (b) to any land leased after the commencement of the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995 in the districts of Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada by landowners or persons registered as occupants under the provisions of this Act, for the purpose of utilising the land for acquaculture for a period not exceeding twenty years, at such lease, rent as may be determined by mutual agreement between the parties and such agreement shall be registered and a copy thereof shall be sent to the Deputy Commissioner within fifteen days from the date of such registration.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After the proviso to sub-section (6) of Section 48-A of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided further that the Tribunal may on its own or on the application of any of the parties, for reasons to be recorded in writing, correct the extent of land in any order passed by it after causing actual measurement and after giving an opportunity of being heard to the concerned parties."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 61 of the principal Act - (a) in sub-section (1), the words "subject to condition that no fragment shall be created by any such partition", shall be omitted. (b) in sub-section (3), for the words "rules relating to grant of Government lands", the words and figures "provisions of Section 77", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 63 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) The ceiling area for a person who is tenant under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 5 shall be forty units."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 79-A of the principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "Amendment Act", the words "the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995", shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "fifty thousand" wherever they occur, the words "two lakhs" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 109 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed and the provisions of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act No. 11 of 1963), the State Government may, by notification, exempt, any land in any area from the provisions of Sections 63, 79-A, 79-B or 80 to be used for - (i) industrial development, the extent of which shall not exceed twenty units; (ii) educational institutions recognised by the State or Central Government to be used for non- agricultural purpose the extent of which shall not exceed four units; (iii) Places of worship to be specified by Government by notification which are established or constructed by a recognised or registered body for non-agricultural purpose, the extent of which shall not exceed one unit. (iv) a housing project, approved by the State Government the extent of which shall not exceed ten units; (v) the purpose of horticulture including floriculture and agro based industries the extent of which shall not exceed twenty units. (1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Government may in public interest and for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, exempt any extent of land for any specific purpose." 
