Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Sixteenth day of December, 1975. Received the assent of the President on the Twelfth day of March, 1976
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 48-B of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely - "48-C. Interim Orders -(1) The Tribunal may, when it considers it just and proper and subject to such terms and conditions as it may impose, issue interlocutory orders in the nature of temporary injunction or appointment of Receiver concerning the land in respect of which an application is made under Section 48-A. (2) The Tribunal may at any time revoke or modify the order issued by it under sub-section (1). (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the order of the Tribunal shall be final."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (B) of Section 112 of the Principal Act, after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted, namely - "(bb) to decide whether the land in respect of which an application under Section 48-A is made or in respect of which any question of tenancy is raised or involved, is or is not agricultural land; (bbb) to decide questions referred to it under Section 133; (bbbb) to issue interim orders under Section 48-C."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 133 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "133. Suits, proceedings, etc., involving questions required to be decided by the Tribunal -(1) Notwithstanding anything in any law for the time being in force - (i) no civil or criminal court or officer or authority shall, in any suit, case or proceedings concerning a land, other than proceedings under Chapter IV of this Act, decide the question whether such land is or is not agricultural land and whether the person claiming to be in possession is or is not a tenant of the said land from prior to 1st March, 1974; (ii) such court or officer or authority shall stay such suit or proceedings insofar as such question is concerned and refer the same to the Tribunal for decision; (iii) all interim orders issued or made by such Court, officer or authority, whether in the nature of temporary injunction or appointment of a Receiver or otherwise, concerning the land shall stand dissolved or vacated, as the case may be; (iv) the Tribunal shall decide the question referred to it under clause (1) and communicate its decision to such court, officer or authority. The decision of the Tribunal shall be final. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall preclude the civil or criminal court or the officer or authority from proceeding with the suit, case or proceedings in respect of any matter other than that referred to in that sub-section."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Land Reforms Rules, 1974, as they stood prior to 1st January, 1976, in Forms 8 and 9, for the first paragraph, the following paragraph shall be and shall respectively be deemed always to have been substituted, namely - "Whereas the Tribunal has to determine the person who is entitled to be registered as an occupant of the lands described below under Section 45."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority - (i) notices issued prior to 1st January, 1976 in Forms 8 and 9 as they stood before the amendment made by Section 5 shall be deemed to have been issued in Forms 8 and 9 as amended by the said section; (ii) every proceeding initiated before and taken by the Tribunal in pursuance of such notices including orders passed shall be deemed to have been initiated, taken and made as if notices had been issued in Forms 8 and 9 as amended by Section 5 and shall be deemed to be valid and shall not be questioned in any court of law.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 24 of 1975) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
