Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962). Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of March, 1974. Received the assent of the Governor on the First day of August, 1977
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 44 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in sub-section (2), in clause (b) the words "rents and all other" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (3) - (i) for the word "tenant", the word "person" shall be substituted; (ii) the following shall be added at the end namely -"after evicting such person."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 46 of the Principal Act, for the words "referred to in", the words "entitled to be registered as an occupant under" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 48 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (3), the following shall be added at the end, namely - "Any proceedings pending before the Tribunal shall be continued by the reconstituted Tribunal as if the same were instituted before it. Explanation -For the purpose of this sub-section re-constitution shall include removal of a member from or nomination of a new member to the Tribunal."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 48-A of the Principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(5-A) Where there is no objection in respect of any part of the claim, the Tribunal may at once pass orders granting the application as regards that part and proceed separately in respect of the other part objected to."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 48-B of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the word, figures and letter "Section 48-A", the words, brackets, figures and letter "and where no application is filed within the period provided in sub-section (1) of Section 48-A, on receipt of the application by the landlord" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 53 of the Principal Act, in clause (ii) of sub-section (1), after the words "twenty years", the words "where the amount is paid by the tenant out of his own funds and not exceeding the number of years which is permitted as maximum for recovery of term loan where the money is advanced by the State Land Development Bank or a credit agency" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 67 of the Principal Act, in sub-sections (3-A) and (4), for the word "himself" wherever it occurs, the word "itself" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 67 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "67-A. Payment for use and occupation of land -(1) Every person possessing land in excess of the ceiling area, as determined under this Chapter, shall pay to the State Government for the period he was in possession of such extent of land from the date of the order determining the excess, such compensation for the use and occupation of such land as the Tribunal may determine in the prescribed manner. (2) Any sum payable under sub-section (1) may be recovered as arrears of land revenue."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 73 of the Principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely - "(1) As soon as may be after the service of the order made under Section 67, the Tahsildar shall publish a notification containing the particulars of the lands vested in the State Government. (1-A) After the publication of the notification under sub-section (1), the Tahsildar shall determine the amount payable in respect of the land which has vested in the State Government."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 77 of the Principal Act - (1) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(1) Surplus land vesting in the State Government under this Act, land directed to be disposed of under sub-section (3) of Section 45, Section 58, Section 60, land vesting in the State Government under Section 79-A, Section 79-B or under any other provision of this Act shall, subject to reservation of fifty per cent thereof for grant to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed in this behalf, may be granted by the Tribunal to the following persons to the extent and in the manner as may be prescribed. (i) Dispossessed tenants who are not registered as occupants; (ii) Displaced tenants having no land; (iii) Landless agricultural labourers; (iv) Landless persons and ex-military personnel whose gross annual income does not exceed rupees two thousand; (v) Released bonded labourers; (vi) Other persons residing in villages in the same Panchayat and whose gross annual income does not exceed rupees two thousand. Explanation - (1) "Dispossessed tenant" means a person who not being member of the family of the owner was cultivating lands personally and was dispossessed between 10th September, 1957 and 24th January, 1971 and who is not registered as an occupant under the provisions of this Act. Explanation - (2) "Displaced tenant" means a person who has been deprived of agricultural land on which he was a tenant, on account of - (i) acquisition of such land under the Land Acquisition Act; or (ii) resumption of such land by a soldier or a seaman for personal cultivation." (2) For sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(2) The lands reserved for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be granted in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 78 of the Principal Act, for the word "Tahsildar" occurring for the first time, the word "Tribunal" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 82 of the Principal Act, the words "as the case may be" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 114 of the Principal Act, for the word "Court" the word "Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka Section 117 of the Principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 118 of the Principal Act, sub-sections (1), (3), (4), (5) and (6) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 119 of the Principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1), the words "Court or the" and the words "courts or" shall be omitted; (ii) in sub-section (3), the word "Court" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka Section 120 of the Principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 121 of the Principal Act - (i) the words "District Court or the" wherever they occur, shall be omitted; (ii) in sub-section (2), the words "District Court or the" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka Section 121-A of the Principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 122 of the Principal Act - (i) the words "the Court or" shall be omitted; (ii) for the words "or the Tahsildar", the words "or the prescribed authority or the Tahsildar" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 128 of the Principal Act, for the word "Tahsildar" in the two places it occurs, the words "the Tribunal" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 137 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2) - (i) clause (i) shall be omitted; (ii) in clause (xvi) for the word "Tahsildar", the word "Tribunal" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka In the Principal Act, for the words "Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal" wherever they occur, the words "Karnataka Appellate Tribunal" shall be substituted. 
