Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act No. 10 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-first Year of Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of February, 1991
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (A) of Section 2 of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act No. 10 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in clause (25), the word "cocoa" shall be omitted. (2) in clause (31), for the words "four thousand and eight hundred rupees", the words "ten thousand rupees", shall be substituted; (3) in clause (31-A), for the words "while engaged in operations for the defence of India", in the two places where they occur, the words "while in service as such soldier", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (3) of Section 5 of the principal Act, for the word "granted", the word "created" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8 of the principal Act, after the third proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely - "Provided also that the rent payable by a tenant to the soldier or seaman shall be - (a) in the case of A or B class of land, one-fourth of the gross produce or its value in cash which in any case shall not exceed rupees five hundred per acre; and (b) in the case of any other class of land, one-fifth of the gross produce or its value in cash which in any case shall not exceed rupees two hundred and fifty per acre; Or the contract rent whichever is less. Explanation -For the purpose of this proviso, the gross produce per acre or its value in cash shall be determined as may be prescribed".
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (5) of Section 15 of the principal Act, after the words "within such time as may be specified in the notice" the words "which shall not be less than the prescribed period", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 19 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, for the words "while engaged in the operations for the defence of India", the words "while in service" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "Section 22", the words and figures "Section 15 or 22", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka Sub-section (8) of Section 48 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Item (i) of the second proviso to clause (b) of Section 51 of the principal Act, after the word "minor", the words "a person who has attained the age of sixty-five years", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In the second proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 53 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "he shall be exempted from paying the instalments which falls due on or after the Seventeenth day of October, 1984", the words and figures "he shall be exempted from paying the premium and instalments thereof which falls due on or after the commencement of Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990 or having fallen due before the said date has remained un-paid" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 77 of the principal Act, for clause (iv), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(iv) landless person whose gross annual income does not exceed rupees four thousand and eight hundred and ex-Military personnel whose gross annual income does not exceed rupees twelve thousand."
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 79-A of the principal Act, for the words "twelve thousand", the words "fifty thousand", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of Section 107 of the principal Act, after the words "the Central Government or both", the words "an Agricultural Research Institution recognised by the State Government or the Central Government", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990 (Karnataka Act No. 18 of 1990), in Section 17, for the words "before the expiry of ninety days from the commencement of the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990, whose appeal was pending immediately before the commencement", the words "on or before Thirty-first day of March, 1991, whose appeal was pending immediately before the commencement of the Karnataka Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990", shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted. 
