Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969.1 2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixteenth day of April, 1969 Karnataka Act No. 7 of 1969 repealed by the Karnataka Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 10 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the words "a part of a district comprising" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the principal Act, after the words and quotations "Superintendent of Land Records", the words and quotations "Superintendent for Settlement", "Assistant Superintendent for Settlement"  shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted.
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 114 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "114-A. Revision of settlement of land revenue in certain cases - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law - (a) if at any time after the introduction of a settlement of land revenue under Section 122, the State Government, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is of the opinion that in any zone, the settlement of land revenue requires modification, it may, by order, direct the revision of settlement of land revenue in such zone, and the provisions of this Chapter relating to a revision settlement of land revenue shall be applicable to such revision of settlement; (b) the land revenue settled by such settlement shall, if so directed by the State Government, with the approval of both Houses of the State Legislature, be leviable and payable from the date on which the settlement of land revenue which was directed to be revised under this section was introduced; and (c) where a settlement of land revenue is directed to be revised under clause (a), the land revenue on the lands in the zone concerned shall, pending such revision, be leviable and payable at the same rates as were in force prior to the introduction of such settlement, and after the revision of settlement of land revenue comes into force, the difference if any, between the amount of land revenue paid pending the revision, and the amount of land revenue payable for the period in accordance with the revised settlement of land revenue, shall be paid or refunded, as the case may be."
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 122 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely - "122-A. Notice of assessment to occupants -(1) As soon as may be after the settlement is introduced under Section 122, the assessment of land revenue on each survey number or subdivision shall be determined by the Superintendent for Settlement or the Assistant Superintendent for Settlement or such other officer as the Commissioner for Survey, Settlement and Land Records may appoint, and the occupant of the land liable to pay the land revenue shall be served with a notice specifying the extent of land, the class of such land, the standard rate applicable and the land revenue payable thereon. (2) After service of a notice under sub-section (1), the land revenue as specified in such notice shall, subject to any modification made under Section 122-B, be levied, on the survey number or sub-division. 122-B. Determination of assessment of lands -(1) The Deputy Commissioner - (i) may suo motu at any time, and (ii) shall, on the application of any person aggrieved by the land revenue assessed within a period of thirty days from the date of service of the notice under Section 122-A, if he is satisfied after such enquiry as he deems fit that the assessment of land revenue on any land or the land, as the case may be, is contrary to law or is otherwise incorrect, as regards the extent of land, the class of such land, the standard rate applicable and the land revenue payable, pass such orders, as he deems just: Provided that no order prejudicial to the occupant shall be made under this sub-section unless the applicant or any other person interested has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (1), may, within sixty days from the date of such order, appeal to the Divisional Commissioner, and the decision of the Divisional Commissioner thereon shall be final." 
