Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing - Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990.1 (2) It shall come into force from such date as may be notified by the State Government. Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of February, 1991
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 94 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) the following shall be inserted, namely - "94-A. Regularisation of certain cases of unauthorised occupation by constituting Committee etc -(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the State Government shall, by notification, constitute for each taluk a committee consisting of such number of members not exceeding three of whom one shall be a member of Legislative Assembly, for the purpose of grant land under sub-section (4). (2) The Tahsildar of the concerned taluk shall be the Secretary of the Committee. (3) The Committee shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed. (4) Nothing in Section 94 shall prevent the committee constituted under sub-section (1), but subject to such rules as may be prescribed, if any, to grant to the person liable to be evicted under that section the land which he had unauthorisedly occupied prior to the fourteenth day of April, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as the said date) or any portion thereof, if he satisfies the prescribed conditions (including the extent of the land held and unauthorisedly occupied by him) and makes within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act), an application for such grant in such form along with such fees, as may be prescribed and on payment of the amount payable under sub-section (5): Provided that the land so granted together with the land already held by such person, shall not exceed two hectares of D class of land or its equivalent thereto: Provided further that no land shall be granted in the areas lying within the limits of Cities and City Municipalities specified in column (2) of the Table below and within the distance from such limits specified in the corresponding entries in column (3) thereof: Table Sl. No. Places Distances (1) (2) (3) 1. Bangalore City under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976. 18 Kms. 2. The Cities of Belgaum, Gulbarga, Hubli- Dharwad, Mangalore and Mysore respectively under the provisions of Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976. 10 Kms. 3. All City Municipalities under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964. 5 Kms. Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to Forest lands, Plantation lands or lands referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 79. Explanation - For the purpose of this Section, D class of land means D class of land or an extent equivalent thereto consisting of one or more classes of land, as specified and determined in accordance with the formula in Schedule I to the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961. (5) The amount payable for the grant of land under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub-section - (a) the grant of land, if any, shall be provisional, subject to confirmation by the concerned Tahsildar, on the amount payable being paid, in three equal instalments, of which the first one shall be paid before the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of communication of the order of provisional grant and the remaining to within the period prescribed; and (b) if any instalment is not paid within the period referred to above, the provisional order of grant shall stand cancelled and the amount or amounts of the instalments paid, if any, shall also be liable for forfeiture; and (c) the trees, if any, standing on the land granted and the granite in such land shall continue to belong to the Government, which may at its discretion be disposed off by it, in such manner as it may deem fit."
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 95 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (2) - (a) after the words "he shall", the words "notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force", shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the Fifteenth day of January, 1965; (b) in the proviso for the words "provided that", the words "provided further that", shall be substituted and for the words and brackets "dry (punja) land", the words and brackets "dry (punja) land, wet land or garden land", shall be substituted; (c) before the first proviso as so amended, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: "Provided that the Deputy Commissioner shall not refuse permission for diversion of such land included in the Outline Development Plan or the Comprehensive Development Plan published under the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1963), if such diversion is in accordance with the purpose of land use specified in respect of the land in such plan;" (2) in sub-section (3), for the words "that the diversion is likely to cause a public nuisance", the words "that the diversion is likely to defeat the provisions of any law for the time being in force or that it is likely to cause a public nuisance" shall be substituted. (3) in sub-section (7), for the words "Proviso", the words "Provisos" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1963), in sub-section (2) of Section 14, before the explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: "Provided that where the use or change of land use under this section needs the diversion of agricultural land to non-agricultural purposes, such use or change of use shall not be permitted, unless permission is obtained in accordance with the provisions of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 for such diversion." 
