Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-fifth year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 6th day of July, 1994. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirtieth day of September, 1994 Karnataka Act No. 33 of 1994 repealed by the Karnataka Act No. 22 of 2000. w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 94 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(2) the Deputy Commissioner, in determining the amount of assessment and the fine under sub-section (1), shall count occupation for a portion of a year as whole year."
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 94-A of the principal Act - (1) after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) The State Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary, constitute one or more additional Committees for a taluk for the purpose of grant of land under sub-section (4) consisting of such number not exceeding five, as may be prescribed and the State Government shall nominate from among the members one of them as the Chairman and another as the Secretary of the Committee. When an additional Committee is constituted, the Deputy Commissioner shall determine the jurisdictions of the Committee and the additional Committee and transfer the pending applications to the respective Committee." (2) In sub-section (3), for the word "Committee", the words "Committee or additional Committee" shall be substituted; (3) in sub-section (4) - (a) after the words, brackets and figures "the Committee constituted under sub-section (1)", the words, brackets, figure and letter "or additional Committee constituted under sub-section (2-A)" shall be inserted; (b) in the second proviso, in the Table, in Item 3, after the words "All City Municipalities", the words "having more than fifty thousand population and constituted" shall be inserted; (c) after the second proviso the following shall be inserted, namely: Provided also that a person who has unauthorisedly occupied the land, falling within the distance of five kilometres from the limits of the city municipality having less than fifty thousand population, prior to the 14th day of April, 1990, shall make an application for such grant, within three months from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994." (4) In sub-section (5), after the words, brackets and figure "sub- section (1)", the words, brackets, figure and letter "sub-section (2-A)" shall be inserted; (5) in sub-section (6) - (i) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) The Tahsildar concerned shall issue the order of grant of land, on the recommendations of the Committee or additional Committee, as the case may be, if any, and issue the saguvali chit. The amount payable, if any, shall be paid in three equal instalments of which the first one shall be paid before the expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of communication of the order of grant and the remaining two within such period as may be prescribed; and" (ii) clause (b) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Ordinance, 1994 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 6 of 1994) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
