Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty- seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1986.1 2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Seventh day of May, 1986 Karnataka Act No. 20 of 1986 repealed by the Karnataka Act No. 22 of 2000. w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 90 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964), the following Chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely - "Chapter VII-A Construction of Water Course through Land of Another 90-A. Construction of water course through land belonging to other persons -(1) If the State Government or a co-operative farm or any person (hereinafter in this chapter called the applicant), desires to construct a water course to take water for the purpose of agriculture from a source of water to which he or the State Government or such farm is entitled, but such water course is to be constructed through any land which belongs to, or is in possession of, another person (hereinafter in this Chapter called the neighbouring holder), and if no private agreement is arrived at for such construction between the applicant and the neighbouring holder, the person desiring to construct the water course may make an application in the prescribed form to the Tahsildar. Explanation -For the purposes of this Chapter "Co-operative farm" means a co-operative farm as defined in the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1962) and "Neighbouring holder" shall include any person to whom the land belongs and all persons holding through or under him. (2) On receipt of the application, if the Tahsildar after making an inquiry and after giving to the neighbouring holder and all other persons interested in the land an opportunity of stating any objection to the application, is satisfied that for ensuring the full and efficient use for agriculture of the land belonging to the applicant, it is necessary to construct the water course, he may by order in writing direct the neighbouring holder to permit the applicant to construct the water course subject to the following conditions, namely - (a) the water course shall be constructed through such land in such direction and manner as is agreed upon by the parties or failing such agreement, as directed by the Tahsildar so as to cause as little damage to the land through which it is constructed, as may be possible; (b) where the water course consists of pipes, the pipes shall be laid at a depth of not less than two feet from the surface of the land; (c) where the water course is a water channel, the channel shall not exceed five feet in width; (d) the applicant shall pay to the neighbouring holder - (i) such compensation for any damage caused to such land by reason of the construction of the water course injuriously affecting such land; and (ii) such annual rent; As the Tahsildar may decide to be reasonable. (e) the applicant shall maintain the water course in a good condition and a fit state of repairs; (f) the applicant shall within the prescribed period execute an agreement in the prescribed form in favour of the neighbouring holder; (g) such other conditions as may be prescribed or as the Tahsildar may think fit to impose. (3) An order made under sub-section (2) shall direct how the amount of compensation shall be apportioned among the neighbouring holder and all other persons interested in the land. (4) Any order made under sub-section (2) shall after the applicant executes an agreement as required under clause (f) of sub-section (2) be a complete authority to him or to any agent or other person employed by him for the purpose to enter upon the land specified in the order with assistants or workmen and to do all such work as may be necessary for the construction of the water course and for repairing or maintaining the same. 90-B. Failure to pay rent and to keep water course in good repair -If the applicant in whose favour an order under sub- section (2) of Section 90-A was made - (a) fails to pay the amount of compensation or the amount of the rent, it shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue on an application made to the Tahsildar by the person entitled thereto; (b) fails to maintain the water course in good condition and fit state of repairs, he shall be liable to pay such compensation as may be determined by the Tahsildar for any damage caused on account of such failure. 90-C. Removal or discontinuance of water course -(1) If a person intends to remove or discontinue the water course constructed under the authority conferred on him under Section 90-A, he may do so after giving notice to the Tahsildar and the neighbouring holder. (2) In the event of removal or discontinuance of such water course, the person taking the water shall fill in and restore the land to its original condition at his own cost with the least practicable delay. If he fails to do so, the neighbouring holder may apply to the Tahsildar who shall require such person to fill in and restore the land to its original condition." 
