Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-eighth year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2007. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the eleventh day of December 2006.
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter XIV of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964), the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely:- "Chapter XIV-A : Offences And Penalties 192A. Offences and Penalties - Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act or the rules made thereunder whoever commits any of the offence specified in column (2) of the Table below, shall on conviction by a judicial Magistrate of first class for each of such offence be punishable with the sentence indicated in column (3) thereof,- TABLE Sl.No. Offence Punishment (1) (2) (3) (1) Unlawfully enters or occupies on any Government land with the intention of holding that Government land. Provided that it shall not apply to cases of Jamma, Bane lands in Coorg District or encroached government lands regularised or pending for regularization before the Committee constituted under sections 94A, 94B and 94C of the Act. Imprisonment for one year and fine of rupees five thousand (2) Cheats and thereby dishonestly creates documents for the purpose of selling, mortgaging or transferring by gift or otherwise of any Government land. Imprisonment for three years and fine of rupees ten thousand (3) Creates a forged document regarding Government lands with an intention to use it for that purpose or to grab such land. Imprisonment for three years and fine of rupees five thousand (4) Being a Revenue Officer entrusted with the responsibility of reporting unlawful occupation of Government land or initiating action to remove such unauthorised occupiers fails to report or take action to remove such unlawful occupants. Provided that it shall not apply to cases of Jamma, Bane lands in Coorg District or encroached government lands regularised or pending for regularization before the Committee constituted under sections 94A, 94B and 94C of the Act: Imprisonment for three years and fine of rupees ten thousand. (5) Sells any agricultural land for non-agricultural purposeswithout getting such land converted or without obtaining prior approval of the competent authority. Provided that it shall not apply to cases which are regularized by the government by formulating a special scheme in this behalf Imprisonment for three years and fine of rupees ten thousand. (6) Creates a forged document, regarding conversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural use or authorising the holder of agricultural land to use for non-agricultural purpose. Imprisonment for one year and fine of rupees five thousand. (7) Being a public servant entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining records or entrusted with the responsibility of reporting unlawful conversion to thecompetent authority fails to report to the competent authority or to initiate action against unlawful conversion of revenue lands for non-agricultural purposes. Provided that it shall not apply to cases which are regularized by the government by formulating a special scheme in this behalf Imprisonment for three years and fine of rupees ten thousand (8) Contravenes any lawful order passed under this Act. With fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for the first offence and five times the fine for the second and subsequent offences. 192B. Abetment of offences - Whoever abets any offence punishable by or under this Act or attempts to commit any such offence shall be punished with the penalty provided by or under this Act for committing such offence. 192C. Punishment under other laws not barred - Nothing in this Act shall prevent any person from being prosecuted and punished under any other law for the time being in force for any Act or omission made punishable by or under this Act: Provided that no person shall be so prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. 192D. Cognizance of Offences - Offences under this Chapter, shall be cognisable."
Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Land Revenue (Amendment) Ordinance, 2006 (Karnataka Ordinance 3 of 2006) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka G.K. Boregowda Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation 
