Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979.1 2 (2) This section, Sections 2, 3, 5 and 6 shall come into force at once and Sections 4 and 7 shall be deemed to have come into force on the Second day of September, 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-first day of February, 1979 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), after the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted namely: "Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of which figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the years 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census."
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act, sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act - (1) in the proviso to sub-section (1) as in force prior to the eighth day of December, 1976, for the words "one year" the words "twenty four months" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of January, 1973; (2) for sub-section (1) and the proviso thereto as so amended the following sub-sections shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the Eighth day of December, 1976, namely - "(1) The term of office of a councilor - (a) elected at a general election shall be four years - Provided that the Government may, by notification, for reasons to be specified therein, extend, either prospectively, or retrospectively the term of office of such councillors by such period or periods as it deems fit; so however, that the total period so extended shall not exceed twenty-four months; (b) appointed under Section 12 shall be one year or till a councillor is elected in the vacancy, whichever is earlier. (1-A). The term of office of councillors elected at a general election or appointed under Section 12 shall commence on the date of publication of their names under Section 20 or immediately after the expiry of the term of office of the outgoing councillors, whichever is later. Where the names are so published on more than one date the date by which the names of not less than two thirds of the total number of councillors has been published shall be deemed to be the date of the publication of names for the purpose of this sub-section. (3) in sub-section (2), the words "or appointed" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "40. Resignation - (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a councillor may resign his membership and a president or a vice-president may resign his membership or office as president or vice-president by giving notice in writing to that effect - (a) to the Deputy Commissioner in the case of Town Municipal Council; (b) to the Commissioner in the case of a City Municipal Council. (2) The resignation under sub-section (1) shall take effect on the expiry of the tenth day after the receipt of the notice of resignation unless withdrawn in the meanwhile."
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (11) of Section 42 of the principal Act - (1) in the first proviso for the words "second year" the words "every second year" shall be substituted; (2) for the second and third provisos the following proviso shall be substituted, namely: "Provided further that the period limited under the preceding proviso whether limited before or after the date of commencement of Section 6 of the Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any decree or order of any court, operate only during the term of the municipal council consenting to such limitation."
Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Municipalities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1978 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 8 of 1978) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been taken made or issued under the principal Act as amended by this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded by any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
