Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition Act, 1954. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition Act, 1954, (Mysore Act 1 of 1955); Be it enacted by the Mysore State Legislature in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956.1 Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-eighth day of June, 1956
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 9 of the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition Act, 1954, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely - "9-A. Other Tenants of Inamdar -Every tenant of the inamdar, other than the tenants entitled to be registered as occupants under Sections 4, 5 and 6, shall, with effect on and from the date of vesting and subject to the provisions of Chapter III-A, be entitled to continue as a tenant of the land in respect of which he was a tenant immediately before the date of vesting".
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the principal Act, (1) for the heading, the following heading shall be substituted, namely - "Determination of claims under Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 9-A." (2) In sub-section (1), after the words and figure "as holder under Section 8", the words, figure and letter "or in respect of which any person claims to be continued as tenant under Section 9-A" shall be inserted.
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely - "Chapter III-A Provisions applicable to tenants continued under Section 9-A 26-A. Application of this Chapter -The provisions of this chapter shall apply to tenants continued under Section 9-A. 26-B. Rent -Every tenant shall pay to the inamdar (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the landlord) the reasonable rent in respect of the land held by such tenant: Provided that such rent shall in no case exceed the maximum rent fixed for the time being under the Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952. Explanation -In this section "reasonable rent" means the rent determined by the prescribed authority having regard to the factors specified in sub-section (3) of Section 12 of the Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952. 26-C. Continuation of tenancy on the death of a tenant -If a tenant dies, the landlord shall continue the tenancy on the same terms and conditions on which such tenant was holding it at the time of his death in favour of the heir or heirs of the deceased tenant unless such heir or heirs do not agree to continue the tenancy on the same terms and conditions on which the deceased tenant was holding the land: Explanation -For the purpose of this section an heir means any one of the following relatives of the deceased tenant - (a) Son (b) Sons son (c) Sons sons son (d) Widow (e) Daughter (f) Daughters son (g) Mother (h) Father (i) Daughters daughter (j) Brother (k) Sister (l) Brothers son (m) Sisters son Provided that where the deceased tenant is survived by more relatives than one, the relative specified earlier in the order set out above shall exclude all others coming after him: Provided further that in any case in which the tenant was a manager of a joint Hindu family, the person who succeeds as the manager of such family shall be deemed to be the heir. 26-D. Termination of the tenancy -The tenancy of any land held by a tenant shall not be terminated unless such tenant - (i) has failed to pay the rent of such land for any year; (ii) has done any act which is destructive or permanently injurious to the land; (iii) has failed without reasonable cause to cultivate the land for a period of two consecutive years; (iv) has without reasonable cause left the land follow; (v) has sublet the land or assigned his interest in the land; or (vi) has used such land for a purpose other than agriculture: Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to sub-letting of any land held by a tenant who is a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or a widow or a minor or who is subject to physical or mental disability or who being not more than twenty-one years of age is a student: Provided also that when eviction is sought under clause (i) or (ii), the tenant shall be entitled to relief in accordance with the provisions of Section 25 or 24, as the case may be, of the Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952, for the time being in force. 26-E. Application of Mysore Act XIII of 1952 -Save as otherwise provided in Sections 26-B, 26-C and 26-D, the provisions of the Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952, for the time being in force, shall govern the relations of the landlord and tenant".
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka Section 36 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In column 3 of the Schedule to the principal Act, for the figures "15" and "20" wherever they occur, the figures "25" shall be substituted. 
