Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty sixth year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1995.1 2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the 30th day of April, 1995 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 114 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted namely:- "114-A. Review by the Commissioner - Where the Commissioner, either suo motu or otherwise, after such enquiry as he considers necessary is satisfied that any transfer of title under Section 114 was got recorded in the Corporation register by fraud misrepresentation, or suppression of facts or by furnishing false incorrect or incomplete material, he may within a period of the years from the date of such recording of transfer of title reopen to case and pass such order with respect thereto as he thinks fit: Provided that no such order shall be made except after giving the person likely to be affected thereby a reasonable opportunity of being heard."
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 178 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely - "178-A. Decision of claims to the property by or against the Corporation - (1) In any city to which a survey of lands other than lands ordinary used for the purpose of agriculture only has been or shall be extended under any law for the time being in force, where any property is claimed by or on behalf of the Corporation or by any person as against the Corporation it shall be lawful for the Divisional Commissioner of the concerned revenue division after enquiry of which due notice has been given, to pass an order deciding the claims. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may appeal to the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal, and the decision of the Tribunal shall be final. (3) Any person shall be deemed to have had due notice of an enquiry or order under this section if the notice has been given in the prescribed number." 
