Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for the development of Cigarette-tobacco cultivation and for safeguarding the interests of Cigarette-tobacco cultivators in the 1 [State of Mysore except Bellary District.] Whereas, it is expedient, for the fostering and development of Cigarette-tobacco cultivation in the 2 [State of Mysore except Bellary District,] to take power for controlling and regulating the quality of the seed supply and the curing and marketing of Cigarette-tobacco in the State and for safeguarding the interests of tobacco cultivators; It is hereby enacted as follows: The Mysore Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953 The Mysore Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939.1 Received the assent of His Highness the Maharaja on the Seventh day of February, 1938
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It extends to the 1 [whole of the State of Mysore except Bellary District]. (2) It shall come into operation from such date as the 2 [State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct. The Mysore Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953 Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (a) "Cigarette-tobacco" shall include the following varieties, namely, Harrison Special, Cash, Adcock, Burley and all other flue-cured varieties of tobacco used for the manufacture of cigarettes; (b) "Barn" means any structure in which green tobacco leaf is cured by heat radiating from flue-pipes or tubes connected with an oven or a plant generating steam or electricity; (c) "Seed-bed" means earthen beds in which tobacco seed is sown and seedlings raised; (d) "Licence" means a licence granted under this Act and 'Licensed' and 'Licensee' shall have corresponding meanings; (e) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It shall be lawful for the 1 [State Government] to grant to any person or persons on such conditions and for such periods as may seem fit, licences for raising seed-beds for supply of seedlings to growers and for the construction of barns for curing Cigarette-tobacco. (2) Such conditions in regard to seed-beds may specify the source from which the seed shall be obtained, the places where seed-beds are to be located, the area of the seed-bed, the maximum price at which seedlings shall be sold to growers, the preventive measures to be taken against insect pests and plant diseases and other matters relating to the proper preparation of seedlings. (3) Such conditions in regard to the construction of barns by growers to cure tobacco grown by them may specify the localities and places where they are to be constructed, the kind of material to be used, the dimensions and design of the barns, the oven, and flue-pipes and chimneys. (4) Where such barns are proposed to be constructed by curers for curing tobacco grown by cultivators, such conditions may also prescribe and limit the zones within which they may take up the curing of tobacco grown by cultivators and the distance to be observed from the nearest existing barn and also the extent of tobacco area corresponding to a barn. Such conditions may further prescribe that the owners of such barns shall undertake to purchase all the green tobacco leaf grown in the zone allotted to their barns at not less than the minimum price fixed by the 2 [State Government] in this behalf, suitable agreements being en into by them in writing with the growers before transplantation of seedlings. Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956 Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka It shall not be lawful for any person after the expiration of three months from the coming into force of this Act to carry on the business of raising seedbeds or the construction of barns for curing Cigarette-tobacco except under the authority and subject to the terms and conditions of a licence granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka The decision of the 2 [State Government] as to whether a licence may or may not be granted shall be final. Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956 Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka The 1 [State Government] may by special or general order require the applicant for a licence or a licensee or any person who, being a partner, proprietor, manager or an officer of a company or factory, is able to give information required for the purposes of this Act, to furnish such information within such time as they may fix. Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka For the purpose of this Act and the rules framed thereunder, the Director of Agriculture or any officer authorised by him shall have the right of access to any land or premises wherein tobacco seed-beds, or curing barns are located and into any land where Cigarette-tobacco is cultivated for inspection with reference to the prevalence of insect pests or plant diseases and to all other relevant matters within the purview of this Act and the Rules thereunder.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka The Director of Agriculture or any officer to whom this power is delegated by him with the approval of 1 [State Government], shall have the power to order the destruction of all tobacco seedlings or plants which in his opinion are so badly infested with pest or diseases or parasite as to be a source of the spread of such pest, disease or parasite. The decision of the Director of Agriculture on this point shall be final. Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka On default of the party to comply with an order under Section 9, the Director of Agriculture or the officer empowered by him shall have the power to arrange for the destruction of such affected plants, the cost incurred for such destruction being recoverable in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka The owners of curing barns in the 1 [State of Mysore except Bellary District] shall submit such returns as may be required for the purposes of this Act, in such forms, on such dates and to such authority as may be prescribed by rules framed thereunder. The Mysore Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka Where tobacco is graded and sold, the grading shall be done in the manner prescribed in the rules.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred or in case of continued contravention with a fine which may extend to rupees fifty for everyday during which the contravention is continued after conviction therefor. (2) Any person who - (a) refuses or neglects to furnish any information required to be furnished for the purpose of this Actor Rules made thereunder; (b) refuses access to the Director of Agriculture or officer authorised by him for inspection of seed-beds, cultivation and curing, or (c) fraudulently uses or permits to be used any licence issued under this Act; shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one hundred.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka Where the person guilty of an offence under this Act, is - (a) an Association or Firm, every partner, member, manager or, secretary and other officer thereof who is knowingly a party to the default, or acts in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the Rules framed thereunder, and (b) a Company, every Director, Manager, Secretary and other officer thereof who is knowingly a party to the default, or acts in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the Rules framed thereunder, shall also be guilty of the like offence and liable to the like punishment.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka No offence made punishable by this Act or by any rule made thereunder shall be tried by a Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except with the sanction of the Director of Agriculture.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka No suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against any person in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
Mysore Cigarette-tobacco Safeguarding Act, 1939_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The 1 [State Government] may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide for - (a) the fixing of the minimum price or prices at which the green tobacco leaf shall be purchased by the curers; (b) the maximum price at which seedlings shall be sold to growers from the licensed seed-beds, (c) the levying of fees in respect of licences granted under this Act; (d) the conditions and limitations subject to which and the authority by whom a licence may be granted; (e) the establishing of advisory committees for the purpose of fixing the price or prices at which green Cigarette-tobacco leaf shall be purchased by a curer and defining the powers, functions and procedure of such committees, (f) the records, registers and accounts to be maintained for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act, (g) fixing the grades of cured tobacco, and (h) the returns which the owners of curing barns have to submit, the forms in which, the dates on which and the authority to whom such returns shall be submitted. Substituted for the word "Government" by Act No. 1 of 1956 
