Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows, namely-
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th day of August, 2013.
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977) (hereinafter referred to as the 'principal Act'), in Section 58, after sub-section (20), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(20-A) Removal of unauthorised cable including Optical Fibre Cables laid under, over, along, the across, in or upon any streets or property vested in the Corporation".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 255 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (ii), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(ii-a) make necessary arrangement for collection of solid waste from owners or occupiers as the case may be".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 256 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "256. Public notice ordering deposit of rubbish and filth by occupier - (1) The Commissioner may, by public notice, direct that all rubbish and filth accumulating in any premises in any street or quarter of the city specified in the notice shall be collected by the owner or occupier of such premises, and after segregating it, hand it over to the concerned collector of solid waste or dispose it in such manner as may be specified in the notification, different manner may be specified in respect of different kind of solid wastes. (2) The Commissioner may cause solid wastes are collected and disposed at suitable intervals and in proper and convenient situation in respect of which no notice issued under sub-section (1) is for the time being in force, and may by public notice direct that all rubbish and filth accumulating in any premises, are segregated and handed over or disposed off in accordance with such rules or bye-law as may be made in this regard".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 257 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "257. Removal of rubbish and filth accumulating in large quantities on premises - When any premises are used for carrying on any manufacture, trade or business or in any way so that rubbish or filth or any solid waste is accumulated in quantities which are, in the opinion of the Commissioner, too considerable to be segregated and deposited or handed over to concerned in any of the methods specified, by a notice issued under Section 256, the Commissioner may- (a) by notice require the owner or occupier of such premises to collect all rubbish and filth or any solid waste after segregation accumulating thereon, and to remove the same at such times, in such carts or receptacles, and by such routes as may be specified in the notice to a depot or place provided or appointed under Section 255; or (b) after giving such owner or occupier notice of his intention, cause all rubbish and filth or solid waste accumulated in such premises to be segregated and removed and charge the said owner or occupier for such removal such periodical fee as may, with the sanction of the standing committee, be specified in the notice issued under clause (a)".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 258 of the principal Act, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), after the words "all things", the words "collected or" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 262 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punished with fine; which may extend to five hundred rupees and with further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day on which such offence is continued, after the date of the first conviction and if any person is convicted for the fifth time of an offence for the contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 421 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 423 of the principal Act- (a) in sub-section (7), after clause (b), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(bb) for the regulation of the laying of any cable including Optical Fibre Cables and imposing the conditions thereof and levying of such fees or annual track rent on the cable including Optical Fibre Cables so laid"; (b) after sub-section (29), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(30) Manner of segregation and disposal of solid waste including bulk generation of solid waste and bio-medical solid waste and penalty for contravention of the same".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 424 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "424. Power to give retrospective effect to certain bye-laws and penalties for breaches of bye-laws - (1) Bye-laws with regard to the drainage of, and supply of water to, buildings and water closets, earth closets, privies, ash-pits, solid waste management and cesspools in connection with buildings and the keeping of water closets supplied with sufficient water for flushing may be made so as to affect buildings erected before the making of bye-laws under this Act. (2) In making any bye-law under Section 423 and this section the Corporation may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable- (a) with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and in case of a continuing breach, with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees for every day during which the breach continues after conviction for the first breach; or (b) with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the breach continues after receipt of notice from the Commissioner to discontinue such breach".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 431 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely- "431-A. Penalties for failure to comply with the Solid Waste Management Scheme - (1) It shall be the duty of every owner or occupier generating of solid waste to comply with any notification issued by the State Government, Bye-laws framed by the Corporation, Order, Circular or Public notice issued by the Commissioner or other authority regarding the manner of ensuring cleanliness, sanitation, handling, Transport, processing and disposal of Solid Wastes. (2) Whoever commits any act of commission or omission which is likely to obstruct, impair or fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (1) or the Solid Waste Management Scheme for the time being in force or commits any offence specified in column (2) of Schedule XIII shall on conviction be punished with fine as specified column (3) of the Schedule XIII and on continued offence with fine as specified in column (4) thereof or which may extend to rupees one thousand. (3) The Corporation may by making bye-law alter, amend or vary any of the entries in Schedule XIII. Explanation - For the purpose of this section "Solid Waste Management Scheme" means a series of measures taken by the Corporation for the purpose of effective handling, collection, transport, processing and disposal of Municipal Solid Wastes for discharge of its obligations enumerated under the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 issued by the Central Government under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (Central Act 29 of 1986) or any other provisions of law as may be applicable for management of Municipal Solid Wastes. 431-B. Compounding of offence - Any officer authorised by the Commissioner not below the rank of Group 'B' officer may accept, in the prescribed manner, from any person who has committed or it reasonably suspected of having committed an offence punishable under sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 431-A, such sum of money specified in Schedule XIII or any sum of money as may be prescribed, by way of composition of the offence which such person has committed or is reasonably suspected of having committed and on the payment of such sum of money to the Authorised Officer such person, if in custody, shall be set at liberty and no further proceedings shall be taken against such person with reference to the same act".
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Schedule XI to the principal Act, entries pertaining to Sections 256(1), 256(2), 257(b), 263(1), 263(2), 263(3), 263(4) and 263(5) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka After Schedule XII of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely- "Schedule XIII [See Section 431-A] SI. No. Act of Commission or Omission Penalty for the first offence Penalty for the second and subsequent offence 1. Littering, spitting, urinating, open defecating or committing other acts of nuisance on Road, Bus Station, Railway Station, Street, Playground, Park and other Premises of Public Utility. Rs. 100/- Rs. 200/- 2. Failure to segregate Dry Waste from Wet Waste and hand over the same separately to collector of waste in accordance with the Notification, Bye-laws, Public Notice or circular issued by the Competent Authority from time to time:  (i) by any domestic occupier Rs. 100/- Rs. 500/- (ii) by any bulk generator or commercial complex Rs. 500/- Rs. 1000/- 3. Failure to comply with any lawful directions issued by the Commissioner to ensure cleanliness and hygiene of Road, Bus Station, Railway Station, Street, Playground, Park and other Premises of Public utility. Rs. 100/- Rs. 200/- 4. Failure to segregate and hand over garden waste, inert waste, sanitary, non-Bio degradable and Bio-medical waste or any other category Waste separately to the Corporation for the purpose of handling and transportation of the Wastes in the manner specified by the Corporation. Rs. 500/- Rs. 1000/- 5. Irregular deposit of rubbish or filth or any solid waste Rs. 100/- Rs. 200/- 6. Allowing filth to flow in streets Rs. 100/- Rs. 200/- 7. Depositing carcasses of animals or filth in improper place Rs. 100/- Rs. 200/- 8. Dumping of building waste irregularly Rs. 1000/- Rs. 5000/-". 
