Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to make provision for the administration of the Labour Department in the State of Mysore and for certain other matters. Whereas, it is expedient to make provision for the administration of the Labour Department in the State of Mysore and for certain other matters. It is hereby enacted as follows -
Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1951. Received the assent of the President on the Eighth day of May, 1952
Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act - (1) "Assistant Commissioner" means an Assistant Commissioner of Labour in Mysore; (2) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Labour in Mysore; (3) "Government" means the State Government; (4) "Local area" means any area notified as such by the Government.
Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Mysore Gazette, appoint a person to be the Commissioner. His jurisdiction shall extend throughout the State of Mysore. (2) The Commissioner shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be conferred or imposed on him by or under any law for the time being in force, in Mysore. (3) The Government may, by notification in the Mysore Gazette, appoint Assistant Commissioners for any local area or areas. Such Assistant Commissioners shall, subject to the control and supervision of the Commissioner, exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the Commissioner as may be delegated by him.
Mysore Labour (Administration) Act, 1952_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka The Mysore Labour Act, 1942, is hereby repealed: Provided that any appointment or delegation made under the said Act shall be deemed to have been made under this Act: Provided further that all Labour Associations registered under the said Act shall be deemed to be trade unions registered under the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926 (Central Act XVI of 1926). 
