Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions Act, 1927. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions Act, 1927 (Mysore Act 7 of 1927) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the Eighteenth day of May, 1980
Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions Act, 1927 (Mysore Act 7 of 1927) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) in Chapter II, after Section 12, the following section shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- "12-A. Muzrai Establishment Fund -(1) The Government may, by order, establish for the State a fund called the Muzrai Establishment Fund. The fund shall be operated and maintained by such officer and in such manner as the Government may, from time to time, direct. (2) The said fund shall consist of- (a) contributions made under sub-section (3); (b) sums allotted or granted by the Government or by any local authority; (c) any other sum which may be directed to be credited to the fund by or under the Act. (3) (a) Every Muzrai Institution shall, every year, contribute to the fund constituted under sub-section (1) - (i) such percentage of its income as the Government may, from time to time, fix; (ii) such reserve amount as the Government may, from time to time, by order, determine. (b) The contributions payable under clause (a) shall be paid and recovered in such manner as the Government may from time to time direct".
Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 21 of the principal Act - (1) in the first paragraph for the words "Muzrai Officer one of the defendants", the words, "Commissioner for Endowments and Muzrai Officer as defendants" shall be substituted. (2) in the second paragraph- (a) the words "if no such suit has been filed or it has been filed and dismissed by the Court", and the words "the lapse of six months from the date of" shall be omitted; (b) for the words "or after the dismissal of the suit as the case may be", the words and figures "under Sections 18, 19 or 20" shall be substituted.
Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or any other authority any Muzrai establishment Fund established, and any contribution levied and collected or purported to have been levied and collected from the Muzrai Institutions, under the principal Act or under any order or rule made thereunder or under any other order before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been validly established and levied and collected and shall have effect for all purposes as if it had been established, levied and collected in accordance with the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by Section 2 of this Act, and accordingly no suit or other legal proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any Court or before any authority on the ground that such establishment, levy and collection were not authorised by law-and no Court, or authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any contribution so paid. 
