Mysore Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition Act, 1954 and the Mysore (Religious and Charitable) Inams Abolition Act, 1955. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Mysore (Personal and Miscellaneous) Inams Abolition Act, 1955 (Mysore Act 1 of 1955) and the Mysore (Religious and Charitable) Inams Abolition Act, 1955 (Mysore Act 18 of 1955). Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Mysore Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Mysore Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973.1 Received the assent of the President on the Fourteenth day of December, 1973
Mysore Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Mysore (Religious and Charitable) Inams Abolition Act, 1955 (Mysore Act 18 of 1955),- (1) in Section 2, after Clause (12), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(12-a) Protected tenant means a tenant of any land comprised in a minor inam, if he has held it continuously and cultivated it personally for a period of not less than twelve years prior to the 1st day of July, 1970". (2) after Section 5, the following section shall be inserted namely:- "5-A. Protected tenant to be registered as occupant on certain conditions -(1) Subject to the provision of sub-section (2), every protected tenant shall on and from the date of vesting be entitled to be registered as an occupant in respect of all lands of which he was a protected tenant immediately before the date of vesting. (2) In addition to the annual land revenue payable in respect of the land, a protected tenant entitled to be registered as an occupant of any land under sub-section (1) shall be liable to pay to the Government, as premium for acquisition of ownership of that land, an amount equal to fifty times such land revenue plus in the case of lands classified as dry but possessing facilities for irrigation from any source of water which is the property of the Government- (i) Where two crops of paddy can be raised in a year or where sugarcane can be raised. Rupees three hundred and thirty per acre. (ii) Where one crop of paddy can be raised in a year. Rupees two hundred and twenty per acre. (iii) Where semi-dry crops can be grown. Rupees one hundred and ten per acre. The amount of premium shall be payable in not more than ten annual installments along with the annual land revenue and in default of such payment the amount due shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue due on the land in respect of which it is payable". (3) in Section 6, the proviso shall be omitted. (4) after Section 6, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "6-A. Pujari, Archak, etc., to be registered as occupant on certain conditions -(1) Where the inamdar is an institution of religious worship, a person- (i) rendering religious service in or maintaining the institution as a pujari, archak or the holder of a similar office by whatever name called; or (ii) rendering any service in such institution, and personally cultivating for a continuous period of not less than three years prior to the date of vesting by contributing his own physical labour or that of the members of his family and enjoying the benefits of any land comprised in the inam of such institution without paying rent as such in money or kind to that institution in respect of such land, shall, with effect from and on the date of vesting and subject to the provisions of Section 27-A be entitled to be registered as an occupant of such land. (2) In addition to the annual land revenue payable in respect of the land, a person entitled to be registered as an occupant of any land under sub-section (1) shall be liable to pay to the State Government as premium for ownership of that land an amount equal to one hundred times the land revenue of such land plus in the case of lands classified as dry but possessing facilities for irrigation from any source of water which is the property of the Government,- (i) Where two crops of paddy can be raised in a year or where sugarcane can be raised. Rupees six hundred and sixty per acre. (ii) Where one crop of paddy can be raised in a year. Rupees four hundred and forty per acre. (iii) Where semi-dry crops can be grown. Rupees two hundred and twenty per acre. The amount of premium shall be payable in not more than ten annual installments along with the annual land revenue and in default of such payment the amount due shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue due on the land in respect of which it is payable". (5) in Section 7, in Clause (ii) of sub-section (1) for the figures and word "4 or 5" the figures, letters and word "4, 5, 5-A or 6-A" shall be substituted. (6) in Section 8, in Clause (ii) of sub-section (1) for the figures and word "4, 5 or 7", the figures, word and letters "4, 5, 5-A, 6-A or 7" shall be substituted. (7) in Section 9 - (i) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures "a kadim tenant, a permanent tenant, the holder of a minor inam, or an inamdar claims to be registered as occupant under Sections 4, 5, 7 and 8", the words, figures and letters "a person claims to be registered as an occupant under Sections 4, 5, 5-A, 6-A, 7 and 8" shall be substituted. (ii) in clause (a) of sub-section (2),- (a) after the figure "5" the figures and letters "5-A, 6-A," shall be inserted. (b) for sub-clauses (i) and (ii), the following sub-clauses shall be substituted, namely:- "(i) in respect of lands in inams which have vested in the State before the commencement of the Karnataka Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973, within one year from the date of commencement of the said Amendment Act, and (ii) in respect of lands in inams which vest in the State on or after the commencement of the Karnataka Inams Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1973, within one year from the date of vesting of the inams concerned". (8) in sub-section (1) of Section 10,- (i) the words "whether a kadim tenant, a permanent tenant, the holder of a minor inam or an inamdar" shall be omitted, and (ii) after the figure "5", figures and letters "5-A, 6-A", shall be inserted. (9) in Section 23, in the proviso, for the words and figures "the maximum rent fixed under the Mysore Tenancy Act, 1952", the words and figures "the rent payable according to the Karnataka Land Reforms Act 1961" shall be substituted. (10) for Section 27, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "27. Tenant where to be registered as occupant -A tenant on payment to the Government of an amount equal to one hundred times the land revenue payable in respect of that land plus in the case of lands classified as dry but possessing facilities for irrigation from any source of water which is the property of the Government, (i) Where two crops or paddy can be raised in a year or where sugarcane can be raised. Rupees six hundred and sixty per acre. (ii) Where one crop of paddy can be raised in a year. Rupees four hundred and forty per acre. (iii) Where semi-dry crops can be grown. Rupees two hundred and twenty per acre. shall be registered as an occupant of such land and such amount shall be payable in not more than ten annual installments and on or before such dates as may be fixed by the prescribed authority". (11) in Chapter IV, after Section 27, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "27-A. Extent of land which a person may be registered as an occupant -The extent of land in respect of which a person referred to in Section 6 or Section 6-A shall be entitled to be registered as an occupant shall not together with any land held by him exceed such extent as may be prescribed". 
