Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Mysore Act 25 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the Mysore State Legislature in the Twenty-first year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970. (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April 1970.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Mysore Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (1) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(o-1) "miller" means a person who engages himself in rice milling operations in a rice mill or in causing operations in an oil mill or in dehusking in a decorticating factory, and includes a person who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of such mill or decorticating factory and when the said affairs are entrusted to a manager, managing director or managing agent, such manager, managing director or managing agent; Explanation. - For the purpose of this clause, - (i) "rice mill" means the plant and machinery with which, and the premises including the precincts thereof in which or in any part of which rice milling operation is carried on; (ii) "oil mill" means the plant and machinery with which oil is extracted from oil-seeds; and (iii) "decorticating factory" means any machinery with which the groundnut seeds are separated from groundnuts (with husk);"; (2) after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(t-1) "State Representative" means any person appointed to be the State Representative under section 3;"
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the principal Act, - (1) in the heading, after the words "Commercial Tax Officers", the words "State Representative" shall be inserted; (2) the existing section shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and in the sub-section as so renumbered, after the words "Commercial Tax Officers", the words "a State Representative" shall be inserted; (3) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(2) In proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal, the State Representative shall be competent - (i) to prepare and sign applications, appeals and other documents, (ii) to appear, represent, act and plead, (iii) to receive notices and other processes, and (iv) to do all other acts connected with such proceedings, on behalf of the State Government or any officer appointed under this Act.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 5 of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (1), - (a) the first proviso shall be omitted; and (b) in the second proviso, - (i) for the words "Provided further that", the words "Provided that" shall be substituted; (ii) the words "bread, vermicelli" shall be omitted; (iii) the words "turmeric and turmeric powder" shall be omitted; (iv) for the words "gunny bags and bardans and hessian cloth", the words and brackets "gunny bags, bardans (including batars) and hessian cloth" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (4), the second proviso shall be omitted; (3) in clause (a) of sub-section (5), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "6. Levy of purchase tax under certain circumstances-Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 5, every dealer who in the course of his business purchases any taxable goods in circumstances in which no tax under section 5 is leviable on the sale price of such goods and, (i) either consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise or disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State, or (ii) despatches them to a place outside the State except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, shall be liable to pay tax on the purchase price of such goods at the same rate at which it would have been leviable on the sale price of such goods under section 5 : Provided that this section shall not apply - (i) in respect of sale or purchase of goods specified in the Fourth Schedule, and (ii) in respect of sale or purchase of goods specified in the Second Schedule which have already been subject to a tax under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 5."
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(3) Every miller whether he is a dealer or not shall get himself registered under this Act.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10-A of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "six rupees", the words "twenty-five rupees" shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (4) and the proviso thereto, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(4) (a) The prescribed authority shall, for good and sufficient reasons, demand from any dealer liable to pay tax under this Act and, who has been registered or has applied for renewal of registration, security for the proper payment of tax payable by him and on such demand such dealer shall furnish the same. (b) The amount of security payable under clause (a) shall not exceed, - (i) in the case of dealers who have opted to pay tax under section 17, an amount equivalent to three months compounded rate fixed for that year, and (ii) in other cases, an amount equivalent to one-half of the tax anticipated to be payable by the dealer for that year : Provided that the assessing authority shall have power to demand at any time additional security if such authority has reason to believe that the security fixed was too low. (c) The security paid under this sub-section in any year shall be maintained in full until it is dispensed with by the assessing authority on being satisfied that the reasons for its demand no longer exist or until the registration certificate is cancelled whichever is earlier."
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of section 12 of the principal Act, - (i) for the words "Every dealer whose turnover is ten thousand rupees". the words, figures and letters "Notwithstanding anything contained in section 12B, every dealer whose turnover is twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and (ii) for the words "every registered dealer", the words, brackets and figures "every dealer who is liable to get himself registered under sub-section (2) of section 10" shall be substituted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be and shall always be deemed to have been inserted, namely :- "12-A. Assessment of escaped turnover. - (1) Where for any reason the whole or any part of the turnover of a dealer has escaped assessment to tax or licence fee or has assessed at a lower rate than the rate at which it is assessable, the assessing authority may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), at any time within a period of five years from the expiry of the year to which the tax or licence fee relates, proceed to assess to the best of its judgment, the tax or licence fee payable on the turnover referred to after issuing a notice to the dealer and after making such enquiry as it considers necessary. (1-A) In making an assessment under sub-section (1) the assessing authority may, if it is satisfied that the escape from assessment is due to wilful non-disclosure of assessable turnover by the dealer, direct the dealer to pay, in addition to the tax assessed under sub-section (1), a penalty not exceeding one and a half times the tax so assessed : Provided that no penalty under this sub-section shall be imposed unless the dealer affected has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such imposition. (2) In computing the period of limitation for assessment of the escaped turnover under this section, the time during which an assessment has been deferred on account of any stay order granted by any court or other authority in any case, or by reason of the fact that an appeal or other proceeding is pending before the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court, shall be excluded : Provided that nothing contained in this section limiting the time within which any action may be taken or any order, assessment or re-assessment may be made, shall apply to an assessment or re-assessment made on the assessee or any person in consequence of, or to give effect to, any finding, direction or order made under section 20, 21, 22, 23 or 24 or any judgment, or order made by the Supreme Court, the High Court or any other Court.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka For section 12-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "12-B. Payment of tax in advance. - (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, every dealer shall pay in advance every month the tax on his taxable turnover during the preceding month and when such payment is made, he shall send to the assessing authority a statement of his total turnover and taxable turnover during such preceding month. (2) If at the end of the year it is found that the amount of tax paid in advance by any dealer for any month, or for the whole year in the aggregate was less than the tax payable for that month or the tax for the whole year as finally assessed, as the case may be, by more than fifteen per cent., the assessing authority may direct such dealer to pay, in addition to the tax, by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding one and a half times the amount of tax so paid falls short of the tax payable for the month or for the whole year, as the case may be : Provided that no penalty under this sub-section shall be imposed unless the dealer affected had had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such imposition.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (3) of section 13 of the principal Act, after the words "from a dealer", the words "or any other person" shall be and shall always be deemed to have been inserted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In section 17 of principal Act, - (1) in the heading, the words "or licence fee" shall be omitted; (2) in sub-section (1), - (a) the words "or licence fee" shall omitted; (b) in item (ii), - (i) for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (iii) for the words "fifteen rupees per mensem", the words "six hundred rupees per annum." shall be substituted; (c) item (iii) shall be omitted; (d) in item (iv), - (i) for the words "twenty thousand rupees", the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "seventy-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (iii) for the words "twenty-five rupees per mensem", the words "one thousand and two hundred rupees per annum" shall be substituted; (3) in sub-section (2), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "seventy-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of section 18 of the principal Act, for the words "who is not a registered dealer", the words "whose total turnover in any year is less than twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In section 20 of the principal Act, - (1) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(3)(a) No appeal against an order of assessment shall be entertained by the appellate authority unless it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax and penalty not disputed in the appeal. (b) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (1), the tax or other amount shall be paid in accordance with the order against which the appeal has been preferred : Provided that the appellate authority may, in its discretion, give such directions as it thinks fit in regard to the payment of tax or other amount payable under clause (b), if the appellant furnishes sufficient security to its satisfaction in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed."; (2) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(5) In disposing of an appeal, the appellate authority may, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard - (a) in the case of an order of assessment or penalty - (i) confirm, reduce, enhance or annul the assessment or penalty or both; (ii) set aside the assessment and direct the assessing authority to make a fresh assessment after such further enquiry as may be directed; or (iii) pass such other orders as it may think fit; and (b) in the case of any other order, confirm, cancel or vary such order.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In section 22 of the principal Act, the words, figures and letter "section 12-A or" shall be omitted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of section 24 of the principal Act, the words, figures and letter "under section 12-A or" shall be omitted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In section 27 of the principal Act, for the letters and figures "Rs. 20,000", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be added, namely :- "(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the assessment of a dealer whose total turnover for the year which ends on a date after the first day of April, 1970, is more than ten thousand rupees but is less than twenty-five thousand rupees, shall be regulated as follows, namely :- (a) in the case of a dealer permitted to pay any amount by way of composition under section 17, such dealer shall pay the amount due in monthly instalments for the months immediately prior to first April 1970 and shall not be liable to pay monthly instalments for the remaining months thereafter; and (b) in the case of any other dealer, the turnover during the period from the commencement of the year upto the first day of April 1970 shall be liable to tax and licence fee, if any, and his turnover during the remaining period from first April 1970 shall not be liable to tax.".
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) the entries relating to serial numbers 8 and 9 shall be omitted; (2) in column 3 of serial number 10, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (3) after the entry relating to serial number 10, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "11. Druggets, durries and carpets - Two per cent.". (4) in column 3 of serial number 12, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (5) in column 3 of serial number 13, for the words "Three and a half per cent.". the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted. (6) for the entry relating to serial number 14, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "14. Bicycles, tandem, cycles, cycle combinations and parts and accessories and tyres and tubes thereof, perambulators, children's tricycles and similar articles - Six per cent"; (7) in column 3 of serial number 15, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (8) for the entry relating to serial number 16, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- 16. Sheets, cushions, pillows, mattresses and other like articles made of foamed rubber, or plastic foam or other synthetic foam - Twelve per cent."; (9) in column 3 of serial numbers 17 and 18, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (10) in column 3 of serial number 19, for the words "Four and a half per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (11) in column 3 of serial number 20, for the words "Six and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (12) in column 3 of serial number 21, for the words "Seven and a half per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (13) in column 3 of serial number 22, for the words "Four and a half per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (14) in column 3 of serial number 23, for the words "Eight and half per cent.", the words "Ten per cent." shall be substituted; (15) in column 3 of serial number 24, for the words "One and a half per cent.", the words "Two per cent." shall be substituted; (16) in the entry relating to serial number 35, - (i) in column 2, the words "and refined oil" shall be omitted; (ii) in column 3, for the words "Six and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (17) in column 3 of serial number 36, for the words "Six and a half per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (18) in column 3 of serial number 40, for the words "Twelve and a half per cent.", the words "Twenty-five per cent." shall be substituted; (19) after serial number 40, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "41. Medicinal and Pharmaceutical preparations. ... Six per cent." (20) in column 3 of serial numbers 43 and 44, for the words "Five and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (21) in column 3 of serial number 47, for the words "Two and a half per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (22) in column 3 of serial number 49, for the words "Two and a half per cent.", the words "Two per cent." shall be substituted; (23) in column 3 of serial number 50A, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (24) in the entry relating to serial number 51, - (i) in column 2, after the words "Readymade garments", the words "other than hosiery goods" shall be added; (ii) in column 3, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Two per cent." shall be substituted. (25) in column 3 of the serial number 52, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted. (26) in serial number 53, - (i) in column 2, after the words "accumulators", the words "radio dry cell batteries" shall be inserted; (ii) in column 3, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted. (27) in column 3 of serial numbers 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 and 59, for the words "Eleven per cent.". the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (28) in column 3 of serial number 60, for the words "Seven and a half per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted. (29) in column 3 of serial number 61, for the words "Six and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted. (30) in column 3 of serial number 61A, for the words "Four and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted. (31) the entry relating to serial number 62 shall be omitted; (32) in column 3 of serial number 63, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted. (33) for the entry relating to serial number 64, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "64. Precious stones, namely diamonds, emeralds, rubies, real pearls and saphires; and articles in which such precious stones are set - Twelve per cent."; (34) in column 3 of serial number 65, for the words "Eight and a half per cent.", the words "Ten per cent." shall be substituted; (35) in column 3 of serial number 65-A, for the words "Six and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (36) in column 3 of serial number 66, for the words "Eight and a half per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (37) in column 3 of serial number 67, for the words "Nine and a half per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (38) in column 3 of serial number 68, for the words "Four and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (39) in column 3 of serial number 69, for the words "Five and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (40) in column 3 of serial numbers 70, 71 and 72, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted. (41) in serial number 73, - (i) in column 2, the words "rubber and other tyres and tubes and" shall be omitted; (ii) in column 3, for the words "Eleven per cent.", the words "Twelve per cent." shall be substituted; (42) after the entry relating to serial number 73, the following entry shall be inserted, namely,- "73-A. Rubber and other tyres and tubes of motor vehicles ... Ten per cent."; (43) in column 3 of serial number 74, for the words "One per per cent.", the words "Two per cent." shall be substituted; (44) in column 3 of serial number 75, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (45) in column 3 of serial number 77, for the words "Four and a half per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (46) in serial number 78, - (i) in column 2, after the words "Asbestos sheets", the word "Straw-boards" shall be inserted; (ii) in column 3, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (47) in column 3 of serial number 79, for the words "Three and a half per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (48) in column 3 of serial number 80, for the words "Five and a half per cent.", the words "Six per cent." shall be substituted; (49) for the entry relating to serial number 81-A, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "81-A Dusters and Sprayers used for Two per cent." dusting and spraying pesticides and insecticides and their parts and accessories (other than oil engines or electric motors). (50) in column 3 of serial number 81-B, for the words "Two per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (51) in column 3 of serial number 82, for the words "Five per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (52) after the entry relating to serial number 83, the following entries shall be added, namely :- "84. Petrol ... ... Ten per cent. 85. Motor spirits other than petrol ... Twelve per cent. 86. Arecanut ... ... Two per cent. 87 Pepper ... ... Two per cent. 88. Cashew and its kernel ... ... Two per cent. 89. Lubricating oils including grease and Six per cent. furnace oil. 90. Beedi leaves ... ... Six per cent. 91. Tanning barks ... ... Six per cent. 92. Cotton yarn waste and cotton waste ... Six per cent. 93. Confectionery, Biscuits and cakes ... Six per cent. 94. Washing soaps, including soap flakes, Six per cent. soaps powders, detergent powders and liquids. 95. Ice and Ice-fruits ... ... Six per cent. 96. Vacuum flasks and refills ... ... Six per cent. 97. Paints, colours, dyes and varnish ... Six per cent. 98. Tinned, canned and bottled foods ... Six per cent. 99. Dried or canned fruits ... ... Six per cent. 100. Nux vomica ... ... Six per cent. 101. Camphor ... ... Six per cent. 102. Folding umbrella and parts ... ... Six per cent. 103. Ivory articles ... ... Six per cent. 104. Ethyl alcohol and denatured spirits ... Six per cent. 105. Tinned butter, ghee and cheese ... Six per cent. 106. Coir and coir products ... ... Six per cent. 107. Razor and razor blades ... ... Six per cent. 108. Furniture other than steel furniture ... Six per cent. 109. Glassware and glass bottles ... ... Six per cent. 110. Plastic sheets and all articles made of Eight per cent. Poly-Vinyl-Chloride material ... 111. Crockery and cutlery ... ... Eight per cent. 112. Chinaware, porcelainware and stoneware Eight per cent. other than those falling under any other entry 113. Mercury ... ... Eight per cent. 114. Musical instruments ... ... Eight per cent. 115. Molasses ... ... Twelve per cent."; (53) after Explanation IV, the following explanations shall be added, namely :- "Explanation V : (i) 'Motor spirits' means any substance which by itself or in admixture with other substances is ordinarily used directly or indirectly to provide reasonably efficient fuel for automotive or stationary internal combustion engines, and includes petrol, diesel oil and other internal combustion oils, but does not include kerosene, furnace oil, coal or charcoal; (ii) 'Petrol' means dangerous petroleum as defined in the Petroleum Act, 1934 (Central Act XXX of 1934) and includes a mixture of power, alcohol, as defined in the Indian Power Alcohol Act, 1948 (Central Act XXII of 1948) and petrol. Explanation VI : Where a tax has been levied in respect of cashew under item 88, the kernel pressed out of the said cashew shall not be liable to tax under this Act."
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) in column 4 of serial number 4, for the words "Three per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted. (2) the entries relating to serial numbers 7, 8 and 11 shall be omitted; (3) in column 4 of item (a) of serial number 11-A, for the words "Three per cent.", the words "Four per cent." shall be substituted; (4) in column 4 of serial number 12, for the words "Five per cent.", the words "Eight per cent." shall be substituted; (5) the Explanation at the end of the Schedule shall be omitted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, for the entries relating to items (a) and (b) of serial number 5, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "(a) Groundnut including groundnut Purchase by the first seeds, coconut and copra, or earliest of the til (gingelly) seeds, kusum successive dealers in (kardi) seeds and nigar (Ram the State liable to Two til). tax under this Act. per cent. (b) Cardamom, castor seeds, honge Purchase by the first seeds and neem seeds. or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to Three tax under this Act. per cent."
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) the entry relating to serial number 32 shall be omitted; (2) for the entry relating to serial number 38, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "38. Carpets woven on handlooms when sold at a price not exceeding rupees fifteen per piece; 38-A. Raw Silk;"; (3) Explanation (II) at the end of the Schedule shall be omitted.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka The Mysore Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1957 (Mysore Act 20 of 1957) is hereby repealed : Provided that such repeal shall not affect - (a) the previous operation of the said enactment or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or (b) any right, privileges, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the said enactment; or (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the said enactment; or (d) any investigation, legal proceedings (including assessment proceedings) or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed.
Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, Tribunal or any other authority no sales tax levied, assessed or collected or purported to have been levied, or assessed under the principal Act or under any rules made thereunder at any time before the commencement of this Act, on any firm after its dissolution or on an undivided Hindu family or Aliyasanthana family after its partition shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have become invalid merely on the ground that the assessment of the sales tax on a dissolved firm of a divided Hindu family or Aliyasanthana family and the collection of the sales tax jointly and severally from the persons who at the time of dissolution of the firm were partners, or who at the time of partition of the family were members of such family, was not authorised by law, and the sales tax so levied, assessed and collected shall be deemed to have been validly levied, assessed and collect ed in accordance with law, and accordingly, - (a) all acts, proceedings, or things done or taken by any authority, officer or person in connection with the levy, assessment or collection of such sales tax shall, for all purpose, be deemed to be, and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of any tax so paid; and (c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax so paid. The Statement of Objects and Reasons and the Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation appended to the Mysore Sales Tax (Amendment) Bill, 1970 (Mysore Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV-2-A, dated 26th March, 1970, page 21.), run as follows :- "In the Budget speech it was indicated that the Mysore Taxation and Resources Enquiry Committee's Report on Sales Tax, copies of which were already circulated among the members of the Legislature, has been accepted by the Government with certain modifications. This Bill is intended to implement these decisions. The more important of these decisions are :- (1) Enhancement of the minimum limit of turnover for tax liability from Rs. 10,000 to Rs. 25,000. (2) Raising the maximum limit of turnover for composition benefits to Rs. 75,000. (3) Repeal of the Mysore Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1957 and bringing the sales of motor spirit within the purview of the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957. (4) Rationalisation of the tax rates. This opportunity is also being availed of to include in the Bill certain other amendments which are found necessary." MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION. Clause 7. - Sub-section (4) of section 10A proposed to be substituted by this clause empowers Government to prescribe by rules the authority which can demand from a dealer liable to pay tax under this Act and who has been registered or has applied for renewal of registration, security for proper payment of tax payable by him. Clause 10. - Section 12B proposed to be substituted by this clause empowers Government to make rules subject to which every dealer shall pay in advance in every month, the tax on his taxable turnover in the preceding month. Clause 14. - Sub-section (3) of section 20 proposed to be inserted by this clause empowers Government to make rules regarding the form and the manner in which the appellant should furnish sufficient security to the satisfaction of the appellate authority. 
