Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967.1 2 Received the assent of the Governor on the Ninth day of August, 1967 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act No. 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "nine hundred", the words "one thousand and two hundred" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the principal Act, for the words "two hundred and fifty", the words "three hundred and fifty", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the principal Act, for the words "two hundred", the words "three hundred and fifty" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 6 of the principal Act, for the word "thirty-five", the word "seventy-five" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "six hundred", the words "eight hundred" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred and fifty", the words "two hundred and fifty" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "9. Conveyance for Deputy Ministers - (1) The State Government may provide a suitable motor car for the use of each Deputy Minister. (2) There shall be paid to each Deputy Minister a conveyance allowance of rupees three hundred and fifty per mensem."
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "10. Charges payable by the Deputy Minister and the Government - (1) Each Deputy Minister shall in respect of the residence and motor car allotted for his use under sub-section (1) of Section 8 and Section 9, be liable to pay the following charges, namely - (a) cost of petrol and oil required for the motor car; (b) when the monthly charges for the consumption of electricity in the residence exceed seventy-five rupees in any month, the charges in excess of such sum. (2) All other charges for the maintenance and upkeep of the residence provided under sub-section (1) of Section 8 and the motor car provided under Section 9, including the cost of repairs thereof, the salaries and allowances of the drivers and cleaners of such motor cars, rate and taxes, and all expenditure for the layout and the maintenance of the gardens included in such residence, shall be borne by the State Government."
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the principal Act - (a) in clause (a), for the word "one-fourth", the word "half" shall be substituted. (b) in clause (b), for the words "six annas per mile", the words "forty paise per kilometre" shall be substituted. (c) in clause (d) - (i) for the word "ten", the word "twenty" shall be substituted; (ii) in the first proviso, for the word "twenty-five", the word "forty" shall be substituted. 
