Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka A Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fifty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005. 1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Published in the Karnataka Gazette Part IV-A Extra Ordinary No. 1622 dated 24-8-2005.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "six thousand rupees", the words "twelve thousand rupees", and for the words "rupees five thousand", the words "rupees ten thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6A of the principal Act, for the words "four thousand rupees", the words "eight thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "three thousand five hundred rupees", the words "seven thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (i) in clause (b), for the words "eight rupees", the words "twelve rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (d), for the words "eight hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted; and in the first proviso to clause (d), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "one thousand two hundred rupees" shall be substituted. By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, G.DAKSHINA MOORTHY Secretary to Government Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation 
