Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers' Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers' Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st September, 1993. Received the assent of the Governor on the Eighth day of March, 1994 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Ministers' Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the 'principal Act') for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely - "He shall be entitled for an allowance of five thousand rupees per month for maintenance and upkeep of residence and for layout and maintenance of gardens included in such residence."
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-A of the principal Act, for the words "eight thousand rupees", the words "twelve thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely - "He shall be entitled for an allowance of five thousand rupees per month for maintenance and upkeep of residence and for layout and maintenance of gardens included in such residence."
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "eight thousand rupees", the words "twelve thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), of the following shall be inserted at the end, namely - "He shall be entitled for an allowance of five thousand rupees per month for maintenance and upkeep of residence and for layout and maintenance of gardens included in such residence."
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) - (i) in clause (b), for the words "three rupees and fifty paise", the words "six rupees" shall be substituted: (ii) in clause (d), for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted; (iii) in the first proviso to clause (d), for the words "two hundred and fifty rupees", the words "three hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 
