Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000. 1 (2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of December 2000. First published in the Karnataka Gazette in Extra-ordinary on the 12th day of April, 2001.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "three thousand rupees", "two thousand and five hundred rupees" and "fifty thousand rupees" the words "Six thousand rupees" "five thousand rupees" and "seventy five thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words" five thousand rupees" the words " ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6A of the principal Act, for the words "two thousand two hundred and fifty rupees" the words "four thousand rupees" and for the words "thirty thousand rupees" the words "fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words " five thousand rupees" the words " ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "two thousand rupees" and "thirty thousand rupees" the words "three thousand five hundred rupees" and "forty thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "five thousand rupees" the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (i) in clause (d), for the words "five hundred rupees" the words "eight hundred rupees" shall be substituted, (ii) in the first proviso to clause (d), for the words "six hundred and fifty rupees" the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted. 
