Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of April, 1987. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-fourth day of April, 1987 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 3 of the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be substituted, namely - "3. Salaries of Chief Minister and Ministers - There shall be paid to the Chief Minister a salary of three thousand rupees per mensem and to each Minister a salary of two thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem. They shall also be paid a sumptuary allowance of five thousand rupees per annum".
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Sections 4, 6-B and 8 of the principal Act, for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the principal Act, for the words "nine hundred and fifty rupees", the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-A of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand and five hundred rupees" and "two thousand and four hundred rupees", the words "two thousand two hundred and fifty rupees" and "four thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-C of the principal Act, for the words "nine hundred and fifty rupees", the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand two hundred and fifty rupees" and "one thousand eight hundred rupees", the words "two thousand rupees" and "four thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act, for the words "nine hundred and fifty rupees", the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (2) - (i) in clause (b) for the words "one rupee and fifty paise", the words "two rupees and fifty paise" shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (d), for the words "fifty rupees" and "seventy-five rupees", the words "one hundred rupees" and "one hundred and fifty rupees" shall respectively be substituted. (2) for sub-section (2-A), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(2-A) Every Minister, Minister of State and Deputy Minister touring outside India on duty or travelling outside India for medical treatment shall be entitled to the same terms and conditions in regard to travelling and other expenses as a Minister of the Government of India". 
