Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to prevent Thefts of Coffee. Whereas, it is expedient to make special provision to prevent thefts of coffee and to repress and punish the offence of receiving or disposing of stolen coffee in the neighbourhood of coffee plantations or estates; It is enacted as follows -
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka This Act shall take effect in such districts, divisions or parts of districts, or within such localities or limits within the Presidency of Fort St. George, and from such date as the 1 [2 [State] Government] may from time to time direct by notification published in the 3 [Official Gazette]. The 4 [5 [State] Government] may from time to time modify or cancel such direction by notification similarly published. Substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the A.O. 1937 Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the A.O. 1950 Substituted for the words "Fort St. George Gazette" by A.O. 1937 Substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the A.O. 1937 Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the A.O. 1950
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act - "Labourer" means and includes all persons except resident managers temporarily or permanently employed on a coffee estate in any capacity, whether agricultural, menial or otherwise howsoever; "Carrier" means and includes all persons for the time being employed in the transport of coffee whether by porterage, pack animals, boat, cart or otherwise and whether as contractors, drivers or otherwise; "Coffee estate" means and includes any land on which coffee is growing; "Coffee" means and includes all coffee not roasted or otherwise prepared for immediate consumption.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka It shall not be lawful for any one to purchase, take in barter or exchange or receive coffee from any labourer employed on a coffee estate.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka It shall not be lawful for any one to purchase, take in barter or exchange, or receive coffee from any person other than a labourer employed on a coffee estate, unless the persons so purchasing, taking in barter or exchange or receiving such coffee shall immediately thereupon enter or cause to be entered in a book to be kept by him for that purpose a true record of such transaction, specifying - (a) the name, residence and occupation of the person from whom such coffee was so purchased, taken in barter or exchange or received; (b) the date of the transaction; and (c) the quantity and description of the coffee so purchased, taken in barter or exchange or received: Provided that this section shall not apply to coffee purchased, taken in barter or exchange or received from any person other than a labourer employed on a coffee estate, and intended bona fide for consumption in the house or on the premises of the person purchasing, taking in barter or exchange, or receiving the same as aforesaid.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 5A--> State(s): Karnataka Every person in charge of a coffee estate, whether he be owner thereof or not, who sells, gives in barter or exchange, or delivers any coffee, shall immediately thereupon enter or cause to be entered in a book to be kept by him for that purpose a true record of such transactions specifying - (a) the name, residence and occupation of the person to whom such coffee was so sold, given in barter or exchange, or delivered; (b) the date of the transaction; and (c) the quantity and description of the coffee so sold, given in barter or exchange, or delivered.] Section 5-A inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka All books required 1 [to be kept] by 2 [Sections 5 and 5-A] 3 [x x x x] shall be produced upon the requisition of any police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, generally or specially authorized by any 4 [Executive Magistrate] to require the production of such books. Inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 Substituted for the word and figure "Section 5" by Madras Act No. II of 1900 The words "to be kept by persons purchasing coffee" omitted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 Substituted for the word "Magistrate" by Karnataka Act No. 13 of 1965, w.e.f. 1-10-1965
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka It shall not be lawful for any one to purchase or take in barter or exchange coffee from any carrier, or for any carrier to sell or give in barter or exchange any coffee, unless the person so purchasing or taking in barter or exchange such coffee shall, besides making the entry required by Section 5 of this Act, also enter or cause to be entered in the book mentioned in the said Section 5 the marks (if any) on the bags or other packages in which such coffee may be contained, and unless the entries required by this section and by the said Section 5 be also correctly signed by such carrier in his own name, and attested by a police officer or the headman of the village within which the transaction takes place; for which attestation no fee shall be chargeable.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka Any person committing any breach of the provisions contained in Sections 4, 5, 1 [5-A], 6 or 7 of this Act shall be liable, on conviction by a Magistrate, to pay a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees. Inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka Any coolie, maistri or other labourer employed on a coffee estate found with green gathered 1 [parchment or cherry-dried] coffee in his possession, and failing to account satisfactorily for such possession, shall be liable, on conviction by a 2 [Judicial Magistrate], to pay a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees. Inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 Substituted for the word "Magistrate" by Karnataka Act No. 13 of 1965, w.e.f. 1-10-1965
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall carry or remove coffee from any coffee estate, premises or place, or upon any road, highway or footway, without express permission of the owner or of his authorized agent. Such permission shall be in writing, dated and signed by the said owner or his authorized agent, and shall contain the following particulars - (a) the quantity of the coffee to be carried or removed; (b) the number, description and marks of the packages in which coffee is secured; (c) the place or destination to which the coffee is to be carried or removed; and (d) the names of the consignor and consignee. Any person committing any breach of the provisions of this section shall, on conviction by a 1 [Judicial Magistrate], be liable to pay a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees. Substituted for the word "Magistrate" by Karnataka Act No. 13 of 1965, w.e.f. 1-10-1965
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka No coffee shall be gathered, moved, loaded or unloaded on any coffee estate between sunset and sunrise. Any person committing a breach of this provision, or abetting (within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code) such breach, shall, on conviction by a 1 [Judicial Magistrate], be liable to pay a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees: Provided that nothing in Section 10 or in this section shall apply to the ordinary operations of curing the crop on the estate such as pulping or storing. Substituted for the word "Magistrate" by Karnataka Act No. 13 of 1965, w.e.f. 1-10-1965
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka If it shall appear that such gathering, moving, loading or unloading was for the purpose of committing a theft, the person or persons so engaged shall be liable to be charged with theft, or abetment of theft, and be proceeded against for such offence under the provisions of Sections 378 and 379 or Sections 107, 108 and 109 of the Indian Penal Code, as the case may be.
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka It shall be at the discretion of the 1 [Judicial Magistrate], in the case of any persons, not being females, who shall be convicted of a second offence under Section 9 of this Act, to substitute 2 [x x x x] corporal punishment under the provisions of Act No. VI of 1864 (an Act to authorize the punishment of whipping in certain cases), or of any other law for the time being in force in that behalf for 3 [x x x x] the penalties provided by this Act: Provided that such substituted 4 [x x x x] punishment shall be awarded only in respect of the offence itself, and not as an alternative penalty for non-payment of fine. Substituted for the word "Magistrate" by Karnataka Act No. 13 of 1965, w.e.f. 1-10-1965 The words "or add" omitted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 The words "or to" omitted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 The words "or additional" omitted by Madras Act No. II of 1900
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka All fines paid or levied under this Act shall be paid into the public treasury: Provided that the Magistrate trying any case under this Act may 1 [for reasons to be recorded in writing] grant the whole or any portion of any fine levied therein as rewards to persons furnishing such information as may have led to the conviction of offenders under this Act. Inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka It shall be the duty of every person in charge of a coffee estate whether he be owner thereof or not, to keep such books and to furnish such returns in connection with the coffee estate or the coffee grown thereon at such times and to such authorities as may be prescribed by the 2 [3 [State] Government of Madras], and to afford to such officers as may be generally or specially designated in that behalf by the Collector all reasonable facilities for verifying the correctness of such books and returns, and for obtaining such other information as may be required for the preparation in public offices of such statistics as the 4 [5 [State] Government of Madras] may prescribe. Sections 15 to 17 inserted by Madras Act No. II of 1900 Substituted for the words "Governor of Fort St. George in Council by the A.O. 1937 Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the A.O. 1950 Substituted for the words "Governor of Fort St. George in Council by the A.O. 1937 Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the A.O. 1950
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka The 1 [2 [State] Government of Madras] may after previous publication make rules - (a) prescribing forms for the books, returns and statistics referred to in Section 15; (b) regulating the time at which and the authority to whom such returns are to be furnished; (c) regulating the inspection and examination of such books, returns and statistics; and (d) generally for carrying out the purposes of this Act; and all such rules shall be published in the 3 [Official Gazette] and shall thereupon have the force of law. Substituted for the words Governor of Fort St. George in Council by the A.O. 1937 Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the A.O. 1950 Substituted for the words "Fort St. George Gazette" by the A.O. 1937
Madras Coffee-stealing Prevention Act, 1878_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka Any person failing without reasonable excuse to comply with the provisions of Section 15 of this Act shall be liable on conviction by a Magistrate to pay a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees. 
