Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force from the First day of November, 1990. Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of February, 1991 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Minister Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) for the words "five thousand rupees" the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the principal Act, for the words "at the rate of two thousand rupees" the words "equal to the cost of three hundred litres of petrol" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 6 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) cost of petrol required for their respective motor cars in excess of the cost of three hundred litres of petrol paid by the Government".
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-A of the principal Act, for the words "four thousand rupees" the words "four thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 6-B of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 6-C of the principal Act, for the words "at the rate of two thousand rupees" the words "equal to the cost of three hundred litres of petrol" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka For clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 6-D of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) cost of petrol required for their respective motor cars in excess of the cost of three hundred litres of petrol paid by the Government".
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act, for the words, "four thousand rupees", the words "eight thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 9 of the principal Act, for the words "of two thousand rupees" the words "equal to the cost of three hundred litres of petrol" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka For clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) cost of petrol required for their respective motor cars in excess of the cost of three hundred litres of petrol paid by the Government".
Karnataka Ministers Salaries and Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the principal Act - (i) in clause (b) for the words, "two rupees and fifty paise", the words "three rupees and fifty paise", shall be substituted; (ii) in the first proviso to clause (d) for the words "one hundred and fifty rupees" the words "two hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 
