Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, as in force in Bellary District. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951 (Madras Act XIV of 1951), as in force in Bellary District; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1963.1 Received the assent of the Governor on the Third day of October, 1963
Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 76 of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely - "(1) In respect of the services rendered by the Government and their officers and for defraying the expenses incurred on account of such services, every religious institution shall, from the income derived by it, pay to the Commissioner annually such contribution not exceeding five per centum of its income as may be prescribed. (2) Every religious institution, the annual income of which, for the fasli year immediately preceding as calculated for the purposes of the levy of contribution under sub-section (1), is not less than one thousand rupees, shall pay to the Commissioner annually for meeting the cost of auditing its accounts, such further sum not exceeding one and a half per centum of its income as the Commissioner may determine." (ii) at the end of the section, the following explanation shall be added, namely - "Explanation -Any religious institution the annual income of which is less than two hundred rupees, shall not be liable to pay any contribution to the Commissioner as required by sub-section (1)."
Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter VIII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely - "Chapter IX Endowments Administration Fund 80. Commissioner to be corporation sole -The Commissioner shall be a corporation sole and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued in his corporate name. 81.Religious and Charitable Endowments Administration Fund -(1) There shall be established a Fund to be called the Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Administration Fund. The Fund shall vest in the Commissioner. (2) The contributions payable under sub-section (1) of Section 76 and the further sums payable under sub-section (2) of Section 76 shall, when realised, be credited to the said Fund. It shall be lawful for the Commissioner to accept to the credit of the said Fund grants or loans from the Government and grants from any private person. The Commissioner shall, out of the said Fund, repay to the Government sums paid by the Government under sub-section (4) of Section 76 and loans received from the Government." 
