Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing: Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called as the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006. 1 (2) It shall come into force with effect from the First day of April 2006. First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra-ordinary on the thirty first day of March, 2006.
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1),- (i) in the first proviso, after the words "defence personnel" the words "or employees of public sector undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks" shall be inserted; (ii) in the fourth proviso, in clause (b), after the words "defence personnel" the words "or employees of public sector undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the third proviso, after the words "defence personnel" the words "or employees of public sector undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act, in Part A,- (1) in item 1, in column 2, after the words "defence personnel" the words "or employees of public sector undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks" shall be inserted. (2) in item 3A, in column 3, for the letters and figures "Rs.75/-" the letters and figures "Rs.50/-" shall be substituted. (3) in item 10, in column 3, for the letters and figures "Rs.75/-" the letters and figures "Rs.35/-" shall be substituted. (4) in item 14, in sub-item (2), after the words "defence personnel" the words "or employees of public sector undertakings owned by Government of India including nationalised banks" shall be inserted. By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka G.K. BOREGOWDA Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
