Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances Act, 1963. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 15 of 1963), for the purpose hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fiftieth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Twelfth day of March, 1999. Received the assent of the Governor on the Fifteenth day of April, 1999
Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 15 of 1963) (hereinafter referred to as the 'principal Act') - (a) in the long title for the word "Allowances", the words "salary, allowances and miscellaneous provisions" shall be substituted; (b) in the preamble, for the word "Allowances", the words "salary, allowances and miscellaneous provisions" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 1 of the principal Act, for the word "Allowances", the words "Salary, Allowances and Miscellaneous Provisions" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act - (a) in clause (a), the words "by the Chief Minister" shall be inserted at the end; (b) clause (c) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowances (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "3. Salary and allowances of Parliamentary Secretary - A Parliamentary Secretary shall be entitled to such salaries and allowances as are admissible to a Minister, Minister of State or a Deputy Minister under the Karnataka Minister's Salaries and Allowances Act, 1956, as may be specified by the Government from time to time. 4. Parliamentary Secretary not to draw salaries and allowances as member - A Parliamentary Secretary shall not, while he draws salary and allowances for his office, be entitled to any salary and allowances as a member of a Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council, as the case may be. 5. Functions and duties of Parliamentary Secretary - The functions and duties of a Parliamentary Secretary shall be such as may be specified by the Chief Minister or a Minister to whom he is the Parliamentary Secretary. 6. Oath of office and of secrecy - Before a Parliamentary Secretary enters upon his office, the Chief Minister shall administer to him the oath of office and of secrecy according to such form as may be specified by the Government in this behalf". 
