Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Pawnbrokers Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Pawnbrokers Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 13 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-fourth day of April, 1979
Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the Karnataka Pawnbrokers Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 13 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (1) in clause (7), after the word "sells", the words "hypothecates, pawns" shall be inserted; (2) the following proviso shall be added at the end namely:- "Provided that for an act referred to in clause (7), the term of imprisonment shall not be less than one month and the fine shall not be less than five hundred rupees".
Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely:- "16-A. Pawnbroker to Redeem Pledges - (1) Where before the commencement of the Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979 any pawnbroker has pawned or hypothecated any pledge with any person, such pawnbroker shall, redeem the pledge within thirty days from the date of such commencement. (2) Any pawnbroker who fails to so redeem shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to rupees one thousand: Provided that the terms of imprisonment shall not be less than one month and the fine shall not be less than rupees five hundred."
Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "19-A. Offences by Hindu Undivided Family, Companies etc - (1) If any of the provisions of this Act is contravened by a Hindu undivided Family, the person responsible for the management of the business of such Family shall be deemed to have contravened such provision. (2) (a) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained, in this clause shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge of that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation - For the purposes of this section - (a) "Company" means, a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, and (b) "Director" in relation to a firm means, a partner in the firm.
Karnataka Pawnbrokers (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 20 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "20. Certain Offence to be Cognizable - Offences punishable - (a) under Section 16 for an act referred to in Clause (7) thereof; (b) under Section 16-A; and (c) under Section 18 for contravening the provision of Section 3 shall be cognizable". 
