Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to make better provision for preservation of trees in the State. Whereas, with the growing pace of urbanisation, industrialisation and increasing population, there has been indiscriminate felling of a large number of trees in the rural and urban areas of the State of Karnataka leading to erratic rainfall, recurring famines and floods, soil erosion and consequent ecological disturbances. Whereas, it is expedient to provide for the preservation of trees in the State by regulating the felling of trees and for the planting of adequate number of trees to restore ecological balance and for matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka. (3) This section shall be deemed to have come into force on the seventeenth day of July, 1976 and other provisions shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different urban areas or rural areas or parts thereof. Received the assent of the Governor on the First day of December, 1976
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - (a) "Appointed day" in relation to any area means the date notified under sub-section (3) of Section 1; (b) "Local Authority" means a Municipal Corporation or a Municipal Council or a 1 [Town Panchayat or a Taluk Panchayat]; (c) "Preservation of Trees" means, maintenance and protection of trees to encourage normal growth and prevent damage or cutting or felling and includes planting of new trees and transplanting trees; (d) "Relevant Act" means the enactment under which a local authority is constituted; (e) "Rural Area" means an area and of the kind specified in Schedules I and II; (f) "To fell a tree" means severing the trunk from the roots, uprooting the tree and includes burning or cutting or girdling or applying arboricides to a tree to cause substantial damage thereto or destruction thereof; (g) "Tree" means any woody plant whose branches spring from and are supported upon a trunk or body and which trunk or body is not less than five and a half centimetres in diameter and not less than one metre in height from the ground level and includes palms, bamboos, stumps, brushwood canes and seedlings of such tree but does not include sandal and rosewood trees; (h) "Tree Officer" means a Forest Officer appointed as such by the 2 [Principal Chief Conservator] of Forests (General) for the purposes of this Act; (i) "Urban area" means an area comprising a 3 [larger urban area, smaller urban area, or a transitional area]; (j) "Wood lot" means any piece of land of which trees form the main crop, the average number of such trees in each hectare being not less than twenty-five. (2) Words and expressions used herein but not defined shall have the meanings assigned to them in the relevant Act. Substituted for the words "Notified Area Committee or a Taluk Development Board" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Chief Conservator" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Municipal Corporation, a Municipality or a Notified Area Committee" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall, by notification, constitute a Tree Authority for each urban area and for each rural area. (2) Such Authority shall consist of five members as follows - (a) For an urban area - (i) the Mayor or the President of the Municipal Corporation, the Municipal Council or the 1 [Town Panchayat], as the case may be; (ii) the Divisional Forest Officer or his nominee; (iii) the District Horticultural Officer having jurisdiction; (iv) the Municipal Commissioner or the Chief Executive Officer, as the case may be; and (v) one member of the Municipal Corporation, the Municipal Council or the 2 [Town Panchayat], as may be, nominated by the Mayor or the President, as the case may be: Provided that where the Corporation or the Municipal Council or the 3 [Town Panchayat] is superseded, such person as the State Government may nominate shall be the member. (b) For a rural area specified in Schedule I - (i) the concerned Conservator of Forests having jurisdiction; (ii) the Special Deputy Commissioner and where there is no Special Deputy Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner of the district; (iii) the Superintending Engineer, Communication and Buildings having jurisdiction; and (iv) two non-official members appointed by the State Government. (c) For a rural area specified in Schedule II - 4 [(i) the Adhyaksha of the Taluk Panchayat;] (ii) the Block Development Officer having jurisdiction; (iii) the Assistant Conservator of Forests nominated by the Divisional Forest Officer; (iv) the District Horticultural Officer having jurisdiction; 5 [(v) one member of the Taluk Panchayat nominated by the Adhyaksha.] (3) The State Government shall appoint one of the members to be the Chairman. (4) The Tree Authority may co-opt in such manner and for such period as it may determine not more than three representatives of non-official organisations having special knowledge or practical experience in the preservation of trees. Substituted for the words "Notified Area Committee" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Notified Area Committee" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Notified Area Committee" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Item (i) substituted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Item (v) including the proviso substituted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Tree Authority shall meet at least once in three months at such place and time as the Chairman may decide and shall conduct its business in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Tree Authority shall be one-third of the total number of its members.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The 1 [Principal Chief Conservator] of Forests (General) may, subject to sub-section (2) appoint for each urban area and rural area one or more Forest Officers as Tree Officers for the purpose of this Act. (2) Such Tree Officer shall - (i) in an urban area comprising of a 2 [larger urban area] be not below the rank of an Assistant Conservator of Forests; (ii) in an urban area comprising of a 3 [smaller urban area or a transitional area], be not below the rank of a Range Forest Officer; (iii) in a rural area of the kind specified in Schedule II, be not below the rank of a Range Forest Officer; (iv) in a rural area of the kind specified in Schedule I, be not below the rank of a Divisional Forest Officer. Substituted for the words "Chief Conservator" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Municipal Corporation" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "Municipality or Notified Area Committee" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka The 1 [Principal Chief Conservator] of Forests (General) may from time to time, appoint such other officers and servants to assist the Tree Officer as he may consider necessary who shall be subordinate to the Tree Officer. Substituted for the words "Chief Conservator" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything in the relevant Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Tree Authority shall, subject to any general or special orders of the State Government, be responsible for - (a) the preservation of all trees within its jurisdiction; (b) carrying out a census of the existing trees and obtaining, whenever considered necessary, declarations from all owners or occupants about the number of trees in their lands; (c) specifying the standards regarding the number and kind of trees which each locality, type of land and premises shall have and which shall be planted subject to a minimum of five trees per hectare in the case of rural areas; (d) development and maintenance of nurseries, supply of seeds, saplings and trees to persons who desire or are required to plant new trees or to replace trees which have been felled; (e) planting and transplanting of trees necessitated by construction of new roads or widening of existing roads or replacement of trees which have failed to come up along roads or for safeguarding danger to life and property; (f) organisation of demonstration and extension services for the purposes of this Act and assisting private and public institutions connected with planting and preservation of trees; (g) planting and maintaining such number of trees as may be considered necessary according to the prescribed standards on roads, in public parks and gardens and on the banks of rivers or lakes or seashores; and (h) undertaking such schemes or measures as may be directed from time to time by the State Government for achieving the objects of the Act.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) With effect on and from the appointed day, notwithstanding any custom, usage, contract or law for the time being in force, no person shall fell any tree or cause any tree to be felled in any land, whether in his ownership or occupancy or otherwise, except with the previous permission of the Tree Officer: 1 [Provided that no permission shall be granted under this section for felling of trees if it involves felling of all trees in the areas proposed for cultivation or extension of cultivation of rubber or tea.] (2) Any person desiring to fell a tree, shall apply in writing to the concerned Tree Officer for permission in that behalf. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan or survey sketch specifying clearly the site or survey number, the number, kind and girth of the tree sought to be cut and the reasons therefor along with the consent of the owner or occupant. (3) On receipt of the application, the Tree Officer may, after inspecting the tree and holding such inquiry as he deems necessary, either grant permission in whole or in part or refuse permission: Provided that permission shall not be refused, if the tree - (i) is dead, diseased or wind-fallen; or (ii) has silviculturally matured; or (iii) constitutes a danger to life or property; or (iv) constitutes obstruction to traffic; or (v) is substantially damaged or destroyed by fire, lightning, rain or other natural causes; or 2 [vi) is required to be removed either for cultivation, extension of cultivation or change in crop cultivation in areas specified in Schedule II, (except where such removal does not involve felling of all trees in the areas proposed for cultivation, extension of cultivation or change in crop cultivation) or for the bona fide use of the applicant.] 3 [(4) The Tree Officer shall make all possible endeavour to dispose off the application received under this section within a period of three months from the date of its receipt:] Provided that in computing the period of three months under this subsection, the time required to obtain - (a) opinion from revenue authorities; (b) report from the Assistant Director of Land Records; (c) measurement list of trees intended to be felled; or (d) any other relevant information as may be prescribed, shall be excluded.] (5) Where permission to fell a tree is granted, the Tree Officer may grant it subject to the condition that the applicant shall plant another tree or trees of the same or any other suitable species on the same site or other suitable place within thirty days from the date the tree is felled or within such extended time as the Tree Officer may allow. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (5) but subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, for bona fide domestic use of a family, one or more members of such family may, if they are otherwise entitled to do so, in the aggregate, fell, in a calendar year, such number of trees as would fetch 4 [not more than 2.8 cubic metres of timber and five tonnes of firewood.] 5 [(7) Nothing in this section shall apply to felling of 6 [Casuarina, Coconut, Erythrina, Eucalyptus, Glyrecidia, Hopea Wightina, Prosipis, Rubber, Sesbania, Silver Oak and Subabul trees.]]- Proviso inserted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998. Clause (vi) substituted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Sub-section (4) substituted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 Substituted for the words "not more than two cubic metres of timber and one and a half tonnes of firewood" by Act No. 21 of 1977, w.e.f. 29-7-1977 Sub-section (7) inserted by Act No. 21 of 1977, w.e.f. 29-7-1977 Substituted for the words casuarina and hopea wightigna trees by Act No. 39 of 1987, w.e.f. 1-12-1987
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 8A--> State(s): Karnataka The Tree Officer may cancel or suspend the permission granted under Section 8 on any of the grounds specified below, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the grantee and after recording reasons therefor, namely:- (a) furnishing of false or wrong information to obtain permission; (b) discovery of defects in title; (c) misuse of felling permission; (d) non-fulfilment of conditions of felling permission; (e) violation of any provisions of this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder; (f) felling of unpermitted trees; (g) dispute between grantee and others. Section 8-A inserted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every owner or occupant of a land shall, within a period of five years from the appointed day or within such extended period as the Tree Authority may specify, plant trees so as to conform to the standards prescribed by the said Tree Authority under clause (c) of Section 7. (2) If in the opinion of the Tree Officer the number of trees in any land is not adequate according to the standards referred to in sub-section (1), the Tree Officer may, by order giving a reasonable opportunity to the owner or occupier of the land of making representation, require him to plant such trees, or additional trees, as the case may be, and at such places in the land as may be specified in the order. (3) The owner or occupier of the land shall comply with such order within thirty days from the receipt thereof or such extended time as the Tree Officer may allow in this behalf.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Where any tree has fallen or is destroyed by wind, fire, lightning, torrential rain or such other natural causes, the Tree Officer may suo motu or on information given to him, after holding such enquiry as he deems fit, by order, require such owner or occupier to plant a tree or trees in place of the tree so fallen or destroyed, of the same or other species at the same or other suitable place as may be specified in the order. (2) The owner or the occupier of the land shall comply with such order within thirty days from the receipt thereof or such extended time as the Tree Officer may allow.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of Section 12, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupier of the land who is required by an order under Sections 8, 9 or 10 to plant a tree or trees to ensure that they grow properly and are well preserved.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, the Tree Authority may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may specify in that behalf, permit any individual, body corporate or institution to adopt any tree for such period as may be specified therein and during such period the said individual, body corporate or institution shall be responsible for the maintenance and preservation of the said tree.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka Where the owner or occupier fails to comply with an order made by the Tree Officer under Sections 8, 9 or 10, the Tree Officer may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to such owner or occupier of making representation and without prejudice to any other action which may be taken against the defaulter under this Act take necessary action himself and recover the expenditure incurred therefor from the owner or the occupier, as the case may be. If such expenditure is not paid within the time specified by the Tree Officer, the amount along with interest at six percent per annum and other expense, if any, shall be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Against the order of the Tree Officer under Sections 8, 1 [8-A], 9 or 10, an appeal shall lie to the Tree Authority. (2) Such appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the date the decision is communicated to the owner or occupier of the land and shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees. (3) The Tree Authority shall decide the appeal after giving to the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard. The decision of the Tree Authority shall be final. (4) Where an appeal is made in time, the period for compliance specified in the order of the Tree Officer shall be reckoned from the date on which the appeal is decided against the appellant and where the appeal is allowed the fee paid under sub-section (2) shall be refunded to the appellant. (5) Every appeal shall be heard by not less than three members of the Tree Authority. Inserted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka Where the Tree Officer has reason to believe that an offence under this Act is committed in respect of any tree, he may seize the tools and any boats, vehicles or other conveyances or animals used for the commission of the said offence along with the tree or part thereof which has been severed from the ground or the trunk, as the case may be.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 15A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any Tree Officer within such area as the State Government may, by notification specify, may as regards offences under Section 22 exercise powers conferred on an officer in-charge of a police station by the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973: Provided that any such power shall be subject to such restrictions and modifications, if any, as the State Government may specify. (2) For the purposes of Section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the area in regard to which the Tree Officer is empowered under sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be a police station and such officer shall be deemed to be the officer-in-charge of such station. Sections 15-A and 15-B inserted by Act No. 20 of 2000, w.e.f. 4-10-2000
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 15B--> State(s): Karnataka If, on any investigation by a Tree Officer empowered under sub-section (1) of Section 15-A, it appears that there is sufficient evidence to justify the prosecution of the accused, the Investigating Officer shall submit a report (which shall, for the purposes of Section 190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 be deemed to be a police report) to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to enquire into or try the case and empowered to take cognizance of offences on police reports.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka The Tree Officer may release the properties seized under Section 15 if the owner or occupier executes a bond for their production whenever required.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any Tree Officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably suspected of having been concerned in any offence under this Act, if such person refuses to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which the Tree Officer has reason to believe is false or if he has reason to believe that the person will abscond. (2) Any person arrested under this section shall be informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest and shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Court of the Magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period without the authority of a Magistrate.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka Any Tree Officer who has arrested any person under the provisions of Section 17 may release such person on his executing a bond with proper surety to appear, if and when so required, before the Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or before the Police or the Tree Officer concerned.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka Every Tree Officer or his subordinates or any forest, revenue or Police Officer shall prevent and may interfere for the purpose of preventing, the commission of any offence under this Act.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for any act or omission which constitutes an offence under this Act or from being liable under such other law to any higher punishment or penalty than that provided by this Act or the rules made thereunder: Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the same offence.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by order, empower a Tree Officer - (a) to compound on payment of a sum 1 [equivalent to twenty-five percent of the value of the property involved in the offence] any offence under this Act; (b) to release any property seized or liable to confiscation, on payment of the value thereof, as estimated by such officer. (2) On the payment of such sum or such value or both, as the case may be, to such officer, the offender, if in custody, shall be released. The property, if any, seized shall be released and no further proceedings shall be taken against such offender or property. Substituted for the words "not exceeding five thousand rupees" by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or orders made thereunder shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. Upon such conviction the Court may order any property in respect of which the offence is committed to be forfeited to the State Government.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 22A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person incharge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this section has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer of the Company, such Director, Manager, Secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation - For the purpose of this section - (a) "Company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "Director" in relation to a firm, means "a partner in the firm. Section 22-A inserted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out, the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall from the date on which the modification or annulment is notified by the Government in the Official Gazette have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer for anything done or omitted to be done by him in good faith under this Act or the rules or orders made thereunder.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by notification, invest the Tree Officers and other officers with all or any of the following powers, namely - (a) power to enter upon any land and to survey, demarcate and make a map of the same; (b) powers of a Civil Court to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and material objects; (c) power to issue a search warrant under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; (d) power to hold inquiries into offences under the Act and in the course of such inquiry to receive and record evidence; (e) power to take possession of property under the Act; (f) power to direct release of property or withdrawal of charges; (g) power to insist any person to plant tree or trees of suitable species in adequate numbers on any land owned or occupied by him. (2) Any evidence recorded under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be admissible in any subsequent trial before a Magistrate if such evidence has been taken in the presence of the accused person and recorded in the manner provided by Section 355, Section 356 or Section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka The provisions of Section 50 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964), and Chapter XVI of the Karnataka Forest Rules shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the transit of the felled trees under this Act.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may from time to time give to the Tree Authority or any Tree Officer and officers subordinate to him and the Tree Authority may give to the Tree Officer or officers subordinate to him, such general or special directions regarding the discharge of their functions and for carrying out effectively the purposes of this Act and such Tree Authority or Tree Officers shall comply with the directions issued.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 27A--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may, by notification and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in such notification, exempt any area or areas from the provisions of this Act. Section 27-A inserted by Act No. 14 of 1979 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 22-9-1978
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect the operation of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 or the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 and the rules made thereunder and the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of the said Acts and rules.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Preservation of Trees Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 14 of 1976) is hereby repealed. 1 [(2) Notwithstanding such repeal any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued under the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been taken, made or issued under this Act and shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded by any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued under this Act.] Sub-section (2) shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted by Act No. 14 of 1979.
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section Sch.--> State(s): Karnataka [See Section 2(i)] Areas comprising lands under 1 [x x x x x], tea, rubber, 2 [x x x x x] or cinchona cultivation including wood-lots and lands belonging to the State Government and released in favour of others. The word "coffee" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998 The words "cardamom, cocoa" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1998, w.e.f. 11-5-1998
Karnataka Preservation of Trees Act, 1976_Section Sch.--> State(s): Karnataka [See Section 2(i)] Areas comprising lands other than those included in Schedule I. 
