Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices Act, 1959. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1960), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975.1 2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Fifth day of May, 1975 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the long title of, and the preamble to, the Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "Hindu temples", the words "any place of public religious worship or adoration and in any congregation or procession connected with religious worship" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act - (1) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(b) "Precincts" in relation to a place of public religious worship or adoration includes all lands and buildings near such place which are ordinarily used for purposes connected with religious worship or adoration". (2) In clause (c), for the words "or with an intention of propitiating any deity", the words "of any religious worship or adoration" shall be substituted; (3) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(d) "Place of public religious worship or adoration" means any place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public or a section thereof for the purposes of religious worship or adoration".
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "3. Sacrifice in or in precincts of any place of public religious worship or adoration or in a congregation or procession connected with religious worship, prohibited - No person shall sacrifice any animal in any place of public religious worship or adoration or its precincts or in any congregation or procession connected with any religious worship in a public street. Explanation - For the purposes of this section and Section 4 "public street" means a road, street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which the public are granted access or over which they have a right to pass".
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act, for the words "temple or its precincts or, near a temple car or deity", the words "place of public religious worship or adoration or its precincts or in any congregation or procession connected with any religious worship in a public street", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act - (1) in the heading, for the word "Temple", the words "Place of public religious worship or adoration", shall be substituted; (2) in clause (a), for the word "temple", the words "place of public religious worship or adoration", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prevention of Animal Sacrifices (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 6 of the principal Act, for the word "temple" in the two places where it occurs, the words "institution related to the place of public religious worship or adoration" shall be substituted. 
