Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1966. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 1 of 1967) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act 1979.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-second day of February, 1979
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 1 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (g), after the proviso the following explanation shall be inserted, namely:- "Explanation - For the purpose of this clause, where a person holds different parcels of lands each such parcel of land assessed separately for land revenue shall be deemed to be a holding".
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act, for the heading and sub-section (1) thereof the following heading and sub-section (1) shall be substituted, namely:- "9. Sections 5 and 6 not to apply to certain transfers - (1) Nothing in Sections 5 and 6 shall apply to transfer of any land - (i) to or by the Karnataka Bhoodan Yagna Board established under the Karnataka Bhoodan Yagna Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1963); or (ii) for such public purpose as may be specified by notification in this behalf by the State Government."
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 30 of the principal Act, after the words "under this Act", the words and figures "or under any of the Acts repealed by Section 47" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely:- 37-A. Power of State Government to exclude the application of the Act - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to such areas and from such date as may be specified in the notification."
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 47 of the principal Act, for the proviso the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that Sections 6 and 24 of the Karnataka General Clauses Act, 1899 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1899) shall be applicable in respect of such repeal."
Karnataka Prevention of Fragmentation and Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- "Schedule (See Section 3) Sl. No. Class of lands Area (1) (2) (3) 1. A Class One-half acre. 2. B Class Three-fourth acre. 3. C Class One and one-fourth acre. 4. D Class Two and seven-tenth acres Explanation - In this Schedule 'A' Class, 'B' Class, 'C' Class or 'D Class' shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961." 
