Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1975), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-third year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 19821 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of October, 1981. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Ninth day of March, 1982, Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixth day of March, 1982
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1975) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - for sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely - "(2) The Committee shall consist of - (a) The Secretary to Government, Social Welfare and Labour Department Member (b) The Director of Social Welfare in Karnataka Member (c) The Secretary to Government, Finance Department Member (d) Four non-official members nominated by the Government Members The Government may appoint one of the Members of the Committee as its Chairman and appoint a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Committee. (3) Subject to the pleasure of the State Government, the term of the office of the non-official members shall be for a period of three years: Provided that if a non-official member of the Committee absents himself without permission of the Committee for two consecutive meetings of the committee, he shall cease to be a member. (4) (a) Casual or other vacancies in the Committee shall be filled by the Government in the prescribed manner. (b) During any vacancy in the Committee the continuing members may act as if no vacancy had occurred. (5) The non-official members shall be paid such remuneration and allowances as may be prescribed. (6) The Committee shall meet at least once in two months".
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 12 of the principal Act, for the words "six months", the words "twelve months" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 13 of the principal Act, for the words "six months", the words "twelve months" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka Section 30 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely - "(2) The Central Relief Fund shall be administered by a Committee consisting of the Secretary to Government, Social Welfare and Labour Department who shall be the Chairman and the Director of Social Welfare and a representative of the Finance Department nominated by the Government who shall be the members of the Committee. (3) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Central Relief Fund shall be applied for such purposes and in such manner as may be decided by the Committee constituted under sub-section (2) from time to time".
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "the Central Relief Committee", the words, brackets and figures "the Committee constituted under sub-section (2) of Section 30", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (Karnataka Ordinance 19 of 1981), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
