Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1975) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fifty third year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary Act, 1975 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1975) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (i) in sub-section (4), after the word "bond" the words "for a sum of rupees one thousand" shall be inserted. (ii) in sub-section (5), after the words "a surety" the words "for a sum of rupees two thousand" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "not exceeding twelve months" the words "which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) for the words "not exceeding twelve months" the words "which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three years" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Prohibition of Beggary (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 31 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- "(4) If a local authority fails to make payment of such balance amount within the time as directed by the Government under sub-section (3), the Government may make an order directing the person having the custody of the fund of the local authority concerned to pay such balance amount in priority to any other charge against such fund and such person shall so far as the amounts to the credit of such fund admit, be bound to comply with the order. (5) Where the balance amount due from a local authority is not paid in compliance with the order of the Government under sub-section (4), the such amount shall be recoverable from such local authority in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue and the amount so recovered shall be credited to the Central Relief Fund." By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, M.R.HEGDE Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
