Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1993), for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislative in the Sixty-first year of the republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1993) (hereinafter referred to as the "principal Act"), after clause (28), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(28-A) "Panchayat Development Officer" means the Panchayat Development Officer of the Grama Panchayat".
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the giving and recording of votes in the Grama Panchayat election by voting machines in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the State Election Commission may having regard to the circumstances of each case specify. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "Voting Machine" means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used at any election".
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (c), for the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 111 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word "Secretary", the words "Panchayat Development Officer and Secretary" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 112 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the word "Secretary", the words "Panchayat Development Officer, Secretary and Accounts Assistant" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 113 of the Principal Act, in sub-sections (2) and (4), for the word "Secretary", the words "Panchayat Development Officer" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 123 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 130 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the giving and recording of votes in taluk panchayat elections by voting machines in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the State election commission may having regard to the circumstances of each case specify. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "Voting Machine" means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used at any election".
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 138 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (c), for the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 162 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), of the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 169 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the giving and recording of votes in zilla panchayat elections by voting machines in such manner as may be prescribed, may be adopted in such constituency or constituencies as the State Election Commission may having regard to the circumstances of each case specify. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section "Voting machine" means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used at any election".
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 177 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (c), for the words "one-third", the words "fifty per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 200 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the word "Secretary", the words "Panchayat Development Officer" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 241 of the Principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (5), for the word "Secretary", the words "Panchayat Development Officer" shall be substituted. 
