Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for the Regulation of Stone Crushers in the State of Karnataka. Whereas the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka by its order dated: 10.7.1998 in Writ Petition No.17078/1997 has directed the State Government to formulate a policy regulating the carrying on the business related to the crushing of stones by prescribing reasonable conditions including guidelines and licenses and their renewals. And whereas it is considered necessary to enact a legislation providing for licenses and their renewals in the State of Karnataka and for certain other matters. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the sixty-second year of Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Seventh day of September, 2011.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "Appellate Authority" means the Regional Commissioner of the concerned region; (b) "committee" means the District Stone Crusher Regulation Committee constituted under section 8; (c) "Deputy Commissioner" means the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned Revenue District; (d) "Licence" means a licence granted under this Act; (e) "Licensee" means a person or a company holding licence under this Act; (f) "Licencing Authority" means the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned Revenue District; (g) "Licence fee" means the licence fee payable under this Act; (h) "Pollution Control Board" means the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board established under the provisions of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; (i) "rules" means rules made under this Act; (j) "safer zone" means a location or a zone declared as such by the Licencing Authority under section 6; (k) "stone crusher" means any power driven machinery of any size which crushes stone; (l) "year" means year commencing on the first day of April and concluding on 31 day of March of the succeeding year. (2) All other words and expressions used in this Act but not defined shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (Central Act 67 of 1957) and rules issued thereunder.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person shall carry on the business of stone crushing in the State except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a license issued under this Act. (2) Any person who is carrying on the business of stone crusher on the date of commencement of this Act with a license issued by any authority shall apply to the Licencing Authority for a license under section 4 of the Act within three months from the date of declaration of safer zone under section 6. (3) On receipt of the application made under sub-section (2), the existing stone crusher units may be allowed to function till the grant or refusal of the license under the provisions of this Act or till three months from the date of receipt of application within which time the licensing authority shall dispose of such application after due verification of the location and fulfilment of other conditions of licence. (4) On grant of licence under sub-section (3), the existing stone crushers shall be shifted to the safer zone within six months.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1)Every application for grant or renewal of license to carry on the business of stone crushing under this Act shall be made to the licensing authority in such form, in such manner, accompanied by such documents and such fees as may be prescribed. An application for renewal of license shall be made to the licencing authority three months before the expiry of the license. (2) On receipt of application for grant or renewal of licence, the Licencing Authority shall cause inspection of the location and after verifying the fulfilment of other conditions of licence grant or reject the application within three months from the date of application.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka A license shall be valid for a period of three years and may be renewed for a further period of three years subject to fulfilment of the conditions laid down under this Act or the rules made thereunder. Explanation.- Where a license has been granted in the middle of a year, for the purpose of computing the term of license, the remaining part of the year shall be deemed to be a year.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka License shall be granted under this Act subject to the following conditions, namely:- (1) The stone crusher shall not be established outside the safer zone; (2) The safer zone shall be within a location of,- (a) two kilometres away from the National Highways, habitats, temples, schools and river; (b) one and a half kilometres away from the State Highway; (c) five hundred meters away from the link roads; (d) eight kilometres away from the limits of Municipal Corporations; (e) four kilometres away from the limits of District Head Quarters; (f) two kilometres away from the boundary limits of a Taluk Head Quarters; (g) one kilometre away from the limits of an inhabited village or any land recorded as forest in Government records or any private land which is shown as cultivable land in the revenue records; (3) No two safer zones shall be located within a radius of fifty kilometres. (4) The Licencing Authority shall, within a period of four months from the date of commencement of this Act, identify and declare the safer zones by notification specifying the area and limits within their jurisdiction: Provided that the Licencing Authority may in exceptional circumstances and for the reasons to be recorded in writing may relax any of the condition or conditions specified in sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) for the purpose of declaration of safer zones. (5) The Licencing Authority shall send the proposal of declaration of safer zone under sub-section (4), to the pollution control Board for its certification. On receipt of the proposal by the pollution control Board or where three months have lapsed from the date of the proposal and no communication has been received by the Licencing Authority, the Licencing Authority shall by notification declare the safer zone in accordance with the proposal. (6) Each stone crusher unit shall be located in a minimum area of one acre of land including stone crushers belonging to State Government or the Panchayat as the case may be. (7) Each unit shall abide by the pollution control measures or such other safeguards as may be prescribed by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board from time to time. (8) Each unit shall conform to the Noise (Regulations and Control) Rules, 2000. (9) The unit shall abide by the provisions of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the Environment Protection Act, 1986 and rules made thereunder.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, license for temporary stone crushers exclusively for construction of National Highway, State Highway or any other infra-structural Government project and Government approved Public Private Partnership Projects may be granted for the project period on their fulfilling the provisions of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Environmental Protection Act, 1986 and Rules made thereunder.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, there shall be established in each of the Revenue District a District Stone Crushers Regulation Committee consisting of the following, namely:- (a) The Deputy Commissioner of the District Chairman (b) Superintendent of Police of the District Member ex-officio (c) CEO of Zilla Panchayath of the District Member ex-officio (d) Deputy Conservator of Forest of the District Member ex-officio (e) Environmental Officer of the District Member ex-officio (f) Assistant Director of Fire Force of the District Member ex-officio (g) Assistant Director of Factories and Boilers of the District Member ex-officio (h) Labour Officer in charge of the District Member ex-officio (i) District Health Officer Member ex-officio (j) Deputy Director / Senior Geologist, Department of Mines and Geology to be appointed by the Chairman Member-Secretary (2) The District Stone Crushers Regulation Committee shall assist the licensing authority and shall be responsible for the supervision of the licensed premises. The license shall be issued by the licensing authority after obtaining No Objection Certificate from the concerned departments including the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board, the Forest and the Revenue departments and in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka The Deputy Commissioner or an officer authorized by the Deputy Commissioner shall inspect each stone crusher at least once a year.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka The license issued under this Act may be cancelled suo-moto for the reasons to be recorded in writing by the Licensing Authority or on considering any complaint or application filed by any person to the effect that the license granted is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and rules or that the licensee has violated the conditions of license: Provided that no order of canceling the license shall be made under this section without giving an opportunity of being heard to the licensee or a person aggrieved by such cancellation.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of this Act and to any directions that the Central Government or State Government may give in this behalf, the Licensing Authority may in the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue any directions in writing to any person, officer or authority, and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions. Explanation.- The power to issue directions under this section shall include, the power to direct,- (a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any stone crusher; or (b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or any other service to the stone crusher.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Committee shall have and maintain a separate fund called Victim Relief Fund, to which shall be credited all moneys received by it through licence fee, fines and penalties levied by it, which shall be held, applied and disbursed in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and rules made thereunder. (2) The Chairman and the member secretary of the Committee shall operate the Victim Relief Fund in accordance with the rules made under this Act. (3) The Victim Relief Fund shall be kept in any of the Nationalised Bank in such manner as may be prescribed. (4) The Committee shall receive complaints or applications or claim from the victims on account of the health hazard caused by the stone crushers within a period of three months from the date the health hazard has occurred and consider such applications and determine the amount of relief to be granted to each of the applicant within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the application in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed: Provided that the Committee may entertain such complaints or applications after the expiry of three months if it is satisfied that the complainant or applicant had sufficient cause for not submitting the complaint or application in time. (5) The Committee may also direct the licence holder to pay such amount to such of the victims as determined under sub-section (4) in addition to the amount paid by it, within a period of two months from the date of the Order failing which the license shall be cancelled.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Accounts of all receipts and expenditure of the Victim Relief Fund shall be kept in such manner and in such form as may be prescribed. (2) The accounts of the Victim Relief Fund shall be subject to audit annually by the State Accounts Department and the audit report shall be forwarded annually to the State Government.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka The committee shall prepare for every year a report of its activities under this Act and submit the same to the State Government in such form on or before such date as may be prescribed and the State Government shall cause the same to be laid before each house of the legislature.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Regional Commissioner of the concerned region shall be the Appellate Authority of respective jurisdiction to whom appeals in respect of the orders passed by the licensing authority shall lie. (2) Every appeal shall be presented within thirty days from the date on which the order appealed against was communicated to the person affected: Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the said period of thirty days, if the appellant show sufficient cause that the appeal could not be presented in time. (3) Every appeal shall be in the form of memorandum setting forth concisely the grounds of objection to the order and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed against. (4) The appeal shall be disposed off on hearing both sides within a period of three months.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whoever contravenes the conditions of license shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with both. (2) Any rule made under any provision of this Act may provide that any contravention thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act or any rules made thereunder except upon complaint in writing made by a person authorized in this behalf by the Licensing Authority. (2) No court other than the Court of Judicial Magistrate first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, after previous publication by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the State Government may, by order published in the official Gazette as the occasion may require do anything which appears to it be necessary to remove the difficulty.
Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Act, 2011_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Regulation of Stone Crushers Ordinance, 2011 (Karnataka Ordinance No.2 of 2011) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act. H. R.BHARDWAJ GOVERNOR OF KARNATAKA By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, G. K. BOREGOWDA Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation 
