Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas Act, 1991. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 29 of 1991) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may called the Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 19951 . (2) Clauses (1), (2) and (3) of Section 4 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the First day of August, 1992 and the remaining provision shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 3rd Day of June, 1995. Received the assent of the Governor on Fifth day of October, 1995
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 29 of 1991) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(1-A) "Competent Authority" means a Competent Authority appointed under Section 6." (2) Clause (6) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) for the words and figures "Thirty-first day of March, 1990", the words and figures "First day of January, 1995" shall be substituted. (2) for the words and figures "before the First day of October, 1994", the words and figures "before the Thirty-first day of December, 1995" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act - (1) in clause (i), after the words "existing or proposed roads", the words "including those proposed for widening" shall be inserted. (2) Clauses (ii),(iv) and (vi) shall be omitted. (3) for clause (vii-b), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(vii-b) Unauthorised constructions on land belonging to the Central Government."
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 6 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "6. Competent Authority - (1) For the purpose of regularisation of unauthorised constructions, the State Government may by notification appoint an Officer not below the rank of a K.A.S. Group-A Senior Scale Officer to be a Competent Authority for such area or areas as may be specified by it, and two or more Competent Authorities may be appointed in respect of the same areas. (2) The Competent Authority shall scrutinise application received under Section 3 and after holding an enquiry in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed and subject to payment being made according to the provisions, hereinafter contained make a provisional order of regularisation of unauthorised constructions and where such construction is situated on the land belonging to the State Government may for the purpose of regularising the construction also make a provisional order for grant of the appurtenant land included in the said construction, subject to such maximum extent that may be prescribed. (3) Burden of proving that an unauthorised construction was made prior to the First day of January, 1995 shall lie on the applicant who seeks regularisation of such unauthorised construction."
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "Screening Committee", the words "Competent Authority" shall be substituted. (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "Member-Secretary of the Screening Committee shall issue an order", the words "Competent Authority shall make a final order" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 8-A of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely - "8-A. Revision by the Divisional Commissioner - The Divisional Commissioner of the concerned Revenue Division may on his own motion or on the application of any person at any time call for and examine the order passed or proceeding recorded by the Competent Authority for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of the order or the regularity of such proceeding and may pass such order with respect thereto as he may deem fit: Provided that no such order shall be made except after giving the person affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard."
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) - (1) in clause (a), for the words, figure and brackets "sub-section (4)", the words, figure and brackets "sub-section (2)" shall be substituted. (2) in clause (b), for the words "Screening Committee", the words "Competent Authority" shall be substituted. (3) clause (c) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Regularisation of Unauthorised Constructions in Urban Areas (Amendment) Ordinance, 1995 (Karnataka Ordinance 3 of 1995) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by the Act. 
