Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1961) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Thirty-first day of December, 1982. Received the assent of the President on the Fifteenth day of July, 1983 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (4) of Section 1 of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1961), (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), for the figures "1982" the figures "1992" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 21-A of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "21-B. Special provision for recovery of possession of premises by members of Armed Fores of the Union or a member of the family of a deceased member of such Forces - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, - (a) a landlord, who is a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or who was such a member and is duly retired which term shall include premature retirement shall be entitled to recover possession of any premises on the ground that the premises is bona fide required by him for occupation by himself or any member of his family and the Court shall pass a decree for eviction on such ground if the landlord, at the hearing of the suit, produces a certificate given by the head of his service or his commanding officer, to the effect that,- (i) he is presently a member of the Armed Forces of the Union or he was such a member and is not retired; and (ii) he does not possess any other suitable accommodation in the local area where he or the members of his family can reside. (b) Where a member of the Armed Forces of the Union dies while in service or such member is duly retired as stated above and dies within five years of his retirement, his widow who is or becomes a landlady of any premise shall be entitled to recover possession of such premises on the ground that the accommodation is bona fide required by her for occupation by herself, or any member of her family and the Court shall pass a decree for eviction on such ground, if such widow, at the hearing of the suit, produces a certificate given by the Area or Sub-Area Commander within whose jurisdiction the accommodation is situated to the effect that,- (i) she is the widow of a deceased member of the Armed Forces as aforesaid; and (ii) she does not possess any other suitable accommodation in the local area where she or the members of her family can reside. Explanation - For the purposes of clause (a) of this sub-section, the expression "the head of his service" in the case of members retired from the Indian Army includes the Area Commander, in the case of members retired from the Indian Navy includes the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief and in the case of the members retired from the Indian Air Force includes the Station Commander. (2) For the purposes of this Section and certificate referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein."
Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka for schedules I, II and III of the Principal Act, the following Schedules shall be substituted, namely:- "Schedule I [See Section 2(2)] A. Areas within the limits of the Cities under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976, and the areas within a radius of three kilometres from the limits of the said cities. B. Areas within the limits of the following City Municipalities,- 1. Bellary 2. Bidar 3. Bijapur 4. Davanagere 5. Gadag-Betageri 6. Hospet 7. Hassan 8. Mandya 9. Raichur 10. Shimoga 11. Tumkur C. Areas within the limits of the following town municipalities of,- 1. Arsikere 2. Bhadravathi 3. Buntawal 4. Chickmagalur 5. Chitradurga 6. Kundapura 7. Kolar 8. Karwar 9. Karkala 10. Kollegal 11. Malavalli 12. Madikeri 13. Mulki 14. Mudabidri 15. Nippani 16. Puttur 17. Udupi D. Area within the limits of Kolar Gold Fields Sanitary Board. Schedule II [See Section 2(3)] I. Areas within the limits of cities under the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 and the area within a radius of three kilometres from the limits of the said cities. II. Areas within the limits of City Municipalities, Town Municipalities and Notified Areas constituted or deemed to be constituted under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964, except the Notified Area Committee, Bhadravathi. III. Areas within the limits of the Notified Area Committee, Bhadravathi, excluding New Town and Paper Town. IV. Area within the limits of Kolar Gold Fields Sanitary Board. V. Area within the limits of Town Panchayats of: 1. Bankapur 2. Gokarna VI. Areas within the limits of Revenue Village of: 1. Buntwal 2. Kod 3. Mudibidri 4. Mulki Schedule III [See Section 2(4)] Areas within the limits of under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976, and the areas within a of three kilometres from the limits of the said cities."
Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Rent Control (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Karnataka Ordinance 4 of 1983) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
