Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences Act, 1994. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences Act, 1994 (Karnataka Act 44 of 1994), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty-fourth year of the Republic of India, as follows-
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty-first day of December, 2013
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences Act, 1994 (Karnataka Act 44 of 1994) (hereinafter referred to as the ' principal Act')- (i) for sub-section (3), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(3) The Committee referred to in sub-section (2) shall be a Search Committee constituted by the State Government consisting of three persons of whom, one shall be nominated by the Chancellor, one by the State Government and one by the Syndicate. The State Government shall appoint one of the members as Chairman of the Committee. The Secretary to the Government in-charge of Medical Education or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government shall be the Convenor of the Search Committee. (ii) in sub-section (4)- (a) for the words "but he shall be eligible for re-appointment", the words "he shall not be eligible for re-appointment for a second term" shall be substituted; (b) the first proviso shall be omitted; (c) in second proviso, the word "further" shall be omitted.
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(1) The Registrar shall be a whole time Officer of the University. The State Government shall appoint an Officer belonging to the Indian Administrative Service in the Senior Scale or an Officer belonging to the Karnataka Administrative Services not below the rank of Supertime Scale to be the Registrar of the University".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(1) The Registrar (Evaluation) shall be a whole time Officer of the University. The State Government shall either appoint an Officer belonging to the Karnataka Administrative Service, not below the rank of Group 'A' Senior Scale to be the Registrar (Evaluation) of the University or a Professor of an Autonomous Government Medical Institute with experience of at least five continuous years in the post of Professor".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole time Officer of the University. The State Government shall appoint an Officer belonging to the cadre of Joint Controller in the State Accounts Department to be the Finance Officer of the University".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 18 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "18. Other Officers - The manner of appointment and the conditions of service of other Officers of the University referred to in clause (viii) of Section 9 shall be such as may be prescribed by statute or by deputation of Officers of the State Government or Officers of Government Autonomous Medical Institutes for a period not exceeding three years. Provided that no such officers for any Administrative Posts in the University shall be taken on deputation from any aided or unaided private colleges or educational institutions. The powers and duties and the conditions of service of such officers shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)- (i) for clause (iii), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(iii) The Secretary to Government in-charge of Medical Education, or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government". (ii) for clause (xiii), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(xiii) Six members each of whom elected to Medical Council of India, Dental Council of India, Pharmacy Council of India, Indian Nursing Council, Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council of Homeopathy from Karnataka Chapter".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)- (a) after clause (i), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(i-a) The Secretary to Government, in-charge of Health and Family Welfare or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government; (i-b) The Secretary to Government in-charge of Medical Education, or his nominee not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to Government"; (b) for clause (x), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(x) One nominee from an autonomous Government Medical Institute nominated by the Government by yearly rotation"; (c) after clause (xi), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(xii) Six persons nominated by the State Government from amongst eminent personalities in the field of Health Sciences of whom- (i) one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes; (ii) one person belonging to the Other Backward Classes; (iii one woman; (iv) one person belonging to Linguistic Minorities; and (v) two others: Provided that no person who is in the employment of an affiliated college or in the University in whatever capacity shall be eligible for nomination".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 40 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "40. Management of Funds - All the funds of the University shall be managed in such manner as may be prescribed by the statutes: Provided that the State Government may also issue directions from time to time regarding the management and utilisation of funds. The directions of the State Government shall be final".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 43 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "43. Annual accounts and audit - (1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the directions of the Syndicate. (2) The annual accounts so prepared shall be considered by the Senate at its next earliest meeting. The Senate may pass a resolution with reference thereto and communicate the same to the Syndicate. The Syndicate shall consider the suggestions made by the Senate and take such action thereon as it thinks fit and shall inform the Senate at its next meeting the action taken by it or the reasons for not taking action. (3) The accounts of the University shall be audited by the Controller of State Accounts once a year, in the month of April. (4) The accounts so audited shall be placed before the Syndicate and the Senate and thereafter transmitted to the State Government with comments along with the resolution of the Senate before 30th of September every year. The State Government shall place the same before both the houses of the State Legislature at their next earliest session".
Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 44 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely- "(2) Copies of the Annual Report along with the resolution of the Senate thereon shall be sent to the Government before 30th of September every year. The State Government shall place the same before both the houses of the State Legislature at their next earliest session". 
