Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1961) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976.1 2 (2) Sections 2, 3, 4 and 6 shall be deemed to have come into force on the twentieth day of August, 1976 and Sections 5 and 7 shall be deemed to have come into force on the Thirteenth day of October, 1976, and the remaining sections shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-seventh day of November, 1976 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1961) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ff) "Family" in relation to a person means the wife or husband of such person and his or her dependent children;"
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the Principal Act, for the words "be given on lease", the words "be given to the landlord for his use and occupation or on lease" shall be substituted and before the Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that where such building is a residential building no such order shall be made in favour of a person not being the landlord, who or any member of whose family owns a residential building in the same city or town or village in which the vacant building is situated."
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 8 of the Principal Act, after the proviso, the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided further that no such direction shall be issued in favour of any person who or any member of whose family owns a residential building in the same city, town or village in which the building is situated."
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 14 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (1), clauses (a) and (b) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 21 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "21-A. Vacation of residential building in certain cases - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, on and from the date of coming into force of this Section. (a) any person who is in occupation or possession of a residential building as a tenant on allotment by the Controller, shall, within one year from the said date vacate such building if he owns in his name or in the name of any member of his family, a residential building in the same city, town or village (hereinafter referred to as his own building); (b) such person shall be entitled to recover possession of his own building, in case it is let out to any other person and he may apply to the prescribed authority for eviction of such other person: Provided that no such application shall be entertained unless the applicant has given notice of not less than four months requiring the person sought to be evicted to vacate the said building; (c) the prescribed authority shall, after making such summary inquiry as it deems necessary, evict such other person, if necessary, by using force and put the applicant in possession of his own building: Provided that where such person owns more than one building which are all let out, the choice of which building he seeks possession for his own occupation shall lie with such person; (d) the Controller shall, while allotting premises under Section 5, give first priority immediately after the State Government and the Central Government to the person to whom notice under the proviso to clause (b) has been issued if such person makes an application in this behalf. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person who being in occupation or possession of a residential building as a tenant on allotment by the Controller acquires or constructs on or after the 20th day of August, 1976 either in his own name or in the name of any member of the family a residential building in the same city, town or village shall within such time as may be prescribed, vacate the building of which he is the tenant. (3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (1), or sub-section (2) shall, on conviction, be punished with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both".
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka After Part V of the Principal Act, the following Part and Sections shall be inserted, namely:- "Part V-A SPECIAL PROVISIONS 31-A. Application of the Part - The provisions of this Part shall apply in residential buildings to which Part II applies. 31-B. Voluntary declaration - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act," (i) any landlord who has occupied or let out a residential building; or (ii) any person who has occupied such building as a tenant, in contravention of Section 4 or Section 5, may, within Sixty days from the date of coming into force in this Section, make a declaration in this behalf to the prescribed Authority: Provided that the prescribed authority may entertain the declaration after the expiry of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the declarant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the declaration in time. (2) Such declaration shall contain the following particulars, namely:- (a) Name and address of the declarant; (b) Name and address of the landlord and tenant, if any; (c) Location of the building along with its Municipal Number; (d) Date on which it was occupied or let out; (e) Whether such landlord or tenant or any member of his family owns any residential building in the same city, town or village and if so, details thereof; (f) The person in occupation of the building referred to in clause (e). 31-C. Regularisation of occupation - (1) On receipt of the declaration under Section 31-B, the prescribed authority shall, if so satisfied pass an order declaring that the occupation or letting out from its inception is lawful: Provided that no such order shall be passed in favour of a declarant who owns either in his own name or in the name of his family any residential building in the same city, town or village in which the building referred to in the declaration is situated. (2) On the passing of an order under sub-section (1), the declarant if he is a tenant shall be deemed for all purposes of the Act to be a person in whose favour the building is ordered to be leased under Section 5. (3) The provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 4 and Section 10-A shall not apply when an order under sub-section (1) is made. 31-D. Regularisation not to affect other remedies - Any order passed under sub-section (1) of Section 31-C, shall not in any way prejudice any action taken or to be taken by any person under Section 21."
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka All proceedings including appeals pending before any Court or authority,- (i) on the 20th day of August, 1976 shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by Sections 2, 3, 4 and 6 of this Act; (ii) on the 13th day of October, 1976 shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by Sections 5 and 7 of this Act.
Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Rent Control (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 20 of 1976) and the Karnataka Rent Control (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 29 of 1976) are hereby repealed and shall be deemed to have been repealed on and from 20th day of August, 1976 and the 13th day of October, 1976 respectively. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinances shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
