Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1996. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1996 (Karnataka Act 19 of 1996) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fifty-second year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2001. 1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-first day of November, 1996. First published in the Karnataka Gazette Extraordinary on the tenth day of August, 2001.
Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After section 19 of the Roerich and Devikarani Roerich Estate (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1996, (Karnataka Act 19 of 1996) the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "19A Disbursement of amount to the owners, transferees and other interested persons:- (1) If out of the amount paid to him in relation to the estate, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities specified in Schedule-II, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the owners, transferees and other interested persons. (2) Before making any payment to the owners, transferees and other interested persons in proportion to their interest in the Estate, the Commissioner shall satisfy himself as to the right of such owners, transferees and other interested persons to receive the whole or any part of such amount and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of such owner, transferee or other interested persons to receive the whole or any part of the amount referred to in sections 7 and 8, including apportionment of the amount among them, the Commissioner shall refer the matter to the Court and make disbursement in accordance with the decision of the Court. (3) The court shall decide the apportionment of amount among the owners, transferees and other interested persons in relation to the estate having due regard to the value on the appointed day, of the property forming part of the estate. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act evidence shall be admissible to establish before the court right, title and interest of the owners, transferees or other interested persons in relation to the estate. Explanation: In this section 'Court' in relation to the estate means the principal court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the estate is situated." 
