Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement Clearance) Act, 1973. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1973 (Karnataka Act 33 of 1974) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 19811 2 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Thirtieth day of December, 1980. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Seventh day of April, 1981, Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixth day of April, 1981 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1973 (Karnataka Act 33 of 1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) after clause (e) the following clause shall be inserted namely:- "(ee) "hut" means any building, which is constructed principally of wood, mud, leaves, grass or thatch and includes any temporary structure of whatever size or any small building of whatever material made". (2) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ff) "licensing authority" means the authority competent under any law for the time being in force to grant permission for the execution of work relating to construction or re-construction of any building";
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely:- "Chapter III A Prohibition of Un-Authorised Constructions 5-A. Application - (1) This Chapter shall come into force,- (i) in the cities of Bangalore, Belagum, Hubli-Dharwar, Mangalore and Karnataka constituted or continued under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 or under any other law and in the areas within five kilometres from the limits of the said cities, at once; (ii) in the municipalities constituted or continued under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 or under any other law, on such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different municipalities. Explanation - For the purposes of this clause municipalities include, notified area committees, sanitary boards and town boards. (2) This Chapter shall not apply to other areas in the State. 5-B. Prohibition of construction of buildings without previous permission - (1)(a) After the coming into force of this chapter in any area, no construction or reconstruction of a building shall in such area be begun by any person unless and until permission for the execution of the work relating to such construction or reconstruction is granted to such person under the relevant law by the licensing authority. (b) No person shall collect any rent or other charges, by whatever name called, from the occupant of any building constructed or reconstructed in contravention of clause (a). (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or who abets such contravention shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees: Provided that,- (i) in the clause of a first offence the term of imprisonment shall not be less than six months and the amount of fine shall not be less than five hundred rupees; and (ii) in the case of a second or subsequent offence the term of imprisonment shall not be less than one year and the amount of fine shall not be less than one thousand rupees. 5-C. Demolition of buildings unlawfully commenced, carried on or completed - (1) If the Board is satisfied that the construction or reconstruction of any building has been commenced or is being carried on or has been completed without obtaining the permission of the licensing authority, under the relevant law, the Board may make a provisional order requiring the owner or the builder or the occupier of the building to demolish the work done and may also direct that the owner or the builder shall refrain from proceeding with the work of construction or reconstruction of the building. (2) The Board shall serve a copy of the provisional order made under sub-section (1) on the owner or builder or the occupier of the building together with a notice requiring him to show cause within a reasonable time to be specified in such notice why the order should not be confirmed. (3) If the owner or the builder or the occupier fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the Board, it may confirm the order, with such modifications as it may think fit, and such order shall then be binding on the owner, the builder and the occupier and the Board may take any measure or do anything which may, in its opinion be necessary, for giving due effect to the order and the expenses incurred for the purpose shall be recovered from the owner, the builder and the occupier, as arrears of land revenue. The Board may seize the materials and tools used for the construction or reconstruction of the building and may sell them and apply the sale proceeds towards the expenses incurred. (4) If the work of construction or reconstruction of any building is commenced in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 5-B and the Board is of the opinion that immediate action should be taken, then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter a notice to be given under sub-section (2) shall not be of less duration than twenty four hours and shall be deemed to be duly served if it is affixed in some conspicuous part of the building to which the notice relates and published by proclamation at or near such building and accompanied by beat of drum, and upon such affixation and publication, all persons concerned shall be deemed to have been duly informed of the matters stated therein. (5) The Government may call for and examine the records of any proceedings of the Board under this section and after such enquiry as it thinks fit, if the Government is satisfied that the order of the Board is contrary to law, pass such orders thereon as the Government deems fit: Provided that no order shall be made to the prejudice of any party unless he has had an opportunity of being heard. 5-D. The Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 and other laws not affected - Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to affect the operation of the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 or the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 or any other law or the rules made thereunder and the provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the provisions of the said Acts, laws and the rules".
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 58 of the principal Act, the following Explanation shall be added at the end, namely:- "Explanation - For purposes of this section dangerous or offensive trade" includes,- (a) trading in arrack or toddy or other intoxicants; and (b) pawn broking or money lending except by a co-operative society or a banking company".
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 71 of the principal Act in sub-section (2), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted namely:- "(e) restrictions, if any, on the exercise of powers by the Board under Section 5-C".
Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1980, (Karnataka Ordinance No. 17 of 1980) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
