Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act 17 of 1960) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 19761 2 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Second day of July, 1976. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the First day of December, 1976, Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-seventh day of November, 1976 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000.
Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 27 of the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act 17 of 1960), the following section shall be inserted, namely - "27-A. Appointment of Administrator - Notwithstanding anything in this Act - (1)(a) Where any society on account of the pendency of litigation or otherwise has not held or is unable to hold the annual general meeting; or (b) where the term of office of the members of the governing body of a society has expired and a new governing body has not for any reason been constituted; or (c) where on a report made by the Registrar or otherwise, on enquiry, the State Government considers it necessary in public interest so to do, the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, appoint an Administrator for such society for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the order, to manage the affairs of the society: Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the State Government may, by like order, extend the said period by any further periods not exceeding six months at a time, so however subject to the provisions of clause (5), the aggregate period shall not extend beyond two years. (2) The expenditure incurred by the State Government towards the salary and allowances of the Administrator shall be paid to the State Government from out of the funds of the society. (3) On the appointment of the Administrator under clause (1) and during the period of such appointment the governing body of the society shall cease to exercise any powers and perform and discharge any functions or duties conferred or imposed on it by this Act, or its memorandum of association or the rules and regulations or any other law and subject to any directions which the State Government, may from time to time issue, all such functions or duties shall be performed or discharged by the Administrator. (4) The Administrator shall, before the expiry of the period of his appointment take necessary action to convene the general body meeting of the society and hold elections for the constitution of the governing body. (5) If the Administrator is not, for reasons beyond his control, able to convene the general body meeting or inspite of such meeting being convened, the general body fails to elect the governing body, the Administrator shall forthwith send a report to the State Government, who may pass such orders as are considered necessary, either extending the period of appointment of the Administrator for a further period or if satisfied that public interest so requires, for the dissolution of the society. (6) Where an order of dissolution is passed under clause (5), the assets of the society shall vest in and the liabilities shall devolve on the State Government".
Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Societies Registration (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 11 of 1976) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
