Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fiftieth year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999.1 (2) It shall come into force with effect from 1st day of April, 1999. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty-first day of March, 1999
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) - (i) for clause (d), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(d) "Conveyance" includes - (i) a conveyance on sale; (ii) every instrument; (iii) every decree or final order of any Civil Court; (iv) every order made by the High Court under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 in respect of amalgamation of companies, by which property, whether moveable or immovable or any estate is transferred to, or vested in, any other person, and which is not otherwise specifically provided for by the schedule". (ii) after clause (m), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(mm) "Market Value" in relation to any property which is the subject-matter of an instrument, means the price which such property would have fetched if sold in open market on the date of execution of such instrument or the consideration stated in the instrument whichever is higher: Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Articles, in respect of an instrument executed by or on behalf of or in favour of the State Government or the Central Government or a local Authority or other Authority constituted by or under any law for the time being in force or a Body incorporate wholly owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, the market value of the property shall be the value of consideration for such conveyance as set forth in the instrument".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 3-B of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely - "3-C. Limit on levy of additional stamp duty - Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no instrument shall be charged with any duty in the form of additional stamp duty under such other law, exceeding the maximum amount of duty with which such instrument is chargeable under of this Act".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the principal Act, after the proviso to clause (a), the following shall be inserted, namely - "Provided further that the State Government may in public interest reduce or remit, by notification; till the end of 31st March, 2001, the stamp duty payable on any instrument, to be specified therein, executed by a new Tiny and Small Scale Industrial unit as defined under the new Industrial Policy of the Government of Karnataka, dated Fifteenth March, 1996."
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(3) Subject to the rules made under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or any other officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf may authorise any person, body or organisation, including Post Offices and Banks, to use machine for making impression of stamps indicating the payment of stamp duty on the instrument".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka Sections 28-A and 28-B of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section. (2) of Section 44 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "Section 34 or Section 39" the words "any of the provisions of this Act" and for the words "within three months of the order of charging the same" the words "within six months from the date of registration of the instrument or the order charging the same" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45-A of the principal Act, Explanation shall be omitted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45-B of the principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1), at the end, the following words shall be added, namely - "and to publish the estimated market value in such manner as may be prescribed". (ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 48 of the principal Act - (i) in clause (1), for the words "two months" the words "six months" shall be substituted; (ii) in clauses (2) and (3), for the words "six months" wherever they occur the words "one year" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 50 of the principal Act, for the words "six months" wherever it occurs, the words "one year" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "51. Allowance for spoiled or misused stamps how to be made - In any case in which allowance is made for spoiled or misused stamps, the Deputy Commissioner may, after deducting twenty paise for each rupee or a fraction thereof, give in lieu thereof - (a) other stamps of the same description; or (b) if required and if he thinks fit, stamps of any, other description; or (c) at his discretion the value in money equal to the discounted value".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (i) Section 52 of the principal Act, shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and in sub-section (1) as so renumbered, in clause (c) for the words "six months" the words "one year" shall be substituted; and (ii) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely - "(2) An appeal shall lie against the orders of the Deputy Commissioner within sixty days from the date of the order passed under this chapter to the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in Article 5 - (a) in clause (d), after the brackets, words and figures "(Karnataka Act 27 of 1966)", a comma, the words, figures and brackets "Municipal Corporation constituted under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976, (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977), Municipal Councils or Town Panchayats constituted under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964), Urban Development Authorities constituted under the Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1987), Grama Panchayats, Taluk Panchayats and Zilla Panchayats constituted under the Karnataka Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1993)" shall be inserted. (b) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(da) Where any instrument of Lease-cum-sale effected by the Bangalore Development Authority constituted under the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976), the Karnataka Housing Board constituted under the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963) pertaining to premises of a Flat or Apartments. The duty payable shall be as a conveyance [No. 20(3)] for the market value equal to the security deposit and the amount of average annual rent reserved under such agreement". (c) in clause (f), after the word "property", the words "situated in Karnataka State shall be inserted. (2) In Article 6 - (i) for the words "pawn, pledge or hypothecation", wherever the occur, the words "pawn or pledge" shall be substituted. (ii) in clause (2) - (a) after the words "property", the words "whether attested or unattested" shall be omitted; (b) in column (3), in the proviso, the word "hypothecation" shall be omitted. (iii) after clause (2), the following shall be inserted, namely - "Exemption - Instruments of pawn or pledge of goods, if unattested. Note - "Goods" for the purpose of exemption means raw materials and stock in trade only". (3) in Article 20 - (a) in clause (1), for the first proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely - "Provided that in respect of any instrument of conveyance effected by the house building co-operative societies, registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) in so far as it relates to allotment of buildings or sites to their members, the duty shall be payable at the rates specified above on the amount or value of consideration for such conveyance as set forth in the instrument". (b) for clause (3), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely - "(3) Where any instrument of conveyance is effected by the Bangalore Development Authority constituted under Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976), the Karnataka Housing Board constituted under the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963) pertaining to premises of Flat or Apartment. The duty shall be payable at the rates specified under clause (2) of Article 20 on the amount or value of consideration as set forth in the instrument:  Provided that in any case where a Lease-cum-sale Agreement is executed and is stamped with the ad valorem duty required for such agreement under item (da) of Article 5 and in furtherance of such agreement a conveyance is subsequently executed, the duty on such conveyance shall not exceed rupees fifty or the difference of the duty payable on such conveyance and the duty already collected on the security deposit under item (da) of Article 5, whichever is greater. (4) If relating to an order made by the High Court under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 in respect of amalgamation of Companies. Ten rupees for every rupees one thousand or part thereof, on the market value of the property of the transferor company, located in State of Karnataka, and transferred to the Transferee Company on amalgamation. Exemption - Amalgamation of sick companies with others, under the orders of Board of Industrial Finance and Reconstruction (BIFR). (5) If relating to industrial machinery Two rupees for every rupees one hundred or part thereof. Exemption - (i) Sale of industrial machinery by the manufacturer or his authorised agent.  (ii) Industrial machinery not exceeding the value of rupees twenty-live thousand. (6) If relating to assignment of receivable by the originator to the special purpose vehicle (SPV), or by whatever name they are called, in the process of securitisation. One rupee for every one thousand rupees or part thereof subject to a maximum of rupees one lakh". (4) in Article 27, in clause (b) - (a) for item (ii), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(ii) If possession is not given and not being a hypothecation. The same duty as a Bond (No. 12) for the amount of the further charge secured by such instrument, subject to a maximum of rupees three lakhs". (b) after item (ii), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(iii) for hypothecation. Same duty as sub-clause (d) of Article (No. 34) for the amount of the further charge secured by such instrument". (5) For Article 28, the following shall be substituted, namely - "28. Gift-Instrument of - not being a Settlement (No. 48) or Will or Transfer (No. 52).  (a) Where the donee is not a family member of the donor. The same duty as a conveyance (Article No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property which is the subject- matter of gift:  Provided that where an instrument of gift contains any provision for the revocation of the gift, the value of the property which is the subject-matter of the gift, shall for the purposes of duty be determined as if no such provision were contained in the instrument. (b) Where the donee is a member of the family of the donor. Rupees one thousand. Explanation - Family in relation to the donor for this purpose means husband, wife, sons and daughters". (6) in Article 30 - (i) to clause (1), after sub-clause (c), after first proviso, the following proviso shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the first day of April, 1998, namely - "Provided further that the duty in respect of an instrument of lease chargeable under Article 30(a)(iv), Article 30(b)(ii) and Article 30(c)(ii), effected by the Bangalore Development Authority constituted under the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976), the Urban Development Authority constituted under the Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1987), the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963), the Improvements Board constituted under the Karnataka Improvements Boards Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1976), Department of Mines and Geology, the Forest Department, Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board established under the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 18 of 1966), the Karnataka Small Scale Industries Development Corporation, the Karnataka State Industrial Investment Development Corporation, Karnataka State Electronics Development Corporation, registered as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1956), the Ka Agricultural Produce Market Committee constituted under the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation)Act,1966(Karnataka Act 27 of 1966) and other authorities as may be specified by the Government shall be payable as a conveyance under clause (1) of Article 20 for a market value equal to the total rent to be paid through the lease period, or as a conveyance under clause (1) of Article20foramarketvalu equal to the amount of premium or money advanced or fine where no rent is reserved, or as a conveyance under clause (1) of Article 20 for a market value equal to the amount of premium or money advanced or fine together with the total rent as set forth in the lease deed as the case may be". (ii) for clause (1), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(1) including an under-lease or sub-lease and any agreement to let or sub-let - (a) Where by such lease, the rent is fixed and no premium is paid or delivered -- (i) where the lease purports to be for a term of less than one year. The same duty as a Bond (No. 12) for the total amount of rent payable under such lease. (ii) where the lease purports to be for a term of not less than one year but not more than five years. The same duty as a Bond (No. 12) for the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved. (iii) where the lease purports to be for a term of less than five years, but not exceeding ten years. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article No. 20) for a market value equal to twice the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved. (iv) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding ten years, but not exceeding twenty years. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article 20) for an amount equal to three times the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved. (v) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding twenty years, but not exceeding thirty years. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article 20) for an amount equal to four times the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved. (vi) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding thirty years or in perpetuity or does not purports to be for any definite term. The same duty as a Bond (Article No. 12) for an amount equal to the market value of the property. (b) Where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or for money advanced and where no rent is reserved. (i) where the lease purports to be for a term not exceeding thirty years. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article 20), for the amount or value of such fine or premium or advance as set forth in the lease. (ii) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding thirty years or in perpetuity or does not purports to be for any definite tern. The same duty as a Bond (Article No. 12), for the amount or value of such fine or premium or advance, as set forth in the lease or for an amount equal to the market value of the property, whichever is higher. (c) Where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or for money advanced in addition to rent reserved - (i) where the lease purports to be for a term not exceeding thirty years. The same duty as a conveyance (Article 20), for the amount or value of such fine or premium or advance, as set forth in the lease, in addition to duty which would have been payable on such lease, if no fine or premium or advance had been paid or delivered. (ii) where the lease purports to be for a ten exceeding thirty years or in perpetuity or does not purport to be for any definite tern. The same duty as a Bond (Article No. 12), for the amount or value of such fine or premium or advance as set forth in the lease or for an amount equal to the market value of the property whichever is higher: Provided that, in any case when an agreement to lease is stamped with the ad valorem stamp required for a lease and a lease in pursuance of such agreement is subsequently executed, the duty on such lease shall not exceed rupees fifty: Provided further that the duty in respect of an instrument of lease chargeable under Article 30(a), [(v) and (vi)], Article 30(b)(ii) and Article 30(c)(ii), effected by the Bangalore Development Authority constituted under the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976), the Urban Development Authority constituted under the Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987, the Karnataka Housing Board, constituted under (Karnataka Act 34 of 1987), the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963), the Improvements Board constituted under the Karnataka Improvements Boards Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1976), Department of Mines and Geology, the Forest Department, Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board established under the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 18 of 1966), the Karnataka Small Scale Industries Development Corporation, the Karnataka State Industrial Investment Development Corporation, Karnataka State Electronics Development Corporation, registered as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956), the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Market Committee constituted under the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1966) and other authorities as may be specified by the Government, shall be payable as the case may be in the following manner - (a) as per item (v) of sub-clause (a) of clause (1), where by such lease the rent is fixed and no premium is paid; (b) as per item (i) of sub-clause (b) of clause (1) where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or money advanced and where no rent is reserved. (c) as per item (i) of sub-clause (i) of clause (1) where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or money advanced in addition to rent reserved: "Provided also that the duty in respect of an instrument of lease executed in favour of the wife, husband, father, mother, son, daughter, brother or sister in relation to the person shall be rupees one thousand". (7) in Article 34 - (i) for the words "pawn, pledge or hypothecation", the words "pawn or pledge" shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (b), after the words "aforesaid" the words "and not being a hypothecation" shall be inserted; (iii) for clause (c), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(c) When a collateral or auxiliary or additional or substituted security, or by way of further assurance for the above mentioned purpose, where the principal or primary security is duly stamped -  (i) for every sum secured not exceeding Rs. 1,000. Three rupees and fifty paise. (ii) for every Rs. 1,000 or part thereof, secured in excess of Rs. 1,000 Three rupees and fifty paise subject to a maximum of Rupees Three lakhs. (d) For hypothecation of movable property. Ten rupees for every ten thousand rupees or part thereof advanced, subject to a maximum of rupees, ten thousand". (8) (a) for Article 39 except the proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely - "Art. 39 Partition - Instrument of, as defined by clause (K) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 -  (a) where the property involved in the partition is converted for non-agricultural purpose or is meant for non-agricultural use.  (1) If the property is situated in the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation or Urban Development Authorities of Municipal Councils or Town Panchayats. Rupees one thousand for each share. (2) If the property is situated in the areas other than those mentioned in sub-clause (1) above. Rupees five hundred for each share. (b) Where the property involved in the partition is agricultural land. Rupees two hundred fifty for each share. (c) Where the property involved in the partition is movable or money. Rupees two hundred and fifty for each share. (d) Where the property involved in the partition belongs to any of the combinations of categories mentioned in sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) above. Maximum of the duties described in sub-clause (a), (b) or (c) above for each share". (b) in the proviso to Article 39 - (i) in clause (a), for the words "three rupees", the words "fifty rupees" shall be substituted. (ii) clause (b) shall be omitted. (iii) in clause (c) for the words "three rupees" the words "fifty rupees" shall be substituted. (9) in Article 41 - (a) for clause (ea), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(ea) When given to a promoter or developer by whatever name called for construction development on, or sale, or transfer (in any manner whatsoever) of, any immovable property situated in Karnataka State. (i) Four rupees for every hundred or part thereof, on the market value of the property which is the subject-matter of the instrument subject to a maximum of rupees four lakhs.  (ii) If such market value is not set forth, then a fixed amount of rupees four lakhs.  Provided that where an agreement is executed between the same parties, in respect of same property and is stamped in accordance with Article 5(f) and in furtherance of such agreement if a power of attorney is subsequently executed, the duty on such power of attorney shall be in accordance with clause (f) of this Article". (b) for clause (eb), the following shall be substituted - "(eb) When given to person other than the father, mother, wife or husband, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters in relation to the executant authorising such person to sell immovable property situated in Karnataka State. Two rupees for every one hundred rupees or part thereof on the market value of the property which is the subject-matter of power of Attorney:  Provided that the duty paid on such instrument is adjustable towards the duty payable on the instrument of sale or transfer executed subsequently in favour of either the Attorney holder or any other person". (10) in Article 45, for clauses (a) and (b), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) where the release is not between the family members. (i) where the release is not for any consideration. The same duty as a Bond (No. 12), for such amount or value of the property as set forth in the instrument or on such average amount or value of *he comparable properties, whichever is higher. (ii) if the release is for consideration. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article No. 20), for a market value equal to the amount of the consideration. (b) where the release is between the family members. Rupees one thousand. Explanation - Family in relation to a person for the purpose of clause (b) means father, mother, husband, wife, sons, daughters, brothers and sisters". (11) in Article 48, for clause "A" the following shall be substituted, "A. Instrument of (including a deed of dower)  (i) where the disposition is not for the purpose of distributing the property of the settlor among his family. The same duty as a Conveyance (Article No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property, which is the subject-matter of settlement:  Provided that where an agreement to settle is stamped with the stamp duty required for an instrument of settlement, and an instrument of settlement in pursuance of such agreement is subsequently executed, the duty in such instrument shall not exceed rupees fifty. (ii) where the disposition is for the purpose of distributing the property of the settlor among his family. Rupees one thousand. Explanation - Family in relation to the settlor for the purpose of clause (A) means husband, wife sons and daughters.  Exemption - Deed of dower executed on the occasion of a marriage between muhammadans". (12) in Article 52 for clause (a) the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(a) of debentures, being marketable securities, whether the debenture is liable to duty or not. Fifty paise for every rupees one hundred or part thereof subject to a maximum of one thousand rupees for a consideration equal to the face value of the debenture".
Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka Duty paid on any instrument referred to in the second proviso after sub-clause (c), of Article 30 of the Schedule as inserted by this Act, at the rates specified therein during the period from the first day of April, 1998 and till the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be the proper duty. 
