Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-second year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Seventh day of December, 1991
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 1 of the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:- "1. Short title and commencement -(1) This Act may be called The Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint".
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act - (1) Clause (1) shall be renumbered as (1-a) thereof and before the clause as so renumbered the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(1) "Board" means the Board consisting of the Chairman Legislative Council and the Speaker Legislative Assembly." (2) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(4-a) "Special Board" means the Board consisting of Chief Minister, the Chairman Legislative Council, the Speaker Legislative Assembly, the Minister-in-charge of Parliamentary Affairs and the Minister-in-charge of Finance."
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that in respect of the officers and servants of the High Court the powers of the State Government under this sub-section, shall be exercised by the Chief Justice of the High Court: Provided further that in respect of the Secretariat Staff of the Houses of the Legislature, the powers of the State Government under this sub-section, shall be exercised by the Special Board". (2) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) The power to make rules conferred by sub-section (1) shall be subject to the following conditions, namely - (a) the rules shall be made after previous publication for a period not less than thirty days; (b) where the proposed rules relate to the methods of recruitment to civil services or civil posts in respect of which the Karnataka Public Service Commission has to be consulted under clause (3) of Article 320 of the Constitution of India and in the case of officers and servants of the High Court under the proviso to clause (1) of Article 229 of the Constitution of India, a copy of the draft rules as published under clause (a) shall be forwarded to the Secretary of the Karnataka Public Service Commission for communicating the views of the Commission on the proposed rules within the period specified under the said clause; (c) the State Government or the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Special Board shall consider the views of the Karnataka Public Service Commission and any objection or suggestion from any person likely to be affected by the said rules received before the expiry of the period specified under clause (a) and make the rules with such modifications as it or he may deemed fit: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to rules regulating the pay and other emoluments of persons appointed to public services".
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (i) before that existing provisos, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that in respect of any inquiry against the officers and servants of the High Court or the Secretariat Staff of the Houses of the Legislature, the powers of the State Government under this sub-section shall be exercised by the Chief Justice of the High Court and the Special Board or the Board as the case may be respectively". (ii) in the existing provisos, for the words "Provided that" and "Provided further", the words "Provided further" and "Provided also", shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act:- (i) in the heading, the figures and words "10 of 1959" shall be omitted, (ii) sub-section (1) shall be omitted.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka Section 9 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1), as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the repealed Acts shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act".
Karnataka State Civil Services (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 9 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:- "Schedule (See Section 6) 1. The Karnataka State Civil Services Class-III posts (Recruitment) (Validation) Act, 1965. 2. The Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) Act, 1966. 3. The Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of Pay, Promotion and Pension) Act, 1973. 4. The Karnataka State Servants (Determination of Age) Act, 1974. 5. The Karnataka Services Examination Act, 1976. 6. The Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984". 
