Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1973. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirtieth day of March, 1973
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in the proviso to sub-section (1), the word "paddy" shall be omitted; (2) in the proviso to sub-section (4) - (a) for the words "the tax paid under this Act", the words, brackets and figures "and tax has been paid under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956) in respect of the sale of such goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, the tax paid under this Act" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted; (b) for the words "shall be refunded to such person", the words "shall be reimbursed to the person making such sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act - (1) the entry relating to Serial Number 25 shall be omitted; (2) after the entry relating to Serial Number 115, the following entries shall be added, namely - "116. "Poultry feed" and "cattle feed" i.e., processed commodity sold as "poultry feed" and "cattle feed" Two per cent 117. Insecticides and pesticides Two per cent 118. Containers other than gunnies Four per cent 119. Fuel gas, such as burshane, coalgas, indane and the like Four per cent 120. Aluminium ingots Six per cent 121. Industrial gas, such as oxygen, acetylene, nitrogen and the like Six per cent 122. Copper, bronze and brass utensils Six per cent 123. Footwear Four per cent 124. Tractor-trailers Six per cent 125. All kinds of paper including carbon paper but excluding paper falling under Serial Number 55 Six per cent 126. Pressure cookers, their parts and accessories Six per cent 127. Water meters Six per cent 128. Aerated water Six per cent 129. Linoleum Six per cent."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act - (1) after the entry relating to Serial No. 4, the following entry shall be inserted, namely - "4-a. Cardamom Purchase by the first or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Three per cent"; (2) after the entry relating to Serial No. 13, the following entry shall be inserted, namely - "13-a. Shrimps, prawns and lobstersunder this Act Purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax Four per cent".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) for the entry in Column 2 of Serial No. 1, the following entry shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely - "Coal including coke in all its forms, but excluding charcoal: Provided that during the period commencing on the 23rd day of February, 1967 and ending with the 1st day of April, 1973 this entry shall have effect subject to the modification that the words but excluding charcoal shall be omitted"; (2) for the entry in Column 2 of Serial No. 2, the following entry shall be substituted, namely - "Iron and steel, that is to say- (i) pig iron and cast iron including ingot moulds, bottom plates, iron scrap, cast iron scrap, runner scrap and iron skull scrap; (ii) steel semis (ingots, slabs, blooms and billets of all qualities, shapes and sizes); (iii) skelp bars, tin bars, sheet bars, how bars and sleeper bars; (iv) steel bars (rounds, rods, squares, flats, octagons and hexagons, plain and ribbed or twisted, in coil form as well as straight lengths); (v) steel structurals (angles, joints, channels, tees, sheet piling sections, Z sections or any other rolled sections); (vi) sheets, hoops, strips and skelp, both black and galvanised, hot and cold rolled, plain and corrugated, in all qualities, in straight lengths and in coil form, as rolled and in rivetted condition; (vii) Plates both plain and chequered in all qualities; (viii) discs, rings, forgings and steel castings; (ix) tool, alloy and special steels of any of the above categories; (x) steel melting scrap in all forms including steel skull, turnings and borings; (xi) steel tubes, both welded and seamless, of all diameters and lengths, including tube fittings; (xii) tin plates both hot dipped and electrolytic and tinfree plates; (xiii) fishplate bars, bearing plate bars, crossing sleeper bars, fishplates, bearing plates, crossing sleepers and pressed steel sleepers, rails-heavy and light crane rails; (xiv) wheels, tyres, axles and wheel sets; (xv) wire rods and wires-rolled, drawn, galvanised, aluminised, tinned or coated such as by copper; (xvi) defectives, rejects, cuttings or end pieces of any of the above categories"; (3) in Column 2 of Serial No. 4, for the words "hibiscus cannapinus and hibiscus saldarifavar altissima", the words "Hibiscus cannabinus and Hibiscus sabdariffa-Varaltissima and the fibre known as Suunn or Sunnhemp extracted from plants of the species Crotalaria juncea" shall be substituted; (4) in Column 2 of Serial No. 5 - (a) in item (a) - (i) after the words "groundnut seeds",the word "peanut" shall be inserted; (ii) for the words and brackets "and copra, til (gingelly)", the brackets, letters and words "i.e., copra (excluding tender coconuts), sesamum or til (gingelly)" shall be substituted; (iii) after the words and brackets "kusum (kardi) seeds", the word "Saf-flower" shall be inserted; (b) in item (b) - (i) the word "cardamom" shall be omitted; (ii) for the words "honge seeds and neem seeds", the words "Karanja, Pongam, Honge seeds and neem or vepa seeds" shall be substituted; (c) in item (d), for the existing entry, the following shall be substituted, namely - "Other oil-seeds, that is to say -Soyabean, Rapeseed and Mustard (Toria, Rai, Jamba, Taramira, Sarson, yellow and brown, Banarasi Rai or True Mustard), Linseed, Sunflower, Mahua, Illupai, Ippe, Punna, Undi, Kokum, Sal, Tung and Red Palm".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1973_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in the entry relating to Serial No. 38-A, after the words "Raw Silk", the words "thrown silk or twisted silk" shall be inserted; (2) after the entry relating to Serial No. 43, the following entry shall be inserted, namely - "44. Paddy". 
