Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1975. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975.1 2 (2) (a) This section and all other sections of this Act except Section 5, shall come into force in the whole of the State of Karnataka on the First day of May, 1975. (b) Section 5 shall come into force in the City of Bangalore, the City of Hubli-Dharwar and the City Municipalities of Karnataka, Mangalore, Belgaum, Gulbarga, Bellary, Davangere, Bijapur, Shimoga and Bhadravati on the said date and in the other areas of the State on such date as the State Government may, by notification, specify and different dates may be specified for different areas. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-ninth day of April, 1975 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 26 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) - (i) in the opening paragraph the words "or where the consideration for a conveyance is an annuity or other sum payable periodically" and "or the consideration for such conveyance, as the case may be", shall be omitted; (ii) in clause (b), the words "or conveyance" in the two places where they occur, shall be omitted; (iii) in clause (c), the words "or conveyance", shall be omitted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 28 of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section, shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) In the areas where Section 45A is in force, the instruments referred to in the said section shall fully and truly set forth the market value of the property which is the subject matter of the instrument and such other particulars as the State Government may by rules prescribe."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 29 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "29. Direction as to duty in case of certain conveyances - Where a sub-purchaser takes an actual conveyance of the interest of the person immediately selling to him, which is chargeable with ad valorem duty in respect of the market value of the property which is the subject matter of conveyance and is duly stamped accordingly, any conveyance to be afterwards made to him for the same property by the original seller shall be chargeable with a duty equal to that which would be chargeable on a conveyance for the market value of the property which is the subject matter of the conveyance or where such duty would exceed ten rupees with a duty of ten rupees."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 45 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "45-A. Instrument of conveyance, etc. undervalued how to be dealt with - (1) If the registering officer appointed under the Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act XVI of 1908) while registering any instrument of conveyance, exchange or gift has reason to believe that the market value of the property which is the subject matter of conveyance, exchange or gift has not been truly set forth in the instrument, he may, after registering such instrument, refer the same to the Deputy Commissioner for determination of the market value of such property and the proper duty payable thereon. (2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1) the Deputy Commissioner shall, after giving the parties reasonable opportunity of being heard and after holding an inquiry in such manner as the State Government may by rules prescribe, determine by order the market value of the property which is the subject matter of conveyance, exchange or gift and the duty payable thereon. The difference, if any, in the amount of duty, shall be payable by the person liable to pay the duty. (3) The Deputy Commissioner may, suo motu within two years from the date of registration of any instrument of conveyance, exchange or gift not already referred to him under sub-section (1), call for and examine the instrument for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctness of the market value of the property which is the subject matter of conveyance, exchange or gift and the duty payable thereon and if after such examination he has reason to believe that the market value of such property has not been truly set forth in the instrument, he may determine by order the market value of such property and the duty payable thereon in accordance with the procedure provided for in sub-section (2). The difference, if any, in the amount of duty, shall be payable by the person liable to pay the duty: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any instrument registered before the commencement of the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975. (4) The order of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2) or (3) shall be communicated to the person liable to pay the duty. A copy of every such order shall be sent to the registering officer concerned. (5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Deputy Commissioner under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) may, prefer an appeal before the District Judge and all such appeals shall be preferred within such time and be heard and disposed off in such manner as the State Government may by rules prescribe. Explanation - For the purposes of this Act, market value of any property shall be estimated to be the price which in the opinion of the Deputy Commissioner or the appellate authority, as the case may be, such property would have fetched or fetch, if sold in the open market on the date of execution of the instrument of conveyance, exchange or gift."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 68 of the Principal Act,- (1) in clause (c), the word "and", shall be omitted; (2) after clause (d) and before the proviso, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) the manner of holding inquiry under Section 45A(2); and (f) the time within which an appeal shall be preferred and the manner in which such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by the District Judge".
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 70 of the Principal Act, for the words "at a price not exceeding twenty-five naye paise per copy", the words "at such price as the State Government may from time to time fix, per copy", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the Principal Act,- (i) in Article 15, in the second column of clause (c), for the word "consideration", the words "market value", shall be substituted; (ii) in Article 20, in the first column, for the words "where the amount or value of the consideration for such conveyance as set forth therein", the words "where the market value of the property which is the subject matter of conveyance", shall be substituted; (iii) in Article 26, for the entry in the second column the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- "The same duty as a conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property of greatest value which is the subject matter of exchange." (iv) in Article 27, in the entries in the second column of clause (a) and of sub-clause (i) of clause (b), for the words "for a consideration", the words "for a market value", shall be substituted; (v) in Article 28, for the entry in the second column, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- "The same duty as a conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property which is the subject matter of gift"; (vi) in Article 30, in entries in the second column, for the word "consideration" wherever it occurs the words "market value", shall be substituted; (vii) in Article 34, in the second column of clause (a) for the word "consideration", the words "market value", shall be substituted; (viii) in Article 41, for the entry in the second column of clause (e), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- "The same duty as a conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the amount of the consideration" (ix) in Article 44, for the entry in the second column (a), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:- "The same duty as a conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the amount of such consideration as set forth in the re-conveyance,"; (x) in Article 49, in the entry in the second column, for the word "consideration", the words "market value", shall be substituted; (xi) in Article 53, in the entry in the second column, for the words "for a consideration the words "for a market value", shall be substituted. 
