Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) Act, 1966. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) Act, 1966; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Eighteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967.1 Received the assent of the Governor on the Fifteenth day of April, 1967
Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both", the words "and with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 9 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "9-A. Special Provision Regarding Bail -No person accused or convicted of an offence under Section 5 of this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has been given an opportunity to oppose the application for such release and where the prosecution opposes the application, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence. 9-B. Precedence for Trials -The trial of any offence under this Act in any Court shall have precedence over the trial of any other offence pending in such Court".
Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Act, 1967_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka State Civil Services (Prevention of Strikes) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1967 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 2 of 1967) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the Karnataka Ordinance No. 2 of 1967 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act, as if this Act had commenced on 25th January, 1967. 
