Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-second year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on the First day of April, 1991. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirtieth day of March, 1991 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45-A of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (i) in sub-section (1),- (a) for the words "exchange or gift", for the first time where it occurs, the words "exchange, gift, settlement, partition or dissolution of partnership, having regard to the estimated market value notified by the State Government, if any or otherwise", shall be inserted; (b) for the words "exchange or gift" occuring for the second time, the words "exchange, gift, settlement, partition or dissolution of partnership", shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-sections (2), (3) and (5) for the words "exchange or gift" wherever they occur, the words "exchange gift settlement, partition or dissolution of partnership", shall be substituted. (iii) in sub-section (5), for the words "District Judge", the words "Divisional Commissioner of the Revenue Division", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 45-A of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "45-B. Constitution of a Committee for estimation of property - (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the State Government shall, by notification, constitute, for each Taluk or any part thereof one or more committees consisting of such number of members, as may be prescribed, to estimate the market value of any property or of such properties in any area in the prescribed manner and at prescribed intervals. (2) The Committee shall follow such procedures as may be prescribed. (3) The State Government shall, by notification, publish the market value estimated under sub-section (1)."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka Section 46 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) All duties, penalties and other sums required to be paid under this Chapter shall be a charge on the properties of the person liable to pay the duties, penalties and other sums."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka All appeals and proceedings under the principal Act pending before the District Judge on the date of commencement of the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1991 shall stand transferred to the Divisional Commissioner of the respective Revenue Division and such appeal or proceedings shall be disposed of by him as if it has been filed before him. 
