Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on the First Day of October, 1962. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-fifth Day of September, 1962 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act),- (1) for clause (c), the following clause, shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) "Chief Controlling Revenue Authority" means the officer appointed by the State Government to be the Commissioner of Stamps for Karnataka;" (2) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(dd) "Deputy Commissioner" means the Chief Officer-in-charge of the revenue administration of a district and includes in respect of such provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder such officer in such area as the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify;". (3) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(k) "Instrument of Partition" means any instrument whereby co-owners of any property divide or agree to divide such property in severalty and includes- (i) a final order for effecting a partition passed by any revenue authority or any Civil Court, (ii) an award by an arbitrator directing a partition, and (iii) when any partition is effected without executing any such instrument, any instrument or instruments signed by the co-owners and recording, whether by way of declaration of such partition or otherwise, the terms of such partition amongst the co-owners;"
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Principal Act, for the expression "Collector" wherever it occurs, the expression "Deputy Commissioner", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (2) of the proviso to Section 3 of the Principal Act, for the words and figures "the Merchant Shipping Act, 1894 or under Act XIX of 1838 or the Indian Registration of Ships Act, 1841", the words and figures "the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 3 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "3A. Instruments liable to duty in multiples of five naye paise - Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3 and the Schedule or any rule or order published under Section 9, the proper duty payable on any instrument shall be computed and determined in multiples of five naye paise: Provided that where a scale has been specified for determining the proper duty, the total amount of duty payable on any instrument shall be calculated in accordance with such scale, and where the total amount so calculated includes in addition to any multiple of five naye paise a fraction of five naye paise, such fraction shall be deemed to be five naye paise, and the total amount of duty payable on the instrument shall be determined accordingly."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In the proviso to Section 6 of the Principal Act, for the words "three rupees", the words "four rupees and fifty naye paise", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For sub-section (2) of Section 9 of the Principal Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) Every rule or order published under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is published before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or order or both Houses agree that the rule or order should not be made, the rule or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified for or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or order."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the Principal Act,- (1) in clause (a), for the words "with the duty of ten naye paise or five naye paise", the words "with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise", shall be substituted; (2) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) certificate of enrolment in the roll of Advocates maintained by the State Bar Council;".
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 29 of the Principal Act, - (1) in the proviso to sub-section (4), for the words "one rupee" the words "two rupees and twenty-five naye paise", shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (5), for the words "five rupees" in the two places where they occur, the words "ten rupees", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 30 of the Principal Act, - (1) in clause (a), for the figures '22', '26', '28', '33', '44', '45', '46', '47' and '51', the figures '23', '27', '29', '34', '45', '46', '47', '48' and '52', shall respectively be substituted; (2) After clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(dd) in the case of a certificate of enrolment in the roll of advocates maintained by the State Bar Council-by the Advocate enrolled;".
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 31 of the Principal Act, for the words "five rupees" and "fifty naye paise", the words "seven rupees and fifty naye paise" and "seventy naye paise", shall respectively be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (3) of Section 32 of the Principal Act,- (1) for the words "Any instrument upon which" the words and figures, "Subject to any orders made under Chapter VI, any instrument upon which", shall be substituted; (2) in clause (c) of the proviso, for the figures "34", the figures "35", shall be substituted, and for the words "with the duty often naye paise or five naye paise", the words "with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In the proviso to Section 34 of the Principal Act,- (1) in clause (a), for the figures "34", the figures "35", shall be substituted, and for the words "with the duty often naye paise or five naye paise", the words "with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise", shall be substituted; (2) in clause (d), after the words, "this Act", the words and figures "and such certificate has not been revised in exercise of the powers conferred by the provisions of Chapter VI", shall be added.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 39 of the Principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the figures "34", the figures "35", shall be substituted, and for the words "with a duty of ten naye paise or five naye paise", the words "with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise", shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "Every certificate", the words and figures "Subject to any orders made under Chapter VI, every certificate", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 40 of the Principal Act, for the figures "34", the figures "35", shall be substituted, and for the words "with a duty of ten naye paise or five naye paise", the words "with a duty not exceeding fifteen naye paise", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka To Section 44 of the Principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that with the sanction of the State Government the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority may make the refund after the period specified in sub-section (1) or (2)."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Chapter V, after Section 52 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "52A. Power of State Government to grant relief - Notwithstanding anything in the preceding Sections of this Chapter, the State Government, after consultation with the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority, if satisfied that it is just and equitable to grant relief in any case or class of cases,- (i) other than those to which any of the said Sections is applicable; or (ii) after the period specified in any of the said Sections, may by order direct the grant of such relief as may be specified in the order and the Deputy Commissioner shall dispose of the case or class of cases conformably to such order."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 53 of the Principal Act, for the words, figures, letter and brackets "Chapter IV and Chapter V and under clause (a) of the first proviso to Section 27", the words, "any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (b) of Section 63 of the Principal Act, for the words "six naye paise or three naye paise", the words "fifteen naye paise, ten naye paise or five naye paise", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 67 of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "67-A. Procedure of Chief Controlling Revenue Authority and the Deputy Commissioner and rectification of mistakes - (1) No order relating to the proper stamp duty payable under this Act shall be made by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or the Deputy Commissioner to the prejudice of any person liable to pay such duty, unless a reasonable opportunity to be heard is given to such person. (2) The State Government, the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or the Deputy Commissioner may suo motu or on application of any party affected at any time within three years from the date of any order passed by it or him review such order and rectify any mistake, or error apparent from the record: Provided that no such rectification shall be made to the prejudice of any person unless a reasonable opportunity to be heard is given to such person."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 68 of the Principal Act,- (1) in the proviso to sub-section (2), for the words "six naye paise or three naye paise", the words "fifteen naye paise, ten naye paise or five naye paise", shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(3) Every rule made under this Section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified for or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the Principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- "Schedule Stamp-duty on Instruments Description of instrument Proper Stamp-duty  1. Acknowledgment of a debt exceeding twenty rupees in amount or value, written or signed by, or on behalf of, a debtor in order to supply evidence of such debt in any book (other than a banker' s pass-book) or on a separate piece of paper when such book or paper is left in the creditor's possession: provided that such acknowledgment does not contain any promise to pay the debt or any stipulation to pay interest or to deliver any goods or other property. Fifteen naye paise  2. Administration Bond, including a bond given under Section 6 of the Government Savings Banks Act, 1873 (Central Act V of 1873), or Sections 289, 291, 375 or 376 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act XXXIX of 1925);  (a) where the amount does not exceed Rs. 1,000 Three-fourths of duty as Bond (No. 12) for such amount.  (b) in any other case Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise  3. Adoption-deed, that is to say, any instrument (other than a will), recording an adoption, or conferring or purporting to confer an authority to adopt. Thirty-three rupees and seventy-five naye paise  Advocate - See Certificate of enrolment as an Advocate (No.17).  4. Affidavit, including an affirmation or declaration in the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing. Four rupees and fifty naye paise  Exemptions  Affidavit or declaration in writing when made-  (a) as a condition of enlistment to the Armed Forces of the Union;  (b) for the immediate purpose of being filed or used in any Court or before the officer of any Court; or  (c) for the sole purpose of enabling any person to receive any pension or charitable allowance.  5. Agreement or Memorandum of an Agreement -  (a) if relating to the sale of a bill of exchange. Fifty naye paise  (b) if relating to the sale of a Government security or share in an incorporated company or other body corporate. Subject to a maximum of forty-five rupees, thirty naye paise for every Rs. 10,000 or part thereof of the value of the security or shares.  (c) if not otherwise provided for .. Two rupees and twenty-five naye paise  Exemptions  Agreement or memorandum of Agreement-  (a) for or relating to the sale of goods or merchandise exclusively, not being a note or memorandum chargeable under No. 37.  (b) made in the form of tender to the Government, for, or relating to any loan.  Agreement to Lease-See Lease (No. 30).  6. Agreement relating to deposit of title deeds, pawn or pledge, that is to say, any instrument evidencing an agreement relating to-  (1) the deposit of title-deeds or instruments constituting or being evidence of the title to any property whatever (other than a marketable security), or  (2) the pawn or pledge of movable property where such deposit, pawn or pledge has been made by way of security for the repayment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan or an existing or future debt-  (a) if such loan or debt is repayable on demand or more than three months from the date of the instrument evidencing the agreement. If drawn singly If drawn in set of two for each part of the set If drawn in set of three for each part of the set Rs.Np. Rs.Np. Rs.Np. (i) when the amount of the loan or debt does not exceed Rs. 200 0 90 0 60 0 30 (ii) when it exceeds Rs. 200 but does not exceed Rs. 400.. 1 70 0 90 0 60 when it exceeds Rs. 400 but does not exceed Rs. 600.. 2 55 140 0 90 when it exceeds Rs. 600 but does not exceed Rs. 800.. 3 35 1 70 1 10 when it exceeds Rs. 800 but does not exceed Rs. 1000.. 4 20 2 25 1 40 when it exceeds Rs. 1000 but does not exceed Rs. 1200 .. 5 10 2 55 1 70 when it exceeds Rs. 1,200 but does not exceed Rs. 1,600 .. 6 75 3 35 2 25 when it exceeds Rs. 1,600 but does not exceed Rs. 2,500 .. 10 10 5 10 3 35 when it exceeds Rs. 2,500 but does not exceed Rs. 5,000 ... 20 25 10 10 6 75 (iii) when it exceeds Rs. 5000 but does not exceed Rs. 7500 .. 30 35 15 20 10 10 when it exceeds Rs. 7500 but does not exceed Rs. 10000 .. 40 50 20 25 13 50 when it exceeds Rs 10000 but does not exceed Rs. 15000 60 75 30 35 20 25 when it exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000 81 00 40 50 27 00 when it exceeds Rs. 20000 but does not exceed Rs. 25,000 1.01 25 50 60 33 75 when it exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not exceed Rs. 30,000 121 50 60 75 40 50 and for every additional Rs. 10,000 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 30,000. 40 50 20 25 13 50 (b) if such loan or debt is repayable not more than three months from the date of such instrument. Half the duty payable on a loan or debt under clause (a)(i) or clause (a)(ii) or clause (a)(iii) for the amount secured.  Exemption  Instrument of pawn or pledge of goods if unattested.  7. Appointment in execution of a power  whether of trustees or of property, movable or immovable, where made by any writing not being a will. Fifty-six rupees and twenty-five naye paise  8. Appraisement or valuation made otherwise than under an order of the Court in the course of a suit-  (a) where the amount does not exceed Rs. 1,000 The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for such amount.  (b) in any other case. Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise  Exemptions  (a) Appraisement or valuation made for the information of one party only, and not being in any manner obligatory between parties either by agreement or operation of law.  (b) Appraisement of crops for the purpose of ascertaining the amount to be given to a landlord as rent.  9. Apprenticeship-deed, including every writing relating to the service or tuition of any apprentice, clerk or servant placed with any master to learn any profession, trade or employment. Eleven rupees and twenty-five naye paise  Exemption  Instruments of apprenticeship by which a person is apprenticed by, or at the charge of, any public charity.  10. Articles of Association of a Company ... One hundred and fifty rupees  Exemption  Articles of any association not formed for profit and registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956.  See also Memorandum of Association of a Company (No. 33).  Assignment - See Conveyance (No. 20), Transfer (No. 52), and Transfer of lease (No. 53), as the case may be.  Authority to adopt. See Adoption-deed (No. 3).  11. Award, that is to say, any decision in writing by an arbitrator or umpire, not being an award directing a partition, on a reference made otherwise than by an order of the Court in the course of a suit-  (a) where the amount or value of the property to which the award relates, as set forth in such award, does not exceed Rs. 1,000. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for such amount.  (b) if it exceeds Rs. 1,000 but does not exceed Rs. 5,000 ... Thirty rupees  and for every additional Rs. 1,000 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 5,000.. One rupee and fifty naye paise.  12. Bond, as defined by Section 2(1)(a), not being otherwise provided for by this Act, or by the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958.    Rs. np. Where the amount or value secured does not exceed Rs. 10 ... 0 35 Where it exceeds Rs. 10 and does not exceed Rs. 50 ... 0 75 Where it exceeds Rs. 50 and does not exceed Rs. 100 ... 1 50 Where it exceeds Rs. 100 and does not exceed Rs. 200 ... 3 75 Where it exceeds Rs. 200 and does not exceed Rs. 300 ... 5 60 Where it exceeds Rs. 300 and does not exceed Rs. 400 ... 7 50 Where it exceeds Rs. 400 and does not exceed Rs. 500 ... 9 35 Where it exceeds Rs. 500 and does not exceed Rs. 600 ... 13 50 Where it exceeds Rs. 600 and does not exceed Rs. 700 ... 15 75 Where it exceeds Rs. 700 and does not exceed Rs. 800 ... 18 00 Where it exceeds Rs. 800 and does not exceed Rs. 900 .. 20 25 Where it exceeds Rs. 900 and does not exceed Rs. 1,000 ... 22 50 and for every Rs. 500 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 1,000 . 11 25 See Administration Bond (No. 2), Bottomry Bond (No. 13), Customs Bond (No. 23), Indemnity Bond (No. 29), Respondentia Bond (No. 46), Security Bond (No. 47).  Exemption  Bond, when executed by any person for the purpose of guaranteeing that the local income derived from private subscriptions to a charitable dispensary or hospital or any other object of public utility, shall not be less than a specified sum per mensem.  13. Bottomry Bond, that is to say, any instrument whereby the master of a seagoing ship borrows money on the security of the ship to enable him to preserve the ship or prosecute her voyage-    Rs. np. where the amount or value secured does not exceed Rs. 10 ... ... 0 60 where it exceeds Rs. 10 and does not exceed Rs. 50 ... ... 1 10 where it exceeds Rs. 50 and does not exceed Rs. 100 ... ... 2 25 where it exceeds Rs. 100 and does not exceed Rs. 200 ... ... 4 50 where it exceeds Rs. 200 and does not exceed Rs. 300 ... ... 6 75 where it exceeds Rs. 300 and does not exceed Rs. 400 ... ... 9 00 where it exceeds Rs. 400 and does not exceed Rs. 500 ... ... 11 25 where it exceeds Rs. 500 and does not exceed Rs. 600 ... ... 13 50 where it exceeds Rs. 600 and does not exceed Rs. 700 ... ... 15 75 where it exceeds Rs. 700 and does not exceed Rs. 800 ... ... 18 00 where it exceeds Rs. 800 and does not exceed Rs. 900 ... ... 20 25 where it exceeds Rs. 900 and does not exceed Rs. 1000 ... ... 22 50 and for every Rs. 500 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 1,000 ... ... 11 25 14. Cancellation-Instrument of-(including any instrument by which any instrument previously executed is cancelled), if attested and not otherwise provided for. Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise  See also Release (No. 45), Revocation of Settlement (No. 48-B), Surrender of Lease (No. 51), Revocation of Trust (No. 54-B).  15. Certificate of sale - (in respect of each property put up as a separate lot and sold), granted to the purchaser of any property sold by public auction by a Court, or Tribunal, or officer of Government or by any other authority under any enactment-  (a) where the purchase-money does not exceed Rs. 10 ... Sixty naye paise.  (b) where the purchase-money exceeds Rs.10 but does not exceed Rs. 25. One rupee and ten naye paise  (c) in any other case ... The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount of the purchase-money only.  16. Certificate or other document evidencing the right or title of the holder thereof, or any other person, either to any share, scrip or stock in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate or to become proprietor of shares, scrip or stock in or of any such company or body. Thirty naye paise.  See also Letter of Allotment of shares.  17. Certificate of enrolment in the roll of advocates prepared and maintained by the State Bar Council under the Advocates Act, 1961 (Central Act 25 of 1961). Two hundred and fifty rupees.  18. Charter-party, that is to say, any instrument (except an agreement for the hire of a tug-steamer), whereby a vessel or some specified principal part thereof is let for the specified purposes of the charter, whether it includes a penalty clause or not. Four rupees and fifty naye paise.  19. Composition-deed, that is to say, any instrument executed by a debtor, whereby he conveys his property for the benefit of his creditors, or whereby payment of a composition or dividend on their debts is secured to the creditors, or whereby provision is made for the continuance of the debtor's business, under the supervision of inspectors or under letters of licence, for the benefit of his creditors. Thirty-three rupees and seventy-five naye paise  20. Conveyance as defined by Section 2(d), not being a transfer charged or exempted under No. 52-    Rs. np. where the amount or value of the consideration for such conveyance as set forth therein does not exceed Rs. 50.  2 25 where it exceeds Rs. 50 but does not exceed Rs. 100 ... ... 4 10 where it exceeds Rs. 100 but does not exceed Rs. 200 ... ... 8 25 where it exceeds Rs. 200 but does not exceed Rs. 300 ... ... 12 35 where it exceeds Rs. 300 but does not exceed Rs. 400 ... ... 16 50 where it exceeds Rs. 400 but does not exceed Rs. 500 ... ... 20 60 where it exceeds Rs. 500 but does not exceed Rs. 600 ... ... 27 00 where it exceeds Rs. 600 but does not exceed Rs. 700 ... ... 31 50 where it exceeds Rs. 700 but does not exceed Rs. 800 ... ... 36 00 where it exceeds Rs. 800 but does not exceed Rs. 900 ... ... 40 50 where it exceeds Rs. 900 but does not exceed Rs. 1,000 ... ... 45 00 and for every Rs. 500 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 1,000 ... ... 22 50 Exemption  Assignment of copyright under Section 18 of the Copyright Act, 1957 (Central Act 14 of 1957).  Co-partnership Deed-See Partnership (No. 40).  21. Copy or Extract - Certified to be a true copy or extract by or by order of any public officer and not chargeable under the law for the time being in force relating to Court-fees-  (i) if the original was not chargeable with duty, or if the duty with which it was chargeable does not exceed four rupees and fifty naye paise. Two rupees and twenty-five naye paise.  (ii) in any other case. Four rupees and fifty naye paise.  Exemption  (a) Copy of any paper which a public officer is expressly required by law to make or furnish for record in any public office or for any public purpose.  (b) Copy of, or extract from, any register relating to births, baptisms, namings, dedications, marriages, divorces, deaths or burials.  22. Counterpart or Duplicate-of any instrument, chargeable with duty and in respect of which the proper duty has been paid-  (a) if the duty with which the original instrument is chargeable does not exceed four rupees and fifty naye paise. The same duty as is payable on the original.  (b) in any other case. Four rupees and fifty naye paise  Exemption  Counterpart of any lease granted to a cultivator when such lease is exempted from duty.  23. Customs-Bond-  (a) where the amount does not exceed Rs. 1,000 The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for such amount.  (b) in any other case Thirty rupees.  Declaration of any Trust-See Trust (No. 54).  24. Delivery-Order in respect of Goods, that is to say, any instrument entitling any person therein named, or his assigns or the holder thereof, to the delivery of any goods lying in any dock or port, in any warehouse in which goods are stored, or deposited on rent or hire, or upon any wharf, such instrument being signed by or on behalf of the owner of such goods, upon the sale or transfer of the property therein, when such goods exceed in value twenty rupees. Fifteen naye paise  Deposit of Title-deeds-See Agreement relating to Deposit of Title-deeds, Pawn or Pledge (No. 6). Dissolution of Partnership-See Partnership (No. 40).  25. Divorce- Instrument of-that is to say, any instrument by which any person effects the dissolution of his marriage. Seven rupees and fifty naye paise  Dower-Instrument of-See Settlement (No. 48).  Duplicate-See Counterpart (No. 22).  26. Exchange of property--Instrument of The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the value of the property of greatest value as set forth in such instrument.  Extract-See copy (No. 21).  27. Further Charge-Instrument of-that is to say, any instrument imposing a further charge on mortgaged property-  (a) when the original mortgage is one of the description referred to in clause (a) of Article No. 34 (that is, with possession); The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount of the further charge secured by such instrument.  (b) when such mortgage is one of the description referred to in clause (b) of Article No. 34 (that is, without possession)-  (i) if at the time of execution of the instrument of further charge possess- ion of the property is given or agreed to be given under such instrument; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the total amount of the charge (including the original mortgage and any further charge already made) less the duty already paid on such original mortgage and further charge.  (ii) if possession is not given .. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for the amount of the further charge secured by such instrument.  28. Gift-Instrument of, not being a Settlement (No. 48), or Will or Transfer (No. 52). The same duty as a Conveyance (No.20) for a consideration equal to the value of the property as set forth in such instrument.  Hiring Agreement or agreement for service. See Agreement (No. 5).  29. Indemnity Bond The same duty as a Security Bond (No. 47) for the same amount.  Inspectorship Deed-See  Composition Deed (No. 19).  30. Lease- Including an under-lease sub-lease and any agreement to let or sub-let-  (a) where by such lease the rent is fixed and no premium is paid or delivered-  (i) where the lease purports to be for a term of less than one year The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for the whole amount payable or deliverable under such lease.  (ii) where the lease purports to be for a term of not less than one year but not more than five years; The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved.  (iii) where the lease purports to be for a term of not less than one year but not exceeding ten years; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved.  (iv) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding ten years, but not exceeding twenty years; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to twice the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved.  (v) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding twenty years, but not exceeding thirty years; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to three times the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved.  (vi) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding thirty years, but not exceeding one hundred years; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to four times the amount or value of the average annual rent reserved.  (vii) where the lease purports to be for a term exceeding one hundred years or in perpetuity; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to one-sixth of the whole amount of rents which would be paid or delivered in respect of the first fifty years of the lease.  (viii) where the lease does not purport to be for any definite term .. The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to three times the amount or value of the average annual rent which would be paid or delivered for the first ten years if the lease continued so long.  (b) where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or for money advanced and where no rent is reserved; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount or value of such fine or premium, or advance as set forth in the lease.  (c) where the lease is granted for a fine or premium or for money advanced in addition to rent reserved. The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount or value of such fine or premium, or advance as set forth in the lease, in addition to the duty which would have been payable on such lease, if no fine or premium or advance had been paid or delivered;  Provided that, in any case when an agreement to lease is stamped with the ad-valorem stamp required for a lease, and a lease in pursuance of such agreement is subsequently executed, the duty on such lease shall not exceed two rupees and twenty-five naye paise.  Exemption  Lease, executed in the case of a cultivator and for the purposes of cultivation (including a lease of trees for the production of food or drink), without the payment or delivery of any fine or premium, when a definite term is expressed and such term does not exceed one year, or when the average annual rent reserved does not exceed one hundred rupees.  Explanation- When a lessee undertakes to pay any recurring charge, such as Government revenue, the landlord's share of cesses, or the owner's share of municipal rates or taxes which is by law recoverable from the lessor, the amount so agreed to be paid by the lessee shall be deemed to be part of the rent.  31. Letter of Allotment of shares in any company, or proposed company, or in respect of any loan to be raised by any company or proposed company. Thirty naye paise  See also Certificate or other Document (No.16).  Letter of Guarantee-See Agreement (No. 5).  32. Letter of Licence-that is to say, any agreement between a debtor and his creditors that the latter shall, for a specified time, suspend their claims and allow the debtor to carry on business at his own discretion. Thirty-three rupees seventy-five naye paise  33. Memorandum of Association of a Company-  (a) if accompanied by articles of association under Section 26 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956). Ninety rupees  (b) if not so accompanied Two hundred and forty rupees  Exemption  Memorandum of any association not formed for profit and registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956.  34. Mortgage-Deed-not being an agreement relating to Deposit of Title-deeds, Pawn of Pledge (No. 6), Bottomry Bond (No. 13), Mortgage of a Crop (No. 35), Respondentia Bond (No. 46) or Security Bond (No. 47)-  (a) when possession of the property or any part of the property comprised in such deed is given by the mortgagor or agreed to be given; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount secured by such deed.  (b) when possession is not given or agreed to be given as aforesaid. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for the amount secured by such deed.  Explanation - A mortgagor who gives to the mortgagee a power-of-attorney to collect rents, or a lease of the property mortgaged or part thereof is deemed to give possession thereof within the meaning of this article.  (c) when a collateral or auxiliary or additional or substituted security, or by way of further assurance for the above mentioned purpose where the principal or primary security is duly stamped-  for every sum secured not exceeding Rs. 1,000 Two rupees and twenty-five naye paise  and for every Rs. 1,000 or part thereof secured in excess of Rs. 1,000 Two rupees and twenty-five naye paise.  Exemption  (1) Instruments executed by persons taking advances under the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (Central Act XIX of 1883) or the Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1884 (Central Act XIX of 1884) or the Karnataka Land Improvement Loans Act, 1890 (Karnataka Act IV of 1890) or Section 194 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Code, 1888 (Karnataka Act IV of 1888) or the Hyderabad Land Improvement Loans Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act III of 1950) or the Hyderabad Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act II of 1950) or by their sureties as security for the repayment of such advances.  (2) Letter of hypothecation accompanying a bill of exchange.  35. Mortgage of a Crop-including any instrument evidencing an agreement to secure the repayment of a loan made upon any mortgage of a crop, whether the crop is or is not in existence at the time of the mortgage-  (a) when the loan is repayable not more than three months from the date of the instrument-  for every sum secured not exceeding Rs. 200 Thirty-five naye paise  and for every Rs. 200 or part thereof secured in excess of Rs. 200 Thirty-five naye paise  (b) when the loan is repayable more than three months, but not more than eighteen months from the date of the instrument-  for every sum secured not exceeding Rs. 100 Sixty naye paise  and for every Rs. 100 or part thereof secured in excess of Rs. 100 Sixty naye paise  36. Notarial act - that is to say, any instrument, endorsement, note, attestation, certificate, or entry not being a protest (No. 42) made or signed by a Notary Public in the execution of the duties of his office, or by any other person lawfully acting as a Notary Public. Three rupees and thirty-five naye paise  See also Protest of Bill or Note (No. 42).  37. Note or Memorandum--Sent by a Broker or Agent to his principal intimating the purchase or sale on account of such principal-  (a) of any goods exceeding in value twenty rupees Sixty naye paise.  (b) of any stock or marketable security exceeding in value twenty rupees. Subject to a maximum of forty-five rupees and thirty-five naye paise for every Rs. 10,000 or part thereof of the value of the stock or security.  38. Note of Protest by the Master of a ship One rupee and fifty naye paise  See also protest by the Master of a ship (No. 43).  39. Partition-Instrument of-[as defined by Section 2(1)(k)] The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for the amount of the value of the separated share or shares of the property.  N.B - The largest share remaining after the property is partitioned (or if there are two or more shares of equal value and not smaller than any of the other shares, then one of such equal shares) shall be deemed to be that from which the other shares are separated:  Provided always that-  (a) when an instrument of partition containing an agreement to divide property in severalty is executed and a partition is effected in pursuance of such agreement, the duty chargeable upon the instrument effecting such partition shall be reduced by the amount of duty paid in respect of the first instrument, but shall not be less than two rupees and twenty-five naye paise;  (b) when land is held on revenue settlement for a period not exceeding thirty years and paying the full assessment, the value for the purpose of duty shall be calculated at twenty-five times the annual revenue;  (c) where a final order for effecting a partition passed by any Revenue Authority or any Civil Court, or an award by an arbitrator directing a partition, is stamped with the stamp required for an instrument of partition and an instrument of partition in pursuance of such order or award is subsequently executed, the duty on such instrument shall not exceed two rupees and twenty-five naye paise.  40. Partnership-  A. Instrument of-  (a) where the capital of the partnership does not exceed Rs. 500 Fifteen rupees  (b) in any other case Sixty rupees  B. Dissolution of- Thirty rupees.  Pawn or Pledge-See Agreement relating to deposit of Title-deeds, Pawn or Pledge (No. 6).  41. Powers of Attorney-[as defined by Section 2(1)(p)], not being a proxy-  (a) when executed for the sole purpose of procuring the registration of one or more documents in relation to a single transaction or for admitting execution of one or more such documents; One rupee and ten naye paise  (b) when authorising one person or more to act in a single transaction other than the case mentioned in clause (a); Two rupees and twenty-five naye paise  (c) when authorising not more than five persons to act jointly and severally in more than one transaction or generally; Sixteen rupees and eighty-five naye paise  (d) when authorising more than five but not more than ten persons to act jointly and severally in more than one transaction or generally; Thirty rupees and seventy-five naye paise  (e) when given for consideration and authorising the attorney to sell any immoveable property; The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for the amount of the consideration.  (f) in any other case Three rupees and thirty-five naye paise  N.B - The term "registration" includes every operation incidental to registration under the Indian Registration Act, 1908.  Explanation  For the purposes of this article, more persons than one when belonging to the same firm shall be deemed to be one person.  42. Protest of Bill or Note-that is to say, any declaration in writing made by a Notary Public, or other person lawfully acting as such, attesting the dishonour of a bill of exchange or promissory note. Three rupees  43. Protest by the Master of a Ship-that is to say, any declaration of the particulars of her voyage drawn up by him with a view to the adjustment of losses or the calculation of averages, and every declaration in writing made by him against the charterers or the consignees for not loading or unloading the ship, when such declaration is attested or certified by a Notary Public or other person lawfully acting as such. Three rupees  See also Note of Protest by the Master of a ship (No. 38).  44. Reconveyance of mortgaged property-  (a) if the consideration for which the property was mortgaged does not exceed Rs. 1,000. The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for the amount of such consideration as set forth in the reconveyance.  (b) in any other case Forty-five rupees  45. Release, that is to say, any instrument (not being such a release as is provided for by Section 24), whereby a person renounces a claim upon another person or against any specified property-  (a) if the amount or value of the claim does not exceed Rs. 1,000 The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for such amount or value as set forth in the release.  (b) in any other case Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise  46. Respondentia Bond, that is to say, any instrument securing a loan on the cargo laden or to be laden on board a ship and making repayment contingent on the arrival of the cargo at the port of destination. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for the amount of the loan secured.  Revocation of any Trust or Settlement--See Settlement (No. 48); Trust (No. 54).  47. Security bond or Mortgage-deed, executed by way of security for the due execution of an office, or to account for money or other property received by virtue thereof, or executed by a surety to secure the due performance of a contract-  (a) when the amount secured does not exceed Rs. 1,000 The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No.13) for the amount secured.  (b) in any other case Twenty-two rupees and fity naye paise.  Exemption  Bond or other instrument, when executed:--  (a) by any person for the purpose of guaranteeing that the local income derived from private subscriptions to a charitable dispensary or hospital, or any other object of public utility, shall not be less than a specified sum per mensem.  (b) under No. 3-A of the rule made under Section 70 of the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879;  (c) by persons taking advances under the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (Central Act No. XIX of 1883) or the Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1884 (Central Act No. XII of 1884), or the Karnataka Land Improvement Loans Act, 1890 (Karnataka Act IV of 1890), or Section 194 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Code, 1888 (Karnataka Act IV of 1888), the Hyderabad Land Improvement Loans Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act II of 1950), or the Hyderabad Agriculturists' Loans Act, 1950 (Hyderabad Act II of 1950), or by their sureties as security for the repayment of such advances.  (d) by officers of Government or their sureties to secure the due execution of an office or the due accounting for money or other property received by virtue thereof.  48. Settlement.  A. Instrument of (including a deed of dower) The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property settled as set forth in such settlement:  Provided that, where an agreement to settle is stamped with the stamp required for an instrument of settlement, and an instrument of settlement in pursuance of such agreement is subsequently executed, the duty on such instrument shall not exceed two rupees and twenty-five naye paise.  Exemption  Deed of dower executed on the occasion of a marriage between Muhammadans.  See also Trust (No. 54).  B. Revocation of The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property concerned as set forth in the Instrument of Revocation, but not exceeding Forty-five rupees.  49. Share warrants-To bearer issued under the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act I of 1956). One-and-a-half times the duty payable on a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the nominal amount of the shares specified in the warrant.  Exemptions  Share warrant when issued by a company in pursuance of Section 114 of the Companies Act, 1956, to have effect only upon payment, as composition for that duty to the Deputy Commissioner of Stamp-revenue, of-  (a) one-and-a-half per centum of the whole subscribed capital of the company, or  (b) if any company which has paid the said duty or composition in full subsequently issues an addition to its subscribed capital-one-and-a-half per centum of the additional capital so issued.  50. Shipping order for or relating to the conveyance of goods on board of any vessel. Fifteen naye paise.  51. Surrender of Lease-  (a) when the duty with which the lease is chargeable does not exceed twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise. The duty with which such lease is chargeable.  (b) in any other case Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise.  Exemption  Surrender of lease, when such lease is exempted from duty.  52. Transfer- (whether with or without consideration)-  (a) of debentures, being marketable securities, whether the debenture is liable to duty or not; One-half of the duty payable on a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the face amount of the debenture.  (b) of any interest secured by a bond, mortgage-deed or policy of insurance-  (i) if the duty on such bond, mortgage-deed or policy does not exceed twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise; The duty with which such bond, mortgage-deed or policy of insurance is chargeable.  (ii) in any other case Twenty-two rupees and fifty naye paise.  (c) of any property under Section 25 of the Administrator General's Act, 1913. Thirty-three rupees and seventy-five naye paise  (d) of any trust-property from one trustee to another trustee or from a trustee to a beneficiary. Eleven rupees and twenty-five naye paise or such smaller amount as may be chargeable under clauses (a) and (b) of this article.  Exemptions  Transfers by endorsement-  (a) of a bill of exchange, cheque of promissory note;  (b) of a bill of lading, delivery order, warrant for goods, or other mercantile document of title to goods;  (c) of a policy of insurance;  (d) of securities of the Central Government or of a State Government. See also Section 8.  53. Transfer of lease by way of assignment, and not by way of under-lease. The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a consideration equal to the amount of the consideration for the transfer.  Exemption  Transfer of any lease exempt from duty.  54. Trust  A. Declaration of-of, or concerning, any property when made by any writing not being a Will. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property concerned, as set forth in the instrument but not exceeding sixty-seven rupees and fifty naye paise  B. Revocation of-of, or concerning any property when made by any instrument other than a Will. The same duty as a Bottomry Bond (No. 13) for a sum equal to the amount or value of the property concerned, as set forth in the instrument, but not exceeding forty-five rupees.  See also Settlement (No. 47).  Valuation-See Appraisement (No. 8).  55. Warrant for Goods, that is to say, any instrument evidencing the title of any person therein named or his assigns, or the holder thereof, to the property in any goods lying in or upon any dock, warehouse or wharf, such instrument being signed or certified by or on behalf of the person in whose custody such goods may be." One rupee and ten naye paise.  
