Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. Whereas it has been observed that with a view to avoid the higher stamp duty payable on conveyances, parties are resorting to the practice of entering into partnerships and thereafter, dissolving them and transferring properties to one another through such dissolution. And whereas it has been found necessary with a view to avoid leakage of revenue to enhance the stamp duty for the dissolution of partnerships where such dissolution involves the transfer property belonging to one partner or partners to the other partner or partners. Whereas it is, therefore, expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1987.1 2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Eighth day of June, 1987 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely,- "(3) Where any instrument is registered in any part of India other than Karnataka and the instrument relates wholly or partly to any property situated in Karnataka, the copy of such instrument shall, when received in Karnataka be liable to be charged with the difference of stamp duty as original under Section 19 to the extent of and in proportion to the consideration or value of the property situated in Karnataka and the party liable to pay stamp duty on the original instrument shall upon receipt of notice from the registering officer pay the difference in duty within the time allowed."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the Principal Act, for Article 40, the following Article shall be substituted, namely - "40. Partnership- A. Instrument of- (a) Where the capital of the partnership does not exceed Rs. 1,000. Rs. 50.00 (b) In any other case Rs. 200.00 B. Dissolution of - (a) Where the property which belonged to one partner or partners when the partnership commenced is distributed or allotted or given to another partner or partners. The same duty as a Conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property distributed or allotted or given to the partner or partners under the instrument of dissolution, in addition to the duty which would have been payable on such dissolution if such property had not been distributed or allotted or given. (b) In any other case Rs. 200.00". 
