Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-sixth year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995.1 2 (2) It shall come into force with effect from the First day of April, 1995. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty-first day of March, 1995 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 3-A of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "3-B. Certain Instruments chargeable with additional duty - (1) For the purpose of Bangalore Mass Rapid Transit System, any instrument of conveyance, exchange, settlement, gift or lease in perpetuity of immovable property situated within the limits of Bangalore City Planning Area, chargeable with duty under Section 3 read with articles of the schedule, shall be chargeable with additional duty at the rate of five per cent on such duty chargeable on such instrument of conveyance, exchange, gift, settlement and lease in perpetuity. (2) The additional duty chargeable under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to any duty chargeable under Section 3. (3) Except as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), provisions of this Act, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the additional duty chargeable under sub-section (1), as they apply in relation to the duty chargeable under Section 3. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, Bangalore City Planning Area means Bangalore City Planning Area as declared under Section 4-A of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1963)."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the principal Act for the word "three", the words "one hundred", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 28 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "28-A. Intimation of transfer of ownership of Motor Vehicle - Every person applying for transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and who is liable to pay duty under sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of Article 20 of the Schedule to this Act shall for purposes of charging such duty send intimation of transfer to such authority and in such for as may be prescribed, and shall also furnish a copy of such intimation to the registering authority under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) for Article 1, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "1. Acknowledgement of,-  (i) a debt written or signed by or on behalf of, a debtor in order to supply evidence of such debt in any book (other than a Bankers pass book) or on a separate piece of paper when such book or paper is left in the creditors possession and the amount or value of such debt,-  (a) exceeds rupees 100 but does not exceed rupees 10,000 One rupee (b) for every rupees 10,000 or part thereof in excess of rupees 10,000 One rupee subject to a maximum of one hundred rupees (ii) a letter, article, document, parcel, package, or consignment, of any nature or description whatsoever or by whatever name called, given by a person, courier company, firm, or body of persons whether incorporated or unincorporated to the sender of such letter, article, document, parcel, package or consignment One rupee for every rupees one hundred or part thereof of the amount charged therefor." (2) In Article 4, in Column 3, for the words "ten rupees" the words "fifteen rupees", shall be substituted. (3) in Article 5- (i) in the heading, after the words "agreement or" the words "its records or" shall be inserted. (ii) for clauses (a), (b) and (c), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) If relating to the sale of a bill of exchange One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof (b) If relating to the purchase or sale of a Government security One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof of the value of the security at the time of its purchase or sale, as the case may be, subject to a maximum of rupees one thousand (c) If relating to the purchase or sale of shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stocks or any other marketable security of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate  (i) when such agreement or memorandum or an agreement is with or through a member or between members of Stock Exchange recognised under the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (XLII of 1956) One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof of the value of the security at the time of its purchase or sale as the case may be (ii) in any other case One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof of the value of the security at the time of its purchase or sale, as the case may be." (iii) for clause (e), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(e) If relating to sale of immovable property wherein part performance of the contract  (i) possession of the property is delivered or is agreed to be delivered without executing the conveyance Same duty as a conveyance (No. 20) on the market value of the property. (ii) possession of the property is not delivered  (a) Where the value of the property-  (i) does not exceed rupees 5000 Ten rupees (ii) exceeds rupees 5000 but does not exceed rupees 20,000 Twenty rupees (iii)exceeds rupees 20,000 but does not exceed rupees 50,000 One hundred rupees (iv) exceeds rupees 50,000 Two hundred rupees (b) Where such agreement or memorandum of an agreement does not relate to monetary transactions or transactions not susceptible to valuation in terms of money Fifty rupees (f) If relating to giving authority or power to a promoter or developer by whatever name called, for construction or, development of, or sale or transfer (in any manner whatsoever) of any immovable property Same duty as conveyance (No. 20) (g) If relating to sale of moveable property Same duty in sub-clause (e) of this Article (h) If relating to the mortgage Same duty as under Article No. 34(a) or (b) as the case may be (i) If not otherwise provided for Fifty rupees. Explanation:  (I) For the purpose of sub-clause (i) of clause (e) and clause (i), the provisions of Section 45-A shall apply mutatis mutandis to such agreements, its records of memorandum as they apply to an instrument under that section. (II) For the purpose of sub-clause (i) of clause (e) and clause (h), where subsequently conveyance or mortgage as the case may be, is executed in pursuance of such agreement or its records or memorandum the stamp duty, if any, already paid and recovered on the agreement or its record or memorandum shall be adjusted towards the total duty leviable on the conveyance or mortgage, as the case may be." (4) In Article 6, for the words "pawn or pledge" wherever they occur, the words "pawn, pledge or hypothecation", shall be substituted. (5) For Article 10, the following article shall be substituted, namely:- "10. Articles of Association of a company where the company has no share capital or nominal share capital or increased share capital One thousand rupees for every rupees five lakhs or part thereof. Exemption: Articles of any association not formed for profit and registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 See also Memorandum of Association of a Company (No. 33) Assignment: See Conveyance (No. 20), Transfer (No. 52) and Transfer of Lease (No. 53), as the case may be Authority to Adopt:- See Adoption Deed (No. 3)",- (6) For Article 16, the following Article shall be substituted, namely:- "16. Certificate or other document evidencing the right or title of the holder thereof, or any other person either to any share, scrip or stock in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate or to become proprietor of share, scrip or stock in or of any such company or body. One rupee for every one thousand rupees or a part thereof of the value of the share scrip or stock. See also letter of Allotment of Shares (No. 31). Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, the value of the share, scrip or stock includes the amount of premium, if any." (7) After Article 18, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "18-A. Clearance list: (1) Relating to the transactions for the purchase or sale of Government securities submitted to the clearing house of a stock exchange. The sum of duties chargeable under Article 5(b) or Article 37(e), as the case may be in respect of each of the entries in such list on the value of the securities calculated at the making up price or the contract price as the case may be. (2) Relating to the transactions for the purchase or sale of a share, scrip, stock, bond, debenture, debenture stock or other marketable security of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporate submitted to the clearing house of a stock exchange recognised under the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956. The sum of duties chargeable under Article 5(e)(i) or 37(b), as the case may be in respect of each of the entries in such list on the value of the securities calculated at the making up price or the contract price, as the case may be. (3) relating to the transactions for the purchase or sale of a share, scrip, stock, bond, debenture, debenture stock or other marketable security, of a like nature in or of any incorporated company or body corporate, submitted to the clearance house of a Stock Exchange, not recognised under the Securities Contract (Regulation) Act, 1956. The sum of duties chargeable under Article 5(c)(i) or 37(b), as the case may be, in respect of each of the entries in such list on the value of the securities calculated at the making up price or the contract price, as the case may be." (8) In Article 20, after clause (2), the following shall be inserted, namely,- "(3) If relating to moveable property- (a)If relating to the transfer of ownership of motor vehicle registered or deemed to have been registered under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) Two rupees for every rupees one hundred or part thereof. (b)If relating to industrial machinery Two rupees for every rupees one hundred or part thereof. Exemption: (i) Transfer of ownership of 75 CC and below 75 CC motor vehicles and auto-rickshaws (ii) Sale of industrial machinery by the manufacturer or his authorised agent (iii) Industrial machinery not exceeding the value of rupees twenty-five thousand." (9) In Article 30, after sub-clause (c), the following shall be inserted, namely,- "(d) Where the lessee undertakes to effect improvements in the leased property and agreed to make over the same to the lessor at the time of termination of lease The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for value of the improvement contemplated to be made by the lessee as set forth in the deed in addition to the duty chargeable under sub-clause (a) or (b) or (c), as the case may be." (10) After Article 32, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "32-A. Licence of immovable or moveable property,- That is to say licence granted by owner or authority for rent or fee or by whatever name it is called,- (a) Where by such licence granted for rent or fee or by whatever name it is called- - (i) Where the licence purports to be for a term of less than one year The same duty as a bond (No. 12) for the whole amount payable or deliverable under such licence. (ii) Where the licence purports to be for a term of not less than one year but not more than five years The same duty as a bond (No. 12) for the amount or value of the average annual rent or fee or by whatever name it is called. (iii) Where the licence purports to be for a term of not less than five years but not exceeding ten years The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for the amount or value of the average annual rent or fee or by whatever name it is called. (iv) Where the licence purports to be for a term exceeding ten years but not exceeding twenty years The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for twice the amount of annual rent or fee or by whatever name it is called. (v) Where the licence purports to be for a term exceeding twenty years but not exceeding thirty years The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for thrice the average amount of rent or fee or by whatever name it is called. (b) Where the licence is granted for a lump sum amount advanced and where no rent or fee or by whatever name it is called is reserved The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for the whole lump sum amount advanced as set forth in the licence. (c) Where the licence is granted for a lump sum amount advanced in addition to rent or fee or by whatever name it is called The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for the lump sum amount advanced as set forth in the licence in addition to the duty which would have been payable on such licence, if no lump sum amount advanced had been paid or delivered" (11) For Article 33, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "33. Memorandum of Association of a company,- (a) If accompanied by Articles of Association under Section 26 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956) Two hundred rupees (b) If not so accompanied The same duty as under Article (No. 10) according to the share capital of the company. Exemption: -  Memorandum of any Association not formed for profit and registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956)."  (12) In Article 34, for the words "Deposit of title deeds, pawn or pledge (No. 6)", the words "Deposit of title deeds, pawn, pledge or hypothecation (No. 6)", shall be substituted. (13) For Article 37, the following shall be substituted, namely: "37 Note or Memorandum Sent by a broker or agent to his principal intimating the purchase or sale on account of such principal (a) of any goods exceeding in value twenty rupees One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof (b) of any share, scrip, stock, bond, debenture, debenture stock or other marketable security of a like nature exceeding in value twenty rupees, not being a Government security One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof of the value of the security, at the time of its purchase or sale, as the case may be (c) of a Government Security One rupee for every rupees ten thousand or part thereof of the value of the security, at the time of its purchase or sale, as the case may be, subject to a maximum of one thousand rupees. Exemptions: (1) Note or Memorandum sent by a broker or agent to his principal intimating the purchase or sale on account of such principal or a Government security or a share, scrip, stock, bond, debenture, debenture stock or other marketable security of like nature in or of any incorporated company or other body corporated, an entry relating to which is required to be made in clearance lists described in clauses (1), (2) and (3) of Article 18-A. (2) Note or Memorandum sent by a broker or agent to his principal in any of the above cases, when the amount stated in the instrument is less than rupees one hundred." (14) For Article 40, the following Article shall be substituted, namely:- "40. Partnership: A. Instrument of:- (a) Where the Capital of the partnership does not exceed rupees 5000 One hundred rupees (b) In any other case Five hundred rupees B. Reconstitution:- (a) Where immovable property contributed as share by a partner or partners remains with the firm at the time of outgoing in whatever manner by such partner or partners on reconstitution of such partnership firm The same duty as conveyance duty (No. 20) on the market value of the immovable property remaining with the firm. (b) In any other case Five hundred rupees C. Dissolution of:- (a) Where the property which belonged to one partner or partners when the partnership commenced is distributed or allotted or given to another partner or partners The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for a market value equal to the market value of the property distributed or allotted or given to partner or partners under the instrument of dissolution, in addition to the duty which would have been chargeable on such dissolution if such property had not been distributed or allotted or given. (b) In any other case Five hundred rupees." (15) In Article 41, after clause (e), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(ea) When given to a promoter or developer by whatever name called for construction development on, or sale, or transfer (in any manner whatsoever) of, any immovable property The same duty as a conveyance under Article (No. 20)." (16) In Article 45, after clause (b), the following shall be inserted, namely,- "(c) Release of mortgage rights or lien Same duty as bond (No. 12) subject to a maximum of rupees one hundred" (17) For Article 53, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "53. Transfer of lease, by way of assignment, and not by way of underlease The same duty as conveyance (No. 20) for a market value which is the subject-matter of assignment." (18) After Article 53, the following shall be inserted, namely,- "53-A. Transfer of Licence Same duty as conveyance (No. 20)." 
