Karnataka State Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka State Open University Act, 1992. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Karnataka State Open University Act, 1992 (Karnataka Act 46 of 1994), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fifty-third year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka State Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002. 1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Published in the Karnataka Gazette Part IV-A Extra Ordinary No. 434 dated 26-4-2003.
Karnataka State Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After section 41 of the Karnataka State Open University Act, 1992 (Karnataka Act 46 of 1994) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- "42.Continuation of Statutes, Ordinances etc:-Until Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations are made under sections 23, 24 and 25 of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules of the Mysore University established under the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 28 of 1976) regulating the affairs of the Institute of correspondence courses and continuing education, Mysore and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, subject to such adaptations or modifications, as may be made therein by the Vice-chancellor with the approval of the chancellor obtained through the Government, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made under the appropriate provisions of this Act and shall continue to be in force unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act.
Karnataka State Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, anything done, any action taken or any proceeding held (including any appointment or delegation made or order, instrument or direction issued) by the University or any authority, officer or employee of the University with effect from the First day of June 1996 under the statutes, ordinances, regulations or rules of the Mysore University which are deemed to be, the statutes, ordinances or regulations of the University under section 42 of the principal Act and have continued as such, shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if the provisions of section 42 of the principal Act as inserted by this Act and the statutes, ordinances or regulations continued under that section were in force at all relevant times when such thing, action or proceeding was done, taken or held. T.N. CHATURVEDI, GOVERNOR OF KARNATAKA" By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, M.R. HEGDE Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
