Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for regulation of transfer of Principals, Teaching and Non-Teaching staff of Department of Technical Education so as to ensure the availability of Principals, Teaching and Non-Teaching staff in Government Engineering Colleges/ Government Polytechnics and Government Junior Technical Schools/ Steric of the State. Whereas it is expedient to provide for regulation of Transfer of staff of Department of Technical Education so as to ensure transparency and availability of Principals/Teaching/ Non-Teaching staff in Government Engineering Colleges/Government Polytechnics and Government Junior Technical Schools/Steric throughout the state and for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto: Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the sixty third year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called The Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012. (2) The provisions of this Act shall be applicable to teaching and non-teaching staff of the Department of Technical Education except the post of the Director, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director. (3) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Appointment" means appointment by direct recruitment or by posting or by promotion; (b) "Appointing authority" means the concerned authority competent to make appointment to any post in the Karnataka Technical Education Department Service. (c) "Competent authority" means the authority competent to make orders of transfer or appointment of staff of the Department of Technical Education. Explanation : (1) The Government shall be the competent authority to issue appointment and transfer orders in respect of all the officials coming under the Group A Cadre. (2) The Director of Technical Education shall be the competent authority to issue appointment and transfer orders in respect of all the officials coming under the Group B cadre and Group C cadre above the rank of second division Assistant. (3) The Administrative officer of the Technical Education shall be the competent authority to issue appointment and transfer orders in respect of all Group D staff; (d) "College or Institution of Department of Technical Education" means,- (i) "Government Engineering College" belonging to Government coming under purview of the Department of Technical Education; (ii) "Government Polytechnic" belonging to Government coming under purview of the Department of Technical Education; (iii) "Government Junior Technical School" belonging to Government coming under purview of the Department of Technical Education. (e) "deputation" means deployment of the services of staff, fully or partially, from one Office/ Government Engineering Colleges/ Government Polytechnics and Government Junior Technical Schools/ Steric of the Department of Technical Education where he is working to another Office or Government Engineering Colleges/ Government Polytechnics and Government Junior Technical Schools/ Steric without shifting the lien; (f) "Non-Teaching staff" means a person appointed to any category of non-teaching posts of Group-A, Group-B, Group-C or Group-D in various offices or Government Engineering Colleges or Government Polytechnics and Government Junior Technical Schools or Steric of the Department of Technical Education belonging to the State Civil Services and such other posts as specified in Schedule. (g) "Principal" means a person appointed to a category of post of a Principal in the Government Engineering Colleges, Principal Grade-I or Grade-II in Government Polytechnic or equivalent post of Deputy Director/ Assistant Director in the Directorate of Technical Education, principal in Government Junior Technical School belonging to the State Civil Services and such other equivalent posts as specified in the Schedule. (h) "Process of Counseling" means, the process of computerized counseling by giving opportunity to a person considered for appointment or a Government servant considered for transfer to opt a place or post on priority which is being given based on the length of the service put in by him in the place where he is working and such other criteria as may be prescribed. (i) "Schedule" means Schedule appended to this Act; (j) "Steric" means State Technical Education Resources and Information Centre coming under the purview of the Department of Technical Education. (k) "teaching Staff" means,- (i) a person appointed to any of the category of posts of Associate Professor/Assistant Professor/ Professor/Librarian /Assistant Director of physical Education and sports/ Placement Officer in Government Engineering College belonging to the State Civil Services and such other posts as specified in the Schedule. (ii) A person appointed to the category of posts of Head of Section, Lecturer and Assistant Lecturer in a Government Polytechnic belonging to the State Civil Services and such other posts as specified in Schedule. (iii) A person appointed to the category of posts of Lecturer and Assistant Lecturer in a Government Junior Technical School belonging to the State Civil Services and such other posts as specified in Schedule. (l) "transfer" means posting of a staff to a post in a place of working, from one place of working to a post in another place of working and includes transfer within or outside a Zone in the same cadre; (m) "Unit of Seniority" means,- (i) for the purpose of posting of Principal, all teaching and non-teaching staff (except in the category of Group-D posts), of the Department of Technical Education shall be the state; (ii) for the Group-D category of posts, of the Department of the Technical Education the unit of Seniority shall be the District. (m) "Zone" means the specific areas classified for transfer of staff and,- (i) "Zone-A" means,- (a) the areas falling under Bruhath Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) limits and the area falling under Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) limits; (b) the areas falling under the limits of City Corporations constituted under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act 1976; and (c) the areas falling under the limits of District Head Quarters and City Municipal Council or City Municipality of all District. (ii) "Zone-B" means the areas falling under the Taluk Head Quarters and Town Municipality of all Districts, excluding the area falling under Zone-A; (iii) "Zone-C" means the areas falling out side Zone-A and Zone-B. (2) other words and expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990).
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every appointing authority while making initial appointment of a Principal /Teaching /Non-Teaching staff to any College or Institution of the Department of Technical Education shall ensure that vacancies in zone-C shall be filled in the first instance. (2) If no vacancy is available for initial appointment or transfer a vacancy may be created by transfer of a Principal/ Teaching/Non-Teaching staff who has completed minimum number of years of service or more number of years of service to another Zone in the order of priority from Zone-C to Zone-B and Zone-B to Zone-A. Provided that the above condition shall not be applicable to the cadre where there is no post is available in any zone. (3) (a) The minimum length of services required to be completed, to become eligible for transfer is Zone- C, Zone-B and Zone-A shall be as stipulated in the rules. (b) if, no Principal/ Teaching/Non-Teaching staff is available who has completed minimum length of service, a person who has completed maximum number of years below the stipulated period as Principal, teaching or non- teaching staff may be considered for transfer as above: Provided that in case any a Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff is staff who is serving in Zone-C is eligible to be transferred to Zone-B and similarly in case a Principal, teaching or non- teaching staff who is serving in Zone-B is eligible to be transferred to Zone-A but if he desires to continue to serve in Zone-C or Zone-B, as the case may be, he may be allowed to continue to serve in their respective Zones. Explanation:-order of priority shall be calculated interalia, on the basis of the total number of years of service, of a Principal, teaching or non- teaching staff in a zone in different cadres and on the basis of any other criteria as may be prescribed. (c) A Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff who is in Zone-A or Zone-B and who is undergoing any time bound penalty imposed under the Karnataka Civil Services (Classification Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 or who is facing any criminal charges in court of law may be transferred to Zone-C, if no vacancy is available in Zone-C, a vacancy may be created in the manner specified in sub-section (2). Provided that if such Principal, teaching or non- teaching staff is working in Zone-C, he shall be transferred from the place where he is working to another place in the same Zone, but he shall not be transferred outside Zone-C till the completion of such disciplinary proceedings, criminal proceeding or penalty, as the case may be.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka Transfer of a Principal/ Teaching/Non-Teaching staff under this Act shall be through a process of counseling conducted in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that a person who is working in the Department of Technical Education, in the category of Group-D posts may be transferred within the District Provided further that a person working in the Department of Technical Education, in the post of Group-D category may be transferred from one District to another District only on his request.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff who is in service on the date of commencement of this Act and has served for more than prescribed years continuously in any Office, College or Institution of the Department of Technical Education in the same place in Zone-A shall be transferred to Zone-C. Provided that no Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff who has less than two years of service for superannuation shall be transferred outside the limits of Zone-A unless on his request.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka The total number of such transfers in a unit of seniority shall not exceed eight percent of the sanctioned strength of respective cadre in that unit of seniority. Provided that, out of 8 percent of total number of transfer as mentioned above, the percentage of transfers to be made under special category shall be as prescribed.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka If sufficient workload is not available for Teaching staff in any College or Institution of the Department of Technical Education in any subject, such number of post as determined as surplus may be shifted to any other College or Institution within the same Zone where the workload is sufficient, by the competent authority. Provided further that if such Office or College or Institution with sufficient workload in that subject, cadre is not available in the same Zone , such number of posts in that or subject may be shifted from Zone -C to Zone-B and from Zone-B to Zone A.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka The teaching or non-teaching staff working in the posts shifted under section 7 shall be transferred in the same zone under section 3, 4 and 5.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In the case of transfer, the minimum period of stay in a place or zone as may be prescribed from time to time, shall be relaxed in the following cases namely:- (i) In the case of both husband and wife being State Government employees and if one of the spouse is working in a different zone then the other spouse may be transferred to the same place or nearby place if he is in the same zone subject to availability of clear vacancy; (ii) Where a Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff is a widow; (iii) Where a Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff is physically challenged; (iv) Where a Principal, teaching or non-teaching staff has spouse or children and they are suffering from serious ailment, for which medical treatment is not available at his place of work and his transfer is necessary to a place where such treatment is available so as to provide the required medical treatment. Provided that no transfer shall be considered unless the Principal, teaching or non- teaching staff concerned produces a certificate from the District Medical Board Specifying the nature of ailment, stating the fact that the required treatment is not available at his place of work, specifying the place where the required treatment is available and certifying that his transfer is necessary to such a place to provide him the required medical treatment.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In unavoidable circumstances where deputation or from one Office, College or Institution of the Department of Technical Education to another Office, College or Institution of the Department of Technical Education becomes absolutely necessary, then such deputation of teaching or non- teaching staff shall be made within the same zone.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka If any competent authority or any officer makes an order of posting or appointment or transfer in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, such competent authority or officer as the case may be, shall be liable for disciplinary action under the disciplinary rules applicable to civil servants.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on a complaint made in writing by an officer authorized by the Government by notification published in this behalf in the official Gazette.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may by order published in the official Gazette make provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as it appear to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may, by notification, add, alter or remove any of the entries specified in the Schedule.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer of the Government for anything done in good faith or intended to be done under this Act.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may by notification and after previous publication, make rules or amend rules from time to time to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) Any rule made under this Act may be made with retrospective effect and when such a rule is made, the reasons for making the rule shall be specified in a statement to be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature and subject to any modification made under sub- section (14). (3) Every rule under this Act shall have effect as if it enacted under this Act, shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification, in the rule or notification or decide effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rules or notification.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka Any rule, notification, order or appointment, made or issued under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1990) or otherwise providing for or relating to any of the matters for the furtherance of which this Act is an enacted, before the commencement of this Act and in force on the date of commencement of this Act, to the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall continue to be in force and effective as if they are made or issued or appointed under the corresponding provisions of this Act unless and until superseded by anything done or any Act action taken or any rule, notification, order or appointment made under this Act.
Karnataka State Civil Services (Regulation of transfer of staff of Department of Technical College) Act, 2012_Section Sch.--> State(s): Karnataka (see section 2(f), (g) and (h) and section 12) SL NO. DESIGNATION OF THE POSTS OF PRINCIPAL, TEACHING NON- TEACHING STAFF IN GOVERNMENT ENGINEERING COLLEGES, GOVERNMENT. POLYTECHNICS, GOVERNMENT. JUNIOR TECHNICAL SCHOOL, STERIC AND OFFICE OF THE DIRECTORATE OF TECHNICAL EDUCATION. (1) (2) 1. Government Engineering Colleges- 1. Principal 2. Professors 3. Associate Professors 4. Associate Professors 5. Librarian 6. Assistant Director of Physical Education and Sports 7. Placement Officer 2. Govt. Polytechnics-  1. Principal Grade-II or equivalent post of Deputy Director in Directorate of Technical Education. 2. Principal Grade-I equivalent post of Asst. Director/ Subject Inspector in Directorate of Technical Education 3. Head of Department 4. Lecturer or an equivalent post of Senior Technical Assistant/ Technical Assistant/Research Officer / Development Officer/ Programmer/ System Analyst in the Directorate of Technical Education. 5. Asst. Lecturer 3. Govt. Junior Technical School- 1. Principal 2. Lecturer 3. Asst. Lecturer Administrative and Technical Supporting staff 4. Assistant Administrative Officer, Director 5. Registrar/ public Relation Officer 6. System Analyst 7. Junior Programmer 8. Superintendent 9. Librarians 10. First Division Assistant 11. Stenographer 12. Second Division Assistant 13. Senior Data Entry Operator 14. Data Entry Operator 15. Typist 16. Workshop Superintendent 17. Foreman 18. Foremen/ Programmer in Computer Engg 19. Instructor 20. Asst. Librarian 21. Physical Cultural Instructor 22. Asst. Librarian 23. Mechanic 24. Auto Driver Mechanic 25. Camera man 26. Asst. Cameraman 27. Production Assistant 28. Graphics artist 29. Projectionist 30. Sound Recordist 31. Asst. Recordist 32. Driver 33. Group-D (i) Office Attender (ii) Helper (iii) Head cook (iv) Peon (v) Watchman (vi) Sweeper (vii) Asst. Cook (viii) Cleaner (Hostel) H. R. Bhardwaj Governor of Karnataka By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, K. S. Mudagal Secretary to Government (I/C) Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation 
