Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 - Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957, (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-first year of the Republic of India as follows;
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Third day of December, 1979. Received the assent of the Governor on the Fifteenth day of April, 1980 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957), (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) - (1) in clause (a), for the words "with a duty not exceeding thirty paise" the words "with a duty not exceeding fifty paise", shall be substituted; (2) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) instruments chargeable with such amount of duty as the State Government may, by notification specify".
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 46 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted, with effect from the First day of April, 1972, namely:- "46-A. Recovery of stamp duty not levied or short levied - (1) Where any instrument chargeable with duty has not been duly stamped, the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or any other officer authorised by the State Government (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) may, within three years from the date of commencement of the Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980 or the date on which the duty became payable whichever is later, serve notice on the person by whom the duty was payable requiring him to show cause why the proper duty or the amount required to make up the same should not be collected from him: Provided that where the non-payment was by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of duty, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect, as if for the words "three years" the words "six years" were substituted: Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to instruments executed prior to First day of April, 1972. Explanation - Where the service of a notice, under this sub-section is stayed by an order of a Court, the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of three years or six years, as the case may be. (2) The Chief Controlling Revenue Authority or the authorised officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on whom notice is served under sub-section (1), determine the amount of duty due from such person (not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice) and thereupon such person shall pay the amount so determined. (3) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (2), may prefer an appeal before the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal within three months from the date of such order. (4) Any duty payable under this section shall be recovered as arrears of land revenue."
Karnataka Stamp (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Stamp (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1979, (Karnataka Ordinance No. 22 of 1979), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
