Karnataka Stamp and Certain other Law (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 and the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 34 of 1957) and the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act 17 of 1960) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Stamp and Certain other Law (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Stamp and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 20001 . It shall come into force with effect from the First day of April, 2000. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Thirty-first day of March, 2000, Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty-first day of March, 2000
Karnataka Stamp and Certain other Law (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka Act 17 of 1960) - (1) In Section 8 - (i) In sub-section (1), the words "along with a registration fee of one hundred rupees", shall be omitted. (ii) In sub-section (3), the words "Every such appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees" shall be omitted. (2) In Section 9 - (i) In sub-section (2), the words "along with a fee of fifty rupees" shall be omitted. (ii) In sub-section (3), the words "Every such appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees" shall be omitted. (3) In Section 10 - (i) In sub-section (2), the words "along with a fee of fifty rupees" shall be omitted. (ii) In sub-section (3), the words "Every such appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees" shall be omitted. (4) In Section 13 - (i) the words "A filing fee of one hundred rupees shall be paid to the Registrar for filing of the list and the balance sheet and income and expenditure account" shall be omitted. (ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely - "Provided that, if owing to urgent necessity or unavoidable circumstances the society does not file the list of members of Governing Body and a copy of balance sheet and income and expenditure account on or before the fourteenth day of the annual general body meeting of the society, the Registrar on an application made to him may condone the delay if he considers the reason for delay to be satisfactory and permit such society to file such records on payment of fine as may be prescribed". (5) In Section 24 - (i) for the words "on payment of a fee of twenty-five rupees for each inspection", the words "on payment of a such fee as may be prescribed" shall be substituted. (ii) for the words "five rupees", the words "such fee as may be prescribed" shall be substituted. (6) In Section 28, for the words "fifty rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted. (7) In Section 30, after sub-section (1), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(1-A) Without prejudice to the generality of the provision of sub-section (1), the State Government may fix such fees and fines for the following, namely - (a) For the registration of Societies under sub-section (1) of Section 8. (b) For appeal before Karnataka Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of Section 8, sub-section (3) of Section 9 and sub-section (3) of Section 10. (c) For filing of change in Memorandum of Association under sub-section (2) of Section 9. (d) For filing of change of name, rules and regulations under sub-section (2) of Section 10. (e) Filing of the List and Balance sheet and Income and Expenditure account under Section 13. (f) Fines under Section 13 and Section 28. (g) Fee for enquiry under Section 25." 
