Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957). Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) for purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-second Year of Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981.1 2 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Fourth day of April, 1981
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in Section 5 - (1) after the second proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (3), the following further proviso shall be inserted namely - "Provided also that in respect of sale of goods mentioned in Serial Number 146 of the Second Schedule, the sale by a handloom or powerloom weaver or a manufacturer of the said goods to a registered dealer in the State shall not be deemed to be, but the subsequent sale by the latter shall be deemed to be, the sale by the first dealer liable to tax under this Act"; (2) in sub-section (3-A), for the words "three per cent", the words "four per cent" shall be substituted; (3) in clause (a) of sub-section (5), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "Thirty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 6-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "6-B. Levy of turnover tax -(1) Every dealer whose total turnover in a year exceeds rupees one lakh shall, in addition to the tax payable, if any, under other provisions of this Act, pay a tax at the rate of one-half per cent of his total turnover: Provided that no tax under this sub-section shall be payable on any part of such turnover which relates to - (i) sale or purchase of goods specified in the Fifth Schedule; (ii) sale or purchase of goods specified in the Fourth Schedule; (iii) sale or purchase of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce; (iv) sale or purchase of goods in the course of export outside the territory of India or sale or purchase in the course of import into the territory of India; and (v) all amounts collected by way of tax under the provisions of this Act or the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 74 of 1956). (2) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder including those relating to refund or exemption from tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy, assessment and collection of the tax payable under sub-section (1), as they apply in relation to the levy, assessment and collection of sales tax or purchase tax under this Act."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8-A of the principal Act, after subsection (3), the following sub-section shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely - "(3-A) If the rate of tax payable under this Act in respect of any goods or class of goods gets modified by an amendment to this Act, notification, if any, issued in respect on such goods or class of goods under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall, with effect from the date from which such amendment comes into force be deemed to be cancelled to the extent it relates to such goods or class of goods."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 10 of the principal Act, for the words "ten thousand rupees", the words "fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10-A of the principal Act, in subsection (1), for the words "twenty-five rupees", the words "fifty rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12-B of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words tax payable by him on the basis of his actual taxable turnover", the words "tax payable by him under Sections 5, 6-B, 6-C and 25-B on the basis of the turnover particulars shown therein" shall be substituted; (2) sub-section (2) shall be renumbered as sub-section (3) thereof and before the sub-section (3) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2) If no such statement is submitted by a dealer under sub-section (1) before the date prescribed or if the statement submitted by him appears to the assessing authority to be incorrect or incomplete, the assessing authority may assess the dealer provisionally for that month to the best of his judgment, recording the reasons for such assessment, and proceed to demand and collect the tax on the basis of such assessment: Provided that before taking action under this sub-section the dealer shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), after the words "or a dealer referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 10", the words "or a dealer who is a hotelier or a restaurateur" shall be inserted; (2) in the Table under sub-section (1), the entry at Sl. No. 1 shall be omitted; (3) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(4) (i) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (3), subject to such conditions and in such circumstances as may be prescribed, the assessing authority of the area may, if a hotelier or a restaurateur so elects, accept in lieu of the amount of tax payable by him, during any year, under this Act, by way of composition, an amount at the following rates, namely - Sl. No. Total turnover Rate (1) (2) (3) 1. Where the total turnover is not less than thirty-five thousand rupees but less than one lakh rupees. One thousand four hundred rupees (1,400) 2. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh rupees but less than two lakh rupees. Four thousand rupees (4,000) 3. Where the total turnover is not less than two lakh rupees but less than three lakh rupees. Eight thousand rupees (8,000) 4. Where the total turnover is not less than three lakh rupees but less than four lakh rupees. Twelve thousand rupees (12,000) 5. Where the total turnover is not less than four lakh rupees but less than five lakh rupees. Sixteen thousand rupees (16,000) 6. Where the total turnover is not less than five lakh rupees but less than six lakh rupees. Twenty thousand rupees (20,000) 7. Where the total turnover is not less than six lakh rupees but less than seven lakh rupees. Twenty-four thousand rupees (24,000) 8. Where the total turnover is not less than seven lakh rupees but less than eight lakh rupees. Twenty-eight thousand rupees (28,000) 9. Where the total turnover is not less than eight lakh rupees but less than nine lakh rupees. Thirty-two thousand rupees (32,000) 10. Where the total turnover is not less than nine lakh rupees but less than ten lakh rupees. Thirty-six thousand rupees (36,000) 11. Where the total turnover is ten lakh rupees or more. Forty thousand rupees (40,000) plus 4 per cent of the turnover in excess of ten lakh rupees (ii) Any hotelier or restaurateur may apply to the assessing authority to be permitted to pay the amount under clause (i) and, on being so permitted, he shall pay the amount due in advance during the year in equal monthly instalments on or before the 25th of the month following each month and for that purpose shall submit such statements or returns in such manner as may be prescribed. (iii) The amount paid under clause (ii) shall be subject to such adjustment as may be necessary on the completion of final assessment."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 27 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words "fifteen thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "or fifty rupees whichever is less", the words "or two hundred and fifty rupees whichever is more" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 29 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "be liable to a fine which may extend to two hundred rupees", the words "be liable to a fine which shall not be less than two hundred and fifty rupees", shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding two thousand rupees", the words "which may extend to twelve months or with a fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 30-A of the principal Act, in subsection (1), for the words "such sum not exceeding two hundred rupees", the words "such sum which shall not be less than two hundred and fifty rupees but which may extend to five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number 36, in Column 3, for the words "ten percent", the words "eleven per cent" shall be substituted; (2) Serial Number 38-A shall be omitted; (3) in the entries relating to Serial Number 73, in Column 3, for the words "thirteen per cent", the words "twelve per cent" shall be substituted; (4) in the entries relating to Serial Number 73-B, in Column 3, for the words "thirteen per cent", the words "fifteen per cent" shall be substituted; (5) in the entries relating to Serial Number 85, in Column 3, for the words "sixteen per cent", the words "fifteen per cent" shall be substituted; (6) for the entries relating to Serial Number 88, the following shall be substituted namely - "88. Cashew Six per cent 88-A. Cashew kernel Six per cent"; (7) for the entries relating to Serial Number 104, the following shall be substituted, namely - "104. Ethyl alcohol Eight per cent 104-A. Denatured spirit Forty per cent 104-B. Rectified spirit with ethyl alcohol content below 94.68 per cent (popularly known as medium grade (M.G.) alcohol) Sixteen per cent"; (8) in the entries relating to Serial Number 122, in Column 2, for the words "copper, bronze, brass and aluminium utensils", the words "copper, bronze and brass utensils" shall be substituted; (9) after the entries relating to Serial Number 124, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "124-A. Tractors, power-tillers and accessories and parts thereof Ten per cent"; (10) for the entries relating to Serial Number 146, the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "146. Silk fabrics - (i) manufactured on handloom Two per cent (ii) in other cases Four per cent"; (11) at the end, after Explanation VII, the following shall be inserted, namely - "Explanation VIII - "Silk fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics manufactured either wholly or partly from silk, but does not include cotton fabrics, woollen fabrics and man-made fabrics as defined in the Central Excise and Salts Act, 1944".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number 8-A in Column 2, the word "silk", appearing immediately after the word "woollen" shall be omitted; (2) in the entries relating to Serial Number 16, in Column 2, the words "sold by cocoon rearers" shall be omitted; (3) in the entries relating to Serial Number 38-A, in Column 2, after the words "Raw silk", the words "thrown silk or twisted silk" shall be added; (4) after the entries relating to Serial Number 42, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "42-A. Mechanical teaching aids sold to educational institutions recognised by the State Government or affiliated to an university established by Law in the State other than medical, dental, pharmacology, veterinary engineering and agricultural educational institutions and motor driving schools"; (5) after the entries relating to Serial Number 44, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "45. Aluminium utensils, excluding those falling under Serial Number 126 of Second Schedule". 
