Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on the First day of April, 1988. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-sixth day of July, 1988
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (i) for clause (x), the following clause shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1987, namely - "(x) "Year" means the financial year commencing on the first day of April, but, for purposes of assessment a dealer may at his option declare that he will adopt the year for which the accounts of that dealer are ordinarily maintained in his books and where no such declaration is made the year commencing on the first day of April and ending on the 31st day of March shall be reckoned as the assessment year: Provided that a registered dealer shall not change his assessment year except with the previous permission of the Assessing Authority of the area and except on such terms and conditions as may be determined by, the authority"; (ii) for clause (x) as so substituted, the following clause shall be substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1989, namely - "(x) "Year" means the year commencing on the first day of April".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3-A of the principal Act, to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided that no such application shall be entertained unless it is accompanied by proof of payment of such fee, paid in such manner, as may be prescribed".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act - (1) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), every dealer shall pay for each year tax on his taxable turnover of sales (other than the last sale in the State) relating to all kinds of alcoholic liquors for human consumption (other than toddy, arrack, fenny, wine and beer) at the rate of thirty-five per cent of such turnover: Provided that at any point of sale other than first point of sale and the last point of sale, the taxable turnover shall be arrived at by deducting the turnover of such goods on which tax has been levied under this sub-section at the immediately preceding point of sale: Provided further that no tax under this sub-section shall be levied and collected upto the 31st day of May, 1988 on subsequent sales excepting the last sale of alcoholic liquors for human consumption (other than toddy, arrack, fenny, wine and beer) which have already been subjected to tax at the rate of forty-five per cent prior to the 31st day of March, 1988 under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of Section 5 of the Act. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section last sale shall be the sale by a retailer to the customer and shall not include the first sale in the State"; (2) in sub-section (3) - (i) in the first proviso, for the words and figures "Serial Numbers 38, 39 and 40", the words and figures "Serial Number 6 of Part 'L' and Serial Number 2 of Part 'O'" shall be substituted; (ii) the second proviso shall be omitted; (iii) in the fourth proviso, for the words and figures "Serial Numbers 84, 85 and 89", the words and figures "Serial Number 12 of Part 'M' and items (iii) and (v) of Serial Number 5 of Part 'P' shall be substituted; (iv) explanation to second proviso of clause (a) shall be omitted; (3) in sub-section (3-C), after the words "subjected to tax under", the words, figure, letter and brackets "sub-section (1-A) or" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5-A of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), in the second proviso, for the words "other taxable goods", the words "other goods" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1986; (2) in item (1) of the explanation - (i) after the word "timber", the words and brackets "(other than veneer)" shall be inserted; (ii) for the words and figures "Serial Numbers 104 (Ethyl alcohol), 104-A (Denatured spirit), 104-B (M.G. alcohol) and 115 (Molasses)", the words and figures "Serial Number 12 of Part 'S' and Serial Number 10 of Part 'M'" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10-A of the principal Act, after clause (c) of sub-section (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely - "(d) The assessing authority may by order and for good and sufficient cause forfeit the whole or any part of the security furnished by a dealer - (i) for realising any amount of tax or penalty payable by the dealer; (ii) if the dealer is found to have misused any of the forms referred to in clause (a) or to have failed to keep them in proper custody: Provided that no order shall be passed under this clause without giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard. (e) The assessing authority issuing the forms referred to in clause (a) may refuse to issue such forms to a dealer who has failed to comply with a demand under that clause or under clause (b), until the dealer has complied with such demand".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12-A of the principal Act, in subsection (1) for the words "ten years", the words "eight years" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12-B of the principal Act, after the second proviso to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided also that where the tax payable for any quarter by a small-scale industrial undertaking is not paid within thirty days after the close of the quarter to which such tax relates, such undertaking shall be liable to pay tax thereafter as provided under this sub-section excluding the first proviso".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "under Section 17", the words figures and brackets "under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of Section 17" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 19 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "19-A. Deduction of tax at source - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government or any State Government or an industrial, commercial or trading undertaking of the Central Government or any State Government shall be entitled, in respect of works contracts of the nature specified in Serial Number 6 of the Sixth Schedule executed for them, to deduct out of the amounts payable by them to dealers in respect of such works contracts, an amount equal to the tax payable by such dealers under Section 17, calculated at the rate of two person of the amount payable to such dealers. (2) The tax deducted under sub-section (1) shall be remitted into the Government Treasury under the Sales Tax head of Account within seven days from the date of such deduction. (3) Where tax in respect of the works contract is remitted under sub-section (2) the tax payable by the dealer in respect of such works contract shall be reduced by the amount of tax already remitted under the said sub-section: Provided that the burden of proving that the tax on such works contract has already been remitted and of establishing the exact quantum of tax so remitted shall be on the dealer claiming the reduction."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 22 of the principal Act - (1) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(3-A) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (1), the payment of tax or penalty or any other amount, payable, in accordance with any order passed by the Assistant Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner under Section 20 shall not, pending disposal of the appeal be stayed by the Appellate Tribunal"; (2) in sub-section (4), after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided further that if as a result of the appeal any change becomes necessary in the assessment, which is the subject-matter of the appeal, the Appellate Tribunal may authorise the Assessing Authority to amend the assessment, and the Assessing Authority shall amend the assessment accordingly and thereupon, any amount overpaid by the assessee shall be refunded to him without interest, or any additional amount of tax due from him shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the Act, as the case may be"; (3) in sub-section (5) - (i) in the first proviso, after the words "Appellate Tribunal may", the words and figures "except in case of an appeal against an order passed by the Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner under Section 20", shall be inserted; (ii) second proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (11), with effect from the first day of April, 1987 - (i) in clause (i) - (a) for the word "commenced", the word "commences" shall and shall be deemed to have been substituted; (b) for the figures "1986", the figures "1988" shall and shall be deemed to have been substituted; and (c) for the figures "1987", in the two places where they occur, the figures "1989" shall and shall be deemed to have been substituted; (ii) in clause (ii), for the words, figures and brackets "Act, 1986 (Karnataka Act 9 of 1986)", the words, figures and brackets "Act, 1987 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1987)", shall and shall be deemed to have been substituted; (iii) in clause (iii), in sub-clause (a), for the figures "1987", the figures "1989" shall and shall be deemed to have been substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, for the Second Schedule, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely - "Second Schedule Goods on the sale of which a single point tax is leviable on the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State under Section 5(3)(a) Sl. No. Description of goods Rate of tax (1) (2) (3) Part A 1. Adhesives of all kinds including gum, glue and resin Eight per cent 2. Aeroplanes, helicopters, jet planes, gliders and all other types of flying machines (other than balloons) and parts and accessories thereof Twenty per cent 3. Agarbathy Eight per cent 4. Air-coolers, air-conditioning plants and air conditioners and parts thereof Fifteen per cent 5. Aluminium, that is to say -  (i) Aluminium semis (ingots, slabs, blocks and billets of all qualities, shapes and sizes) Eight per cent (ii) Aluminium sheets, circles, hoops, strips and rolls Eight per cent (iii) Aluminium bars (rods, rounds, squares, flats, octagons and hexagons, in coil form as well straight lengths) Six per cent (iv) Aluminium tubes (round and squares) of all diameters and lengths including tube fittings Six per cent (v) Aluminium wire rods and wires rolled or drawn Six per cent (vi) Aluminium structurals (angles, joists, channels, tees, sheet, pilling section, Z sections or any other extruded sections) Six per cent 6. Animal feeds and feed supplements, that is, processed commodity sold as 'Poultry Feed', 'Cattle Feed' and Feed Supplements and mineral mixture concentrates, intended for use as cattle and poultry feed supplements Three per cent 7. Arc carbons Four per cent 8. Arecanut Six per cent 9. Arms of all kinds including guns, rifles, revolvers, pistols and ammunition for the same. Fifteen per cent Part B 1. Bamboo (whether whole or split) Six per cent 2. Batteries and parts thereof but excluding dry cell and dry cell batteries Twenty per cent 3. Beedi leaves Eight per cent 4. Bearings, that is, Ball or Roller bearings (all kinds) Ten per cent 5. Bicycles, tandum cycles, cycle combinations, cycle rickshaws, perambulators, children's tricycles and similar articles and parts and accessories thereof including their tyres, tubes and flaps Three per cent 6. Blasting gunpowder and other mechanical explosives Eight per cent 7. Bone-meal Three per cent 8. Brass, that is to say -  (i) Brass circles, sheets and strips Eight per cent (ii) Brass utensils (kitchenware) Eight per cent (iii) Articles made of brass, including brass rods, rounds, squares and flats but excluding those specified in items (i) and (ii) above and those specified elsewhere. Ten per cent 9. Bricks other than country bricks Five per cent 10. Bronze, that is to say,  (i) Bronze utensils (kitchenware) Eight per cent (ii) Articles made of bronze including bronze rods, rounds, squares and flats but excluding those specified in item (i) above and those specified elsewhere Ten per cent 11. Bullion and specie Three per cent 12. Butter, ghee and cheese:  (i) When sold in bottles and tins or in any kind of sealed containers Fifteen per cent (ii) Cheese not covered at item (i) above (See Explanation VII) Six per cent Part C 1. Camphor of all kinds Eight per cent 2. Candles Six per cent 3. Carpets Eight per cent 4. Cashew, that is to say,  (i) Raw cashew Five per cent (ii) Cashew kernel (See Explanation I) Five per cent 5. (i) Cassette tape recorders (audio and video) and parts and accessories thereof Twenty per cent (ii) (a) Cassettes (audio and video) Four per cent (b) Parts and accessories of Cassettes Twenty per cent 6. Castor oil other than those qualifying as Toilet goods Five per cent 7. Cement Eighteen per cent 8. Cereals and pulses, that is to say -  (i) Cereals (whether with or without husk) other than those mentioned in Fourth Schedule Three per cent (ii) Pulses (whether whole or separated and whether with or without husk) other than those mentioned in Fourth Schedule Two per cent (iii) Flour and husks of pulses; atta, maida, soji of wheat and maize; grits and flakes of maize; parched rice, rice sojee and beaten rice; bran of rice, wheat and maize Three per cent (iv) Chunni of pulses Two per cent 9. Chinaware, porcelainware and stoneware (articles) other than those falling under any other entry Thirteen per cent 10. Charcoal Six per cent 11. (i) Chemical fertilizers other than those falling under item (ii) Three per cent (ii) Chemical fertilizer mixtures of two or more chemical fertilizers on the turnover relating to components thereof, viz., individual chemical fertilizers which have not already suffered tax. (See Explanation II) Three per cent 12. Chicory Eight per cent 13. Cigarette filters Thirteen per cent 14. Cigar and Cigarette cases, holders and lighters; tobacco pipes Fifteen per cent 15. Cinematographic, photographic and other cameras, projectors, enlargers, lenses and parts of and accessories to such cameras, cinematographic projectors and enlargers and plates and cloth required for use therewith Eight per cent 16. Clocks, timepieces and watches (all kinds) and parts thereof Twelve per cent 17. Cocoa pods, beans and powder Eight per cent 18. Coffee, that is to say -  (i) any one of the forms of coffee such as coffee beans, coffee seeds (raw or roasted), coffee powder excluding french coffee, coffee drink and instant coffee Thirteen per cent (ii) Instant coffee Thirteen per cent (iii) French coffee on the turnovers relating to components thereof viz., coffee and chicory which have not already suffered tax under the Act (See Explanation III) Thirteen per cent 19. (i) Coir products (other than coir rope, coir fibre and coir yarn) not falling under item (ii) below Four per cent (ii) Rubberised coir products Eight per cent 20. Computers, micro-computers, computer peripherals and parts and accessories thereof Ten per cent 21. Confectionary, biscuits and cakes Thirteen per cent 22. Containers, that is to say -  (i) Paper boxes, folding cartons, paper bags, carrier bags, cardboard boxes, corrugated boxes Eight per cent (ii) Tin plate containers (cans and boxes), steel and aluminium drums and crates, aluminium tubes and collapsible tubes Eight per cent (iii) Plastic, polyvinyl chloride and polythene bottles, jars, boxes, crates, cans, carboys, drums and bags (other than HDPE woven sacks) Eight per cent (iv) Wooden boxes, crates, casks and containers Eight per cent (v) Glass jars and carboys Eight per cent (vi) High Density Polyethylene woven sacks Two per cent 23. Copper, that is to say -  (i) Coppercircles, sheets and strips Eight per cent (ii) Copper utensils (kitchenware) Eight per cent (iii) Copper ingots and copper wire other than insulated wire Eight per cent (iv) Articles made of copper including copper rods, rounds, squares and flats excluding those specified in items (i) to (iii) above and those specified elsewhere Ten per cent 24. Copper sulphate Five per cent 25. Cotton yarn waste and cotton waste Eight per cent 26. Crockery and cutlery Ten per cent Part D 1. Deodorants, disinfectants, germicides not falling under any other entry Thirteen per cent 2. Dictaphones and other similar apparatus for recording sound and parts thereof Twenty per cent 3. Diesel engines and parts thereof Ten per cent 4. Dry cells and dry cell batteries Thirteen per cent 5. Dry fruits including almonds, walnuts and pista (See Explanation VII) Ten per cent 6. Druggets and durries Eight per cent 7. Dyes Five per cent Part E 1. Edible oils other than the edible oils falling under Serial Number 28 of the Fifth Schedule -  (i) Non-refined Four per cent (ii) Refined Four per cent (iii) Hydrogenated oils and cooking medium Ten per cent 2. Electrical goods, that is to say -  (i) Grinders, mixers, blenders, hair dryers, shavers, washing machines, heaters, cooking ranges, boilers, ovens, hot plates, coil stoves, geysers, vacuum cleaners, floor polishers, juice extractors, cream whippers, egg beaters, irons, massage apparatus, kettles, saucepans, steamers, coffee makers, cookers, egg boilers, frying pans, toasters, coffee roasting appliances, room heaters and ice-cream churners and parts and accessories of all such goods Twelve per cent (ii) Electrical earthenware and porcelain Thirteen per cent (iii) Electrical goods, instruments, apparatus and appliances (other than the appliances falling under item (i) above) including fans and lighting bulbs and tubes and parts and accessories but excluding pumpsets with electric motors of not more than 10 H.P. Ten per cent (iv) Pumpsets with electric motors of not more than 10 H.P. Ten per cent 3. Electrodes, that is, all kinds of welding electrodes, graphite electrodes including anodes, welding rods, soldering rods and soldering wires Four per cent 4. Electronic goods other than those falling under any other entry of this Schedule Ten per cent Part F 1. Fibreglass sheets and articles made of fibreglass excluding helmets Thirteen per cent 2. Films, that is to say-  (i) Photographic films including photographic paper Ten per cent (ii) Cinematographic films Eight per cent (iii) X-ray films Six per cent 3. Fire-fighting equipments and devices except those specified elsewhere Eight per cent 4. Firewood Six per cent 5. Fireworks Fifteen per cent 6. Foamed rubber, plastic foam or any other synthetic foam articles such as sheets, cushions, pillows, mattresses and the like Fifteen per cent 7. Folding umbrellas including garden and beach umbrellas and parts thereof Six per cent 8. Food and non-alcoholic drinks, that is to say -  (i) Ready to serve foods, processed foods, semi-cooked or semi-processed foodstuffs, fruit (other than dry fruits including almonds, walnuts and pista), dried vegetables (whether cooked or not) fruit and vegetable products (other than those falling under items (ii), (iii) and (iv) below) when sold in tins, cans, bottles or in any kind of sealed containers Four per cent (ii) Baby foods including milk powder (sold in sealed containers or otherwise) Four per cent (iii) Aerated water including soft drinks whether or not flavoured or sweetened and whether or not containing vegetable or fruit juice or fruit pulp when sold in bottles, tins, cans or in any kind of sealed containers but excluding soft drink concentrates Ten per cent (iv) Instant mix, such as, jamoon mix, idli mix, icecream mix, jelly mix and the like; sambar and rasam powders and pastes, masala powders and pastes, curry powders and pastes and the like; soft drink concentrates (other than fruit and vegetable concentrates) whether in liquid or powder or crystal form Ten per cent (v) Articles of food and drinks including sweets and sweet meals but excluding those falling under items (i) to (iv) above and those falling under any of the entries in this Schedule, when sold -  (a) in places other than those falling under sub-item (b) below Five per cent (b) in Three Star, Four Star and Five Star hotels as recognised by Tourism Department, Government of India Ten per cent (vi) Soya milk (See Explanation VII) Four per cent 9. Food preservatives, food colours and food flavouring essences Eight per cent 10. Footwear whose selling price is more than thirty rupees per pair Ten per cent 11. Footwear polishes Fifteen per cent 12. Furniture of all kinds, that is to say -  (i) Furniture of every description not falling under items (i), (ii) and (iii) below but including treasure chests and safes and parts and accessories thereof Fifteen per cent (ii) Upholstered furniture and parts and accessories thereof Fifteen per cent (iii) Wooden, bamboo and cane furniture and parts and accessories thereof Thirteen per cent (iv) Chairs, tables and cots made wholly of iron and steel Eight per cent 13. Furs and Skins (other than those falling under IV Schedule) and articles made therefrom but excluding those falling under any other entry Fifteen per cent Part G 1. Galvanised iron buckets Eight per cent 2. Glass sheets and all articles made of glass except glass bottles Thirteen per cent 3. Glycerine Eight per cent 4. Gold thread, that is, all kinds of jari including metallic yarn, metallic jari yarm, metallic plastic yarn, polyester film yarn and radiant yarn Five per cent 5. Gramaphones of every description (other than radio gramaphones) including accessories and parts thereof Twenty per cent 6. Gramaphone records and needles Ten per cent Part H 1. Hardware, that is to say -  (i) Fittings of doors, windows and furniture (made of base metal or alloy thereof) other than those specified elsewhere Ten per cent (ii) Bolts, rivets and nuts (threaded) or tapped and hinges and screws of base metal or alloy thereof including bolt ends, screw studdings, self-tapped screws, screw hooks, screw rings and wire nails Ten per cent (iii) Metallic barbed wire, metallic wire mesh and metallic wire nettings Eight per cent 2. Helmets Five per cent 3. Hosiery (except hosiery cloth in length), that is to say-  (i) hosiery made wholly of cotton Two per cent (ii) hosiery other than hosiery made wholly of cotton Eight per cent Part I 1. Ice and ice fruit Eight per cent 2. Ice-cream Five per cent 3. Industrial gas, such as oxygen, acetylene, nitrogen and the like Thirteen per cent 4. Inks of all kinds Ten per cent 5. Insecticides and pesticides excluding copper sulphate Three per cent 6. Ivory and sandalwood articles Eight per cent Part J 1. Jaggery (gur) Three per cent Part K 1. Kerosene Five per cent 2. Kitchenware coated with heat resistant coatings and used for cooking as well as serving Ten per cent 3. Kitchenware and utensils made of aluminium or other non-ferrous metals and coated with stick resistant coatings Ten per cent Part L 1. Laminated, impregnated or coated matting materials such as linoleum generally used for flour covering (other than floor tiles) Fifteen per cent 2. Laminated packing materials (all kinds) including hessian based paper, polythene and hessian based paper, high density polythene fabric based paper and bituminised waterproof paper but excluding those specified elsewhere Ten per cent 3. Leather goods other than the goods falling under Serial Number 28 of V Schedule and those specified elsewhere Thirteen per cent 4. Lifts whether operated by electricity or hydraulic power Fifteen per cent 5. Lime including Limestone Six per cent (i) Liquor (imported from outside the country) Fifty per cent (ii) Beer -  (a) Where the consideration for the sale or purchase of Beer includes the duties of excise payable under the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 Thirty-six per cent (b) In other cases Two hundred per cent (iii) Fenny Thirteen per cent (iv) Wine -  (a) Where the consideration for the sale or purchase of wine includes the duties of excise payable under the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 Ten per cent (b) in other cases Two hundred per cent (v) Arrack Ten per cent 7. Locks and padlocks (all kinds) Ten per cent Part M 1. Machinery, that is to say -  (i) (a) Earth movers, such as, dumpers, dippers, bulldozers and the like Six per cent (b) Parts and accessories of earth movers (other than diesel engine and its parts, batteries and tyres, tubes and flaps) Thirteen per cent (ii) Agricultural machinery, namely -  (a) Dusters and sprayers used for dusting and spraying insecticides and pesticides and their parts (other than oil engines or electric motors) and accessories Five per cent (b) Sprinkler system generally used for agricultural or horticultural purposes and their parts (other than oil engines or electric motors) and accessories Six per cent (c) Tractors Four per cent (d) Power tillers Two per cent (e) Tractor and power tillers, trailers and parts and accessories thereof (excluding tyres, tubes and flaps) Ten per cent (f) Parts and accessories of tractors and power tillers excluding diesel engines and its parts, batteries and tyres, tubes and flaps Ten per cent (iii) (a) Machinery (all kinds) and parts and accessories thereof except those falling under other items of this entry and those specified elsewhere Thirteen per cent (b) Handlooms and parts and accessories thereof Three per cent (c) Sewing machines and its parts and accessories Six per cent (d) Weighing machines (all kinds) Thirteen per cent (e) Machine tools such as twist drills, taps, reamers, cutters, dies, grinding wheels, grinding belts, button bits and the like Four per cent 2. Man-made or synthetic staple fibres, fibre yarn or filament yarn (all kinds) Four per cent 3. Manure, that is, organic manure including fish and poultry manure Three per cent 4. Marble slabs and articles made of marble Fifteen per cent 5. Medicinal and of pharmaceutical preparations (other than those specified elsewhere) Ten per cent 6. Mercury Ten per cent 7. Metal caps Ten per cent 8. Mill yarn (all kinds) excluding cotton yarn, spun silk yarn, filature silk and those falling under any other entry Four per cent 9. Mineral water sold in containers Ten per cent 10. Molasses Forty per cent 11. Mosquito repellants Ten per cent 12. Motor spirits, that is to say -  (i) petrol including aviation fuel Eighteen per cent (ii) motor spirits not falling under item (i) above (See Explanation IV) Eighteen per cent 13. Motor vehicles, that is to say -  (i) Motor cars including motor taxi cabs Six per cent (ii) Motor-cycles including scooters, motorettes, mopeds and cycle combinations Eight per cent (iii) Jeeps, trekkers and vans (all petrol driven) Eight per cent (iv) Light diesel vehicles Six per cent (v) Motor lorries including motor omnibuses Ten per cent (vi) Three wheeler motor vehicle (petrol driven) Ten per cent (viii) Any other motor vehicles not covered by items above Ten per cent 14. Motor vehicles, parts and accessories, that is to say -  (i) Articles used generally as parts and accessories of motor vehicles but excluding rubber and other tyres, tubes and flaps, batteries and diesel engine and its parts Thirteen per cent (ii) Chassis of motor vehicles Three per cent (iii) Bodies built on motor vehicle chassis Six per cent 15. Musical instruments, that is, parts and accessories of musical instruments Four per cent Part N 1. Newsprint Five per cent 2. Non-ferrous castings and scrap of base metals and alloy thereof Eight per cent 3. Nuxvomica Eight per cent Part O 1. Oil-Cake Three per cent 2. Opium, Ganja and bhang One hundred and fifty per cent 3. Optical goods, that is to say -  (i) Binoculars, opera glasses, telescopes, microscopes and parts and accessories thereof Thirteen per cent (ii) Spectacles, sunglasses, goggles, lenses and frames including attachments, parts and accessories thereof Six per cent Part P 1. Paints, colours, varnishes, pigments, polishes, indigo, enamel, putty, bale oil, white oil, turpentine (all kinds), thinners, primers and paint brushes Fifteen per cent 2. Paper pulp Eight per cent 3. Paper (all kinds) including carbon paper, blotting paper, waterproof paper, PVC coated paper, ferro paper, ammonia paper, stencil paper, but excluding photographic paper, pulp boards, art boards, duplex boards, triplex boards, cardboards, corrugated boards and the like; cellophane Eight per cent 4. Pens of all kinds whose selling price is Rs. 10 or more per piece and refills Eight per cent 5. Petroleum products, namely -  (i) Asphalt (bitumen) Ten per cent (ii) Brake fluid Ten per cent (iii) Furnace oil, Transformer oil and Coolants Thirteen per cent (iv) Liquid petroleum gas, such as burshane caigas, indane and the like Fifteen per cent (v) Lubricating oil including grease Fifteen per cent (vi) Solvent oils Four per cent 6. Pipes, tubes and fittings of iron (not falling under Fourth Schedule), cement and asbestos Eight per cent 7. Plastic goods, that is to say -  (i) High Density Polythene, Low Density Polythene and Rigid Polyvinyl Chloride pipes and fittings which are generally used for water supply and irrigation purposes excluding conduit pipes and fittings Six per cent (ii) Plastic sheets, plastic granules and articles made from all kinds and all forms of plastic including articles made of polythene, polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, polyesterene and the like materials, but excluding those specified in item (i) above Ten per cent 8. Playing cards of every description Fifteen per cent 9. Precious stones, namely, diamonds, emeralds, rubies, real pearls and sapphires and articles in which such precious stones are set Fifteen per cent 10. Pressure cookers, their parts and accessories Ten per cent 11. Printed materials other than books meant for reading Eight per cent Part R 1. Radiogramaphones and components thereof Twenty per cent 2. Railcoaches and parts and accessories thereof Twenty per cent 3. Rayon grade pulp or any other pulp out of which man-made or synthetic staple fibres or fibre yarn or filament yarn are made Eight per cent 4. Razor and Razor blades Eight per cent 5. Readymade garments (other than hosiery of all kinds) made out of any materials whether used as regular wear or casual wear including caps, neck ties and bows Four per cent 6. Refrigerators, including deep freezers, bottle coolers, water coolers, cold storage equipments and the like and parts there Fifteen per cent 7. Rice bran oil Two per cent 8. Rolling shutters and collapsible gates whether operated manually, mechanically or electrically and their parts Thirteen per cent 9. Roofing, light roofing and false roofing materials including cement and asbestos sheets, asphalt sheets, straw boards, hard and soft boards, plywood, veneered boards and panels and laminated sheets but excluding those specified elsewhere Thirteen per cent 10. Rubber, that is to say -  (i) Raw rubber, namely, latex in liquid or sheet form Eight per cent (ii) Rubber plates, sheets and strips unhardened whether vulcanised or not and whether combined with any textile material or otherwise Ten per cent (iii) Piping and tubing of unhardened vulcanised rubber Ten per cent (iv) Transmission, conveyor or elevator belts or belting of vulcanised rubber whether combined with any textile material or otherwise Ten per cent (v) Synthetic rubber including butadiene, acrylonitrile rubber, styrene butadiene rubber and butyl rubber synthetic rubber, latex including prevulcanised synthetic rubber latex Ten per cent 11. Rubber articles, that is, articles made wholly of rubber (other than those specified elsewhere) Eight per cent 12. Rubber and other tyres, tubes and flaps other than those falling under Fourth Schedule and those specified elsewhere Nine per cent Part S 1. Sand Six per cent 2. Sandalwood oil Forty per cent 3. Sanitary fittings of every description excluding pipes and fittings of stoneware, cement and iron and steel 4. Sanitary towels, sanitary napkins, beltless napkins and tampons Ten per cent 5. Scented supari Eight per cent 6. Sewing thread Five per cent 7. Slotted angles and ready to assemble parts of steel racks Thirteen per cent 8. Soapnut (whether powdered or not) Six per cent 9. Soaps, that is to say -  (i) Toilet soap (intended for bathing purpose) including liquid shampoo Thirteen per cent (ii) Washing soaps including soap flakes, soap powders, detergent powders and liquids and laundry brightners Eight per cent 10. Sound transmitting equipments including loudspeakers and parts thereof but excluding telephones and its parts Twenty per cent 11. Spices (in all forms), that is to say -  (i) jeera, methi, pepper, poppy seeds (Kaskas), turmeric, cloves, cinnamon, coriander and tamarind Five per cent (ii) dry chillies Three per cent 12. Spirits and alchohol, that is to say -  (i) Denatured spirit Fifteen per cent (ii) Rectified spirit Thirteen per cent (iii) Ethyl alcohol Ten per cent 13. Sports goods excluding wearing apparel Three per cent 14. Starch, that is to say, laundry and textile starch (all kinds) Four per cent 15. Stationery articles, namely -  (i) Account books, paper envelopes, diaries, calenders, race cards catalogues, greeting cards, invitation cards, humour post cards, picture post cards, cards for special occasions, photo and stamp albums Six per cent (ii) Office desk materials Eight per cent 16. Stethoscopes, thermometers, lactometers, B.P. instruments, surgical cotton wool, enema cans and bedpans Ten per cent 17. Stones, that is to say -  (i) Granite stones and chips Six per cent (ii) Cuddapah stones, slabs and tiles  (a) Polished Eight per cent (b) Unpolished Eight per cent (iii) Shahabad stones, slabs and tiles Eight per cent 18. Stoves, that is, gas stoves and kerosene stoves, and parts and accessories thereof Ten per cent 19. Suitcases, briefcases, attache cases and despatch cases including those made of leather but excluding steel trunks Fifteen per cent 20. Sulphur Ten per cent 21. Surgical/dental instruments and tools, and syringe and its needles Eight per cent Part T 1. Tabulating machines, calculating machines (including all types of mechanical or electronic calculators), duplicating machines, roneo machines, parts and accessories thereof Twenty per cent 2 Tamarind seeds Eight per cent 3. Tanning barks Eight per cent 4. Tarpaulins and waterproof cloth not manufactured in mills or powerloom factories Five per cent 5. Tea Thirteen per cent 6. (i) Telephones of every description Six per cent (ii) Parts of Telephones Twenty per cent 7. Television sets and component parts and accessories thereof Thirteen per cent 8. Tiles -  (i) Mosaic tiles and chips Thirteen per cent (ii) Ceramic and glazed floor and wall tiles Thirteen per cent (iii) Roofing tiles other than country tiles Five per cent (iv) Other tiles not covered by items (i), (ii) and (iii) above Fifteen per cent (v) Jointing powder (other than cement) and situ-mixture for laying tiles and chips specified above Thirteen per cent 9. Timber excluding casurina, bamboo, eucalyptus but including rosewood and sandalwood:  (i) in log form Thirteen per cent (ii) in cut or manufactured form of all sizes and shapes:  (a) obtained from out of material which has suffered tax under item (i) above Three per cent (b) in other cases (See Explanation V) Thirteen per cent 10. Toilet articles (whether medicated or not) except toilet soaps and such other toilet articles as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette (See Explanation VI) Thirteen per cent 11. (i) Typewriter Fifteen per cent (ii) Parts and accessories of typewriter Twenty per cent (iii) Typewriter ribbon Thirteen per cent Part V 1. Vacuum flasks and their refills Ten per cent Part W 1. Washed cottonseed oil Three per cent 2. Watches, clocks and timepieces (all kinds) and parts thereof Twelve per cent 3. Water and weather proofing compounds Ten per cent 4. Water meters Eight per cent 5. Weights and measures Thirteen per cent 6. Wireless reception instruments and apparatus and components thereof including all electrical valves, accumulators, amplifiers and loudspeakers which are not specifically designed for purposes other than wireless reception Fifteen per cent 7. Wood, that is to say - Eucalyptus and casurina of any shape or size Eight per cent Part X 1. X-Ray apparatus Eight per cent Part Y 1. Yeast -  (i) Compressed/wet yeast Two per cent (ii) Dry yeast Eight per cent Explanation I - (i) 1 [where tax has been levied in respect of cashews] under Serial Number 4 of Part C the Kernel pressed out of the said cashew shall not be liable to tax under Section 5. Explanation II - For the purpose of Serial Number 11 of Part C "Chemical Fertilizer and Chemical Fertilizer mixture" means Chemical fertilizer and chemical fertilizer mixtures specified in Parts A and B of Schedule I to the Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 including plant nutrients for various fertilizers as provided in the said order and micronutrients, namely, zinc sulphate and manganese sulphate. Explanation III - Where a tax has been levied in respect of purchase of coffee seeds under Serial Number 18 of Part C the coffee powder (excluding instant coffee and french coffee) made out of those coffee seeds is not liable to tax under the said item. Explanation IV - (i) "Motor spirits" means any substance which by itself or in admixture with other substances is ordinarily used directly or indirectly to provide reasonably efficient fuel for automotive or stationary internal combustion engines and includes petrol, diesel, oil and other internal combustion oil but does not include kerosene, furnace oil, coal, coke or charcoal. (ii) "Petrol" means dangerous petroleum as defined in the Petroleum Act, 1934 (Central Act XXX of 1934) and includes a mixture of power alcohol as defined in the Indian Power Alcohol Act, 1948 (Central Act XXII of 1948) and Petrol. Explanation V - (i) Where timber, rosewood and sandalwood in log form specified under Serial Number 9 of Part 'T' have been purchased from the Forest Department of Government the subsequent sales of such timber, rosewood and sandalwood in log form shall not be liable to tax under Section 5 of the Act, provided that the Forest Department has collected tax on the said sales and the burden of providing that tax has been so collected by the Forest Department shall be on the dealer. (ii) For the purpose of Serial Number 9 of Part T "Timber" rosewood and sandalwood in cut or manufactured form shall include door or window frames and shutters but exclude furniture. 2 [Explanation VI - "Toilet article" means any article which is intended for use in the toilet of the human body or in perfuming apparel of any description or any substance intended to cleanse, improve or alter the complexion, skin, hair or teeth and includes deoderants and perfumes.] Explanation VII - Where tax has been levied in respect of goods mentioned in Serial Numbers 8(i) of Part F, 5 of Part D and 12(i) of Part B such goods taken out from containers and sold loose shall not be liable to tax under Section 5 and the burden of proving that tax has been paid on the goods in question shall be on the dealer". Read for "Explanation (i) -"Motor spirits" means any substance which" by Errata No. FD 17 CSL 89, dated 8-5-1989 Read for the existing Explanation VI by Corrigendum published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, dated 18-8-1994
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, in the Third Schedule, in the entries relating to Serial Number 4a, in Column 3, for the words "Five per cent", the words "Four per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, in the Fourth Schedule - (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number .7, in Column 2, for the words "Four per cent", the words "Two per cent" shall be substituted; (2) in the entries relating to Serial Number 10, in Column 2, for the words "Four per cent", the words "Two per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, in the Fifth Schedule - (1) for the entries relating to Serial Number 23, the following shall be substituted, namely - "23. Country Bullock Carts and its parts thereof and Animal Drawn Carts made wholly of aluminium or with the combination of aluminium and iron and steel and parts thereof"; (2) after Serial Number 47, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the Third day of August, 1982, namely - "47-A. Certified and Treated Seeds of Cereals and Pulses marked "poison" "; (3) after the entries relating to Serial Number 60, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "61. Wheel-chairs and Crutches used by Handicapped and Sick persons. 62. Human Hair Waste".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1988_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, in the Eighth Schedule - (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number 1, in Column 2, for the word "Liquor", the words "Alcoholic Liquor for Human Consumption" shall be substituted; (2) in the entries relating to Serial Number 3, in Column 2 - (i) for the words, figures and letter "Serial Numbers 61 and 61-C", the words and figures "items (i) and (iii) of Serial Number 2 of Part 'E' " shall be substituted; (ii) after the words, figures and letters "more than 10 H.P.", the words "and dry cell and dry cell batteries" shall be inserted; (3) in the entries relating to Serial Number 4, in Column 2, for the words and figures "Serial Number 73", the words and figures "item (i) of Serial Number 14 of Part 'M'" shall be substituted; (4) the entries relating to Serial Number 5, shall be omitted; (5) in the entries relating to Serial Number 6, in Column 2, for the words and figures "Serial Number 182", the words and figures "item (iv) of Serial Number 8 of Part 'T' ", shall be substituted; (6) the entries relating to Serial Number 8 shall be omitted; (7) in the entries relating to Serial Number 10, in Column 2, for the words and figures "Serial Number 110", the words and figures "item (ii) of Serial Number 7 of Part 'P' ", shall be substituted; (8) in the entries relating to Serial Number 11, in Column 2 - (i) for the words and figures "Serial Number 125", the words and figures "Serial Number 3 of Part 'P'" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words and figures "Serial Numbers 55 and 198", the words and figures "Serial Number 2 of Part 'L' and photographic paper" shall be substituted; (9) after the entries relating to Serial Number 12, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "13. Goods falling under Serial Number 4 of Part 'E' of Second Schedule, that is to say, electronic goods, parts and accessories thereof Three per cent". 
