Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2001) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fifty fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004. 1 (2) It shall come into force on the 2 [date] to be notified by the State Government. Published in the Karnataka Gazette Part IV-A Extra Ordinary No. 370 dated 20-3-2004. The Act has come into force on 1st October 2004, vide Notification No. ED 308 URC 2004 date 1-10-2004 (Karnataka Gazette Extraordinary No. 1100, Dated 1-10-2004)
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2001) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in sub-section (1) in clause (a), for the words "Bangalore Rural, Kolar and Tumkur", the words "and Kanakapura and Hoskote Taluks in Bangalore Rural District." shall be substituted. (2) after sub-section (1A), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(1B) There shall be established the Tumkur University with headquarters at Tumkur and territorial jurisdiction extending over the districts of Tumkur, Kolar and Bangalore Rural District excluding Kanakapura and Hoskote Taluks." (3) in sub-section (2) after the words figure, letter and brackets "or sub-section (1A)", the words, figure, letter and brackets "or sub-section (1B)" shall be inserted.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 5, after sub-section (2), the following subsection shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) Any privilege enjoyed from the Bangalore University by the colleges or educational institutions situated in Kolar, Tumkur and Bangalore Rural districts excluding Kanakapura and Hoskote Taluks before the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004 shall, with effect from such date as may be specified by the State Government in this behalf, be deemed to be withdrawn and all such colleges or educational institutions previously admitted to the privileges of, or affiliated to, the Bangalore University shall be deemed to be admitted to the privilege of, or affiliated to, the Tumkur University."
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 14 of the principal Act, after the third proviso to sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided also that notwithstanding anything contrary contained in this section, the first Vice Chancellor of the Tumkur University shall be appointed by the State Government subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by it."
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka The Special Officer appointed by the State Government for the purpose of taking steps to establish the Tumkur University shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of the functions of the University and the Vice Chancellor as may be specified by the State Government, until the first Vice Chancellor is appointed.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It shall be the duty of the first Vice Chancellor to make arrangements for constituting the Syndicate, Academic Council and other authorities of the Tumkur University within six months of the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act) or such longer period not exceeding one year as the Chancellor may direct. (2) The Authorities constituted under sub-section (1) shall commence to exercise their powers and perform their functions on such date as the Chancellor may specify in this behalf.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act as amended by the Amendment Act the first Vice Chancellor may, with the previous approval of the Chancellor, discharge all or any of the functions of the Tumkur University for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Amendment Act and for that purpose may exercise any power or perform any duty which by the principal Act as amended by the Amendment Act is to be exercised or performed by any Authority of the University until such Authority comes into existence as provided by the principal Act as amended by the Amendment Act. (2) All statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules made by the Bangalore University applicable to the affiliated colleges or other educational institutions which are deemed to be affiliated to Tumkur University under section 5 of the principal Act shall be deemed to be statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules made by the Tumkur University and shall continue as such till the Tumkur University makes its own statutes, ordinances, regulations or rules: Provided that the Vice Chancellor may with the approval of the Chancellor make such modification and adaptations therein as he may consider necessary.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act as amended by the Amendment Act or the statutes, ordinances, regulations or rules made thereunder, where immediately before the commencement of the amendment Act,- (a) any student was studying for a degree of the Bangalore University in accordance with the statutes, ordinances, regulations or rules in force he may until such examination is provided by the Tumkur University be admitted to the examination of the Bangalore University and be conferred with the degrees or diplomas for which he qualifies on the result of such examination. (b) the Bangalore University has held any examination, the result of which has been published but the degrees or diplomas relating thereto have not been conferred or issued or the result of any such examination has not been published by the Bangalore University then such examination shall be deemed to have been held by the Bangalore University.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Amendment Act, the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provision as may appear to it necessary or expedient for the purposes of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act. T.N. CHATURVEDI GOVERNOR OF KARNATAKA By order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, M.R. Hegde Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
