Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature on the Thirty-fourth Year of Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on 1st day of April, 1983. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the First day of April, 1983
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) - (1) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(m-1) "Joint Commissioner" means any person appointed to be a Joint Commissioner of Commercial Taxes under Section 3"; (2) in clause (t) after Explanation 4, the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the Second day of February, 1983, namely - "Explanation 5 - Every transaction of supply by way of or as a part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating), where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the supply and purchase of those goods by the person to whom such supply in made".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act - (1) in the heading, after the word "Commissioner", the words "Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted; (2) in sub-section (1) after the words "Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and as many", the words "Joint Commissioner of Commercial Taxes" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3-B of the principal Act, clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) shall be renumbered respectively as clauses (b) and (c) and before clause (b) as so renumbered the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(a) The Joint Commissioner shall perform such functions as the State Government may direct."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (3) - (a) the third proviso to clause (a) shall be omitted; (b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(c) in respect of silk fabrics, at the rate of two per cent, at the point of last sale in the State by the dealer liable to tax under the Act on his taxable turnover of sales relating to such goods in each year: Provided that the sale by a handloom or a powerloom weaver [other than one whose establishment falls within the definition of a "Factory" under the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act 63 of 1948)] of silk fabrics manufactured by him in Karnataka shall not be deemed to be a sale for purposes of this Act. Explanation - For the purpose of this clause - (1) "Silk fabrics" means all varieties of fabrics manufactured either wholly or partly from silk, but does not include cotton fabrics, woollen fabrics and man-made fabrics as defined in the Central Excise and Salts Act, 1944. (2) The term "weaver" means an individual carrying on business as owner, but does not include a corporate entity or society (including a co-operative society), firm, association of persons or a club. (3) The expression "manufactured by him" means manufacture - (i) by one's own labour, or (ii) by the labour of one's own family, or (iii) by servants on wages payable in cash or by hired labour under one's personal supervision or the personal supervision of any member of one's family"; (2) sub-sections (3-A) and (3-B) shall be omitted; (3) in clause (a) of sub-section (5), for the words, "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words, "forty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "5-A. Taxation of Industrial Inputs - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 5 the tax payable by a registered dealer in respect of the sale of any industrial input liable to tax under the Act to another registered dealer for use by the latter as a component part or raw material of any other goods taxable under this Act which he intends to manufacture inside the State for sale, shall be at the rate of four per cent or the rate specified in Section 5 whichever is lower, on the turnover relating to such sale: Provided that where the rate of tax in respect of such industrial input as specified in Section 5 is higher than four per cent, the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply, unless the dealer selling the industrial inputs furnishes to his assessing authority in the prescribed manner a declaration by the buying dealer in the prescribed form obtained from the prescribed authority: Provided further that if any dealer, after purchasing any inputs, in respect of which he has furnished a declaration under the first proviso to this sub-section fails to make use of the whole or part of such inputs in the manufacture of other taxable goods specified in the declaration before the expiry of the accounting year immediately succeeding the one in which such inputs are purchased, either due to cessation of his manufacturing activity or for any other reason, but has not sold away such inputs, he shall be liable to pay the difference between the tax payable at the rate specified under Sections 5 and 6-C and the tax computed at the rate of 4.4 per cent on the turnover relating to the sale of such quantity of these inputs to him as have remained unutilised with him for the declared purpose at the end of the period specified above. (2) If any person - (i) not having his manufacturing unit inside the State, purchases any inputs by furnishing a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1); or (ii) not being liable to pay any tax under this Act in respect of the goods manufactured by him, purchases any inputs by furnishing a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1); or (iii) being liable to pay the tax under this Act, makes use of the inputs purchased by him against a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1) in the manufacture of any goods which are exempted from tax; or (iv) having his manufacturing unit inside the State and having purchased any inputs by furnishing a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1), sells away such inputs contrary to such declaration, the assessing authority, after giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall, by order in writing, impose upon him by way of penalty a sum, which shall not be less than the amount of tax leviable under Sections 5 and 6-C on the sale of the inputs so purchased, but which shall not exceed double the amount of such tax. (3) (a) Every dealer who, during the course of the year, purchases any inputs by furnishing a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1), shall maintain in the prescribed manner a regular account of the receipt and issue of such declaration forms as and when the same are received or issued by him. (b) Every such dealer shall also maintain in the prescribed manner a day-to-day account of the opening balance, purchases, consumption and closing balance of every input, which is purchased by him by furnishing a declaration under the first proviso to sub-section (1). (c) If any dealer fails to maintain, in the prescribed manner, true and complete accounts as required by clause (a) or clause (b) of this sub-section, the assessing authority shall, after giving such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard pass an order - (i) disentitling such dealer from making use of any declaration forms prescribed under the first proviso to sub-section (1) and requiring him to surrender forthwith the declaration forms already issued to him, if any; and (ii) imposing upon him a penalty not exceeding the amount of tax leviable under the provisions of Sections 5 and 6-C on the sale value of the inputs already purchased by him against prescribed declaration forms upto the date of surrender of the unused forms by him. (d) If any dealer, in respect of whom an order has been passed under clause (c) of this sub-section, pays the penalty and complies with other terms of such orders, the assessing authority may, in his discretion, permit such dealer to obtain the prescribed declaration forms afresh and to make use of the same for the purchase of inputs in the State at concessional rate of tax. Explanation - (1) For the purpose of this section, the expressions "industrial inputs" or "inputs", mean either a "component part" or "raw material", but do not include inputs falling under Serial Numbers 104 (Ethyl alcohol), 104-A (Denatured spirit), 104-B (M.G. alcohol) and 115 (Molassess) of the Second Schedule or goods of any other nature. (2) The expression "component part" means an article which forms an identifiable constituent of the finished product and which, along with others, goes to make up the finished product. (3) The expression "raw material" means any material - (a) from which another product can be made, through the process of manufacture, either by itself or in combination with other raw materials; or (b) a processing or any other chemical solvent (including chemicals) used for testing, analysis, or research) used in the solvent extraction process or a catalyst required in the manufacturing process, but it does not include any packaging materials, fuels, electrodes, arc carbons and consumable stores of similar type".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-C of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the figures "5, 6" in the two places where they occur the figures and letter "5, 5-A, 6" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8-A of the principal Act, after subsection (3-A), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any notification which is issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) in respect of any specified goods or class of goods taxable under sub-section (1) of Section 5".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words, "forty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act in sub-section (1), for the words, "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words, "forty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12-A of the principal Act - (1) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(1) If the assessing authority has reason to believe that the whole or any part of the turnover of a dealer in respect of any period has escaped assessment to tax or has been under-assessed or has been assessed at a rate lower than the rate at which it is assessable under this Act or any deductions or exemptions have been wrongly allowed in respect thereof, the assessing authority may notwithstanding the fact that the whole or part of such escaped turnover was already before the said authority at the time of the original assessment or reassessment but subject to the provision of sub-section (2), at any time within a period of five years from the expiry of the year to which the tax relates, proceed to assess or reassess to the best of its judgment the tax payable by the dealer in respect of such turnover after issuing a notice to the dealer and after making such enquiry as it may consider necessary"; (2) in the proviso to sub-section (2), after the figure "22" the figure and letter "22A" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 12-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "12-C. Summary assessment of certain dealers - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of Section 12 where, in respect of an year, the total turnover of a dealer, for whom the authority prescribed under sub-section (1) of Section 10-A is an Assistant Commercial Tax Officer, is not less than the limit specified under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of Section 5, the assessing authority may, at his discretion, but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6) assess such dealer on the basis of the original return or the revised return, as the case may be, without requiring his presence or the production by him of his books of accounts. (2) For purposes of sub-section (1), a dealer, who is eligible to be summarily assessed under the provisions of this section, may - (i) in respect of any completed year of his accounts, the assessment for which is pending on the date on which the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983 comes into force, submit to his assessing authority - (a) the return relating to his turnover under sub-section (1) of Section 12, if the same has not been submitted by him earlier; or (b) the revised return in the form prescribed under the said sub-section if the return had been submitted by him earlier, within a period of forty-five days from the date on which this section comes into force, and (ii) in respect of subsequent accounting years, submit to his assessing authority, the return relating to his turnover under sub-section (1) of Section 12: Provided that the return or revised return(s) to be submitted by a dealer under the provisions of this sub-section shall be accompanied by the enclosures specified in sub-section (3): Provided further that no penalty under the provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 12-B shall be levied nor any prosecution under the provisions of clauses (a) and (g) of sub-section (1) of Section 29 be instituted or continued in respect of a dealer, who submits a revised return is respect of any completed year of his business in accordance with the requirements of this section. (3) Every return or revised return to be submitted by a dealer under this section shall be accompanied by the following enclosures, namely - (i) Satisfactory proof of payment of tax as envisaged under sub-section (1-A) of Section 12 in accordance with such return or revised return; (ii) A statement in the prescribed form, showing true and complete particulars of each of the transactions relating to his turnovers in single point taxable goods, which are claimed as not being liable to tax; (iii) Statements in the prescribed forms, showing true and complete particulars of the receipt and utilisation of all statutory forms issued to him by his assessing authority, either under the provisions of this Act or those of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 74 of 1956); and (iv) Originals of the declaration forms, if any, required to be furnished by him to his assessing authority under the provisions of Section 5-A for purposes of claiming the concessional rate of tax under the said section. (4) Summary assessment under sub-section (1) shall not be made in respect of a dealer for any year, unless the following conditions are fulfilled, namely - (i) At the time of commencement of the year under assessment, the dealer has been continuously registered under this Act for a period of not less than three years; (ii) During a period of two years immediately preceding the year under assessment, the dealer has not been summarily assessed to tax for more than one year; (iii) The assessment of the dealer has been completed in respect of all the years preceding the year under assessment and no appeal, revision or other proceedings under the provisions of this Act are pending disposal in respect of such years; (iv) The total turnover and the tax liability under this Act, as declared by the dealer in the original or the revised return for the year under assessment, are atleast ten per cent more than the corresponding total turnover and tax liability determined in his case for the previous year; (v) No proceedings under Section 12-A or Section 28 of this Act involving suppression of any turnover or tax liability have been taken up or concluded or are pending finalisation in respect of the dealer for the year; and (vi) The dealer has submitted statements under sub-section (1) of Section 12-B for every month commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1983. (5) Where the original or the revised return submitted by a dealer under the provisions of this section is found to have any error apparent from such return in respect of the computation of his total or taxable turnover or in respect of the rate of tax applicable to any goods, the assessing authority shall, while making an assessment under sub-section (1), correct such error: Provided that if any such correction has the effect of increasing the tax liability of the dealer with reference to the amount mentioned in the return, the assessing authority shall do so only after informing the dealer about his proposal in this behalf and obtaining the latter's concurrence in writing, agreeing for the correction and shall keep it on record. (6) Assessment made for any year under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 12-A, 21, 22-A and 25-A. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 20, no appeal shall lie against an order of summary assessment passed under sub-section (1). Exception - The provisions of this section shall not apply to assessments, which have been completed prior to the coming into force of the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983, even if the same has been set aside in appeal or revision and all such assessments or reassessments as the case may be, shall be completed in accordance with the other provisions of this Act and the directions passed in appeal or revision, if any, in such cases."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act - (1) for the Table below sub-section (1), the following Table shall be substituted, namely - "TABLE Sl. No. Total turnover Rate (1) (2) (3) 1. Where the total turnover is not less than forty thousand rupees but less than sixty thousand rupees. One thousand five hundred rupees. 2. Where the total turnover is not less than sixty thousand rupees but less than eighty thousand rupees. Two thousand four hundred rupees. 3. Where the total turnover is not less than eighty thousand rupees but less than one lakh rupees. Three thousand six hundred rupees. 4. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh rupees but less than one lakh twenty-five thousand rupees. Four thousand eight hundred rupees. 5. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh twenty-five thousand rupees but less than one lakh fifty thousand rupees. Seven thousand two hundred rupees"; (2) for the Table below clause (i) of sub-section (4), the following Table shall be substituted, namely - "TABLE SI. No. Total turnover Rate (1) (2) (3) 1. Where the total turnover is not less than forty thousand rupees but less than sixty thousand rupees. Seven hundred fifty rupees. 2. Where the total turnover is not less than sixty thousand rupees but less than eighty thousand rupees. One thousand five hundred rupees. 3. Where the total turnover is not less than eighty thousand rupees but less than one lakh rupees. Two thousand five hundred rupees. 4. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh rupees but less than one lakh twenty-five thousand rupees. Three thousand five hundred rupees. 5. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh twenty-five thousand rupees but less than one lakh fifty thousand rupees. Four thousand five hundred rupees. 6. Where the total turnover is not less than one lakh fifty thousand rupees but less than two lakh rupees. Six thousand rupees. 7. Where the total turnover is not less than two lakh rupees but less than two lakh fifty thousand rupees. Seven thousand five hundred rupees".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 22-A of the principal Act, after the word "Commissioner" wherever it occurs, the words "or the Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the word "Commissioner", the words "or the Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 27 of the principal Act - (1) for the words, "twenty-five thousand rupees", the words, "forty thousand rupees", shall be substituted; (2) in the proviso for the words, "five rupees", the words, "ten rupees", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 29 of the principal Act,- (1) clause(b) of sub-section (1) shall be omitted; (2) in sub-section (2), after clause (aaa) the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(aaaa) being a person obliged to register himself under Section 10 does not get himself registered; or".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (7), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the assessment of a dealer whose total turnover for the year which ends on a date after the First day of April, 1983 is more than twenty-five thousand rupees but is less than forty thousand rupees, shall be regulated as follows, namely - (a) in the case of a dealer permitted to pay any amount by way of composition under Section 17, such dealer shall pay the amount due in monthly instalments for the months immediately prior to the First day of April, 1983 and shall not be liable to pay monthly instalments for the remaining months thereafter; and (b) in the case of any other dealer, the turnover during the period from the commencement of the year upto the First day of April, 1983 shall be liable to tax and his turnover during the remaining period from the First day of April, 1983 shall not be liable to tax."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act- (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number 8, for the entries in Column 2, the following shall be substituted, namely - "Hosiery of all kinds, other than hosiery made wholly of cotton and hosiery cloth in lengths"; (2) in the entries relating to Serial Number 18, for the entries in Column 2, the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "Typewriters, tabulating machines, calculating machines (including all types of mechanical or electronic calculators, micro-computers and computers), duplicating machines, Roneo machines, computer peripherals, parts and accessories thereof"; (3) in the entries relating to Serial Number 24, in Column 3, for the words, "Three per cent", the words, "Four per cent", shall be substituted; (4) in the entries relating to Serial Number 36, in Column 3, for the words, "Eleven per cent", the words, "Fifteen per cent", shall be substituted; (5) in the entries relating to sub-item (i) of Serial Number 38, in Column 3, for the words, "Sixty per cent", the words, "Sixty-five per cent", shall be substituted; (6) after the entries relating to Serial Number 39, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of July, 1972, and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1978, namely - "39-A. Fenny Six per cent"; (7) in the entries relating to Serial Number 44, in Column 3, for the words, "Eight per cent", the words, "ten per cent", shall be substituted; (8) for the entries relating to Serial Number 45, the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "45(a) Timber, rosewood and sandalwood in log form Eight per cent (b) Timber, rosewood and sandalwood in cut or manufactured-form to all sizes and shapes - (i) obtained from out of material which has already suffered tax Two per cent (ii) in other cases Eight per cent"; (9) in the entries relating to Serial Number 51, for the entries in Column 2, the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "Readymade garments costing more than Rupees 25 per piece"; (10) after the entries relating to Serial Number 53, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "53-A. Television sets and component parts and accessories thereof Ten per cent"; (11) in the entries relating to Serial Number 57-A, for the entries in Column 2, the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "Tape Cassette Recorders, Video Cassette Recorders and Tape and Cassettes (both audio and video), parts and accessories thereof"; (12) in the entries relating to Serial Number 58, in Column 3, for the words, "Fifteen per cent", the words, "Twelve per cent" shall be substituted; (13) in the entries relating to Serial Number 63, in Column 3, for the words, "Fifteen per cent", the words, "Twelve per cent" shall be substituted; (14) in the entries relating to Serial Number 71, in Column 3, for the words, "Fifteen per cent", the words, "Twelve per cent" shall be substituted; (15) Serial Number 82 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted with effect from the first day of July, 1983; (16) in the entries relating to Serial Number 104-B, in Column 3, for the words, "Sixteen per cent", the words, "Thirty per cent", shall be substituted; (17) in the entries relating to Serial Number 106, for the entries in Column 2, the following entries shall be substituted namely - "Coir and coir products other than rubberised coir products"; (18) after the entries relating to Serial Number 106, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "106-A. Rubberised Coir products Six per cent"; (19) in the entries relating to Serial Number 115, in Column 3, for the words, "Fourteen per cent", the words, "Twenty per cent" shall be substituted; (20) serial numbers 136, 145 and 146 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (21) after the entries relating to Serial Number 148, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "149. Sandalwood Oil Fifteen per cent"; (22) 'Explanation VIII' shall be omitted; and after Explanation VIII as so omitted, the following explanation shall be inserted, namely - "Explanation IX - (i) Where Timber, Rosewood and Sandalwood in log form' specified under Serial Number 45(a) have been purchased from the Forest Department of the Government, the subsequent sales of such timber, rosewood and sandalwood in log form, shall not be liable to tax under Section 5 of this Act, provided that the Forest Department has collected tax on the said sales and the burden of proving that tax has been so collected by the Forest Department shall be on the dealer." (ii) For purposes of Serial Number 45(b) "Timber, rosewood and sandalwood in cut or manufactured form' shall include door or window frames and shutters but exclude furniture."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act for entries relating to Serial Number 12, the following shall be substituted, namely - "12. Bauxite, chromite, iron, manganese and other ores. Purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax under this Act. Ten per cent".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) for the entries relating to Serial Numbers 5(a) and 5(b), the following entries shall be substituted, namely - "5(a) Groundnut including groundnut seeds - (i) Purchased within Karnataka Purchased by the first or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act. Four per cent (ii) Obtained from outside Karnataka. Sale by the first or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act. Four per cent 5(b) Peanuts, coconuts (i.e., copra excluding tender coconuts) sesamum or til (gingelly) seeds, Kusum (Kardi) seeds, Safflower, niger (Ram til), castor seeds, Karanja, Pongom, honge seeds and neem or vepa seeds. Purchase by the first or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act. Three per cent"; (2) in the entries relating to Serial Number 6, in Column 4, for the words "Three per cent", the words, "Four per cent shall be substituted; (3) in the entries relating to Serial Number 7, in Column 4, for the words "Three per cent", the words "Four per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in the entries relating to Serial Number 22, after sub-item (iv), the following sub-item shall be inserted, namely - "(v) by canteens run departmentally or through employees' co-operatives or by autonomous or statutory bodies established by Central Government or any State Government, as an amenity for the members of their staff"; (2) after the entries relating to Serial Number 47, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "48. Hosiery goods made wholly of cotton. 49. Readymade garments costing not more than twenty-five rupees a piece. 50. All manually operated or animal drawn agricultural implements including ploughs, seed-cum-fertiliser drills, dusters and sprayers used for dusting and spraying pesticides and insecticides (other than those driven by motors), pick-axes, mumties and the like. 51. Gobar-gas plants and parts and accessories thereof"; (3) after the Entry 51 as so inserted the following entry shall be inserted with effect from the first day of July, 1983, namely - "52. Toddy." 
