Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 28 of 1976), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984.1 2 (2) This section and Section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-fourth day of November, 1983 and the other provisions shall come into force at once. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Seventh day of April, 1984
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 33 of the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 28 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the  principal Act) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 21, 24 and 26 or in any law or judgment or decree or order of any Court, the Senate or the Syndicate or the Academic Council shall be deemed to have been duly constituted or reconstituted, when it is constituted or reconstituted with not less than three-fourth of the total number of members thereof."
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 56 of the  principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "56-A. Autonomous College -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made thereunder, the University may, with the prior concurrence of the State Government and the University Grants Commission, designate for such period as may be specified, an affiliated college, department or unit as an Autonomous College for any course of study, after following the procedure and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in the statutes made in this behalf and with a view to improve the quality of education and to introduce new and relevant courses of study. (2) Subject to statutes made in this behalf, an autonomous college so designated shall be entitled to design the courses of studies, devise appropriate teaching methods, devise methods of evaluation examination and tests pertaining to the award of the degree or diploma by the University and frame principles of admission of students. (3) Subject to such periodic review as may be prescribed in the Statutes, the University may, with the prior concurrence of the State Government, continue the designation of the autonomous college for such further period as may be specified or cancel such designation. (4) The Statutes for this purpose shall be made in consultation with the Academic Council of the University and shall provide for - (a) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an affiliated college, department or unit may be designated as an Autonomous College or the designation of such college may be cancelled; (b) matters incidental to the administration of an Autonomous College including the constitution or reconstitution, functions, powers and duties of the Governing body, Academic Council, Board of Studies and Board of Examiners of the Autonomous College; (c) matters relating to admission of students; (d) periodic review for continuance or cancellation of designation of Autonomous College; and (e) such other matters as may be relevant to the work of an Autonomous College including the matters mentioned in sub-section (2)."
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Chapter XI of the principal Act - (1) in the Chapter heading, after the word "Commission", the word "Etc" shall be inserted, and; (2) after Section 61, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "61-A. Planning Board -The Chancellor may, in consultation with the State Government, constitute a Planning Board consisting of not more than five eminent educationists to advise with regard to any matter connected with the development of the University and the standards of higher education and research. Every report of the Planning Board shall be placed before the Academic Council and the Senate for consideration and such action as deemed fit."
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 12of 1983) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
