Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2001), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty-first year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka State Universities Act, 2000 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2001) (hereinafter referred to as the 'principal Act'), in sub-section (1):- (1) in clause (a), for the words "the districts of Bangalore, Bangalore Rural and Kolar", the words "the districts of Bangalore, Bangalore Rural, Kolar, Chikkaballapur and Ramanagara" shall be substituted; (2) in clause (b), for the words "the districts of Bidar, Gulbarga and Raichur", the words "the districts of Bidar, Gulbarga, Raichur and Yadagiri" shall be substituted.
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 14 of the principal Act, for sub-secfion (5), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(5) No person shall be appointed or hold office of the Vice-Chancellor if he has attained the age of sixty-seven years".
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following shall be and shall always be deemed to have been substituted, namely:- "(1) The Registrar shall be a whole time officer of the University. The State Government may appoint an officer not below the rank of Group 'A' Officer of the super time scale or a member of the faculty of any University working as a Professor for at least five years, to be a Registrar of a University".
Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 2 of 2010) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance, shall deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
