Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to enact a uniform law relating to Universities in the State of Karnataka. Whereas, the Karnataka University Ordinance, 1975 was promulgated in order to have a uniform law relating to Universities in the State; And whereas, it is considered expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-fifth day of September, 1975. Repealed by Act No. 29 of 2001 Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirteenth day of March, 1976
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act and in the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules, unless the context otherwise requires - 1 [(1) "Amendment Act" means the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1980;] 2 [(1-A)] "Appointed date" means the date of commencement of this Act; (2) "College" means an institution maintained by the University as such and includes an institution admitted to the privileges of the University as an affiliated college of the University in accordance with the provisions of this Act; 3 [4 [(2-A) "Department", "Department of Studies", "Postgraduate Department" and "Postgraduate Department of Studies" means the Department, Department of studies, Post Graduate Department and Postgraduate Department of Studies in the University run and maintained by the University: Provided that where the University is not running and maintaining any Department, Department of Studies, Postgraduate Department or Postgraduate Department of Studies, such teachers in an affiliated college or colleges or institutions as the Chancellor may, in consultation with the State Government, nominate shall be deemed to be the Department, Department of Studies, Postgraduate Department or Postgraduate Department of Studies;]] (3) "Hotel" means a unit of residence for students of the University maintained or recognised by the University in accordance with the provisions of this Act; (4) "Principal" means the Head of a college; 5 [[(5) "Registered graduate" means a graduate of a University established by the law in India or of a deemed University declared by the Central Government by a notification under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (Central Act III of 1956), who is an Indian citizen and has been residing in the University area for a continuous period of not less than two years as on the 31st January of the year in which the election is due to take place and who has got himself registered in the electoral roll of registered graduates in accordance with the statutes made in this behalf;] (6) "Statutes", "Ordinances", "Regulations" and "Rules" means respectively the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules of the University made under this Act; (7) "Teachers" includes Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other persons imparting instruction in any affiliated college; (8) "Teachers of the University" means persons appointed for the purpose of imparting instruction in the University or in any college maintained by the University; (9) "University" means a University established and incorporated under Section 3; (10) "University Area" means the area under the jurisdiction of a University. Clause (1) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Existing clause (1) renumbered as clause (1-A) by Act No. 25 of 1980 Clause (2-A) inserted by Act No. 57 of 1976 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 21-6-1976 Clause (2-A) substituted by Act No. 18 of 1977 and shall be and shall always be deemed to have been substituted Clause (5) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986 w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be established, with effect on and from the appointed date, the following Universities, namely - (a) the Bangalore University with headquarters at Bangalore and territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bangalore, Kolar and Tumkur; (b) the Karnataka University with headquarters at Dharwar and territorial jurisdiction, over the area comprising the districts of Belgaum, Bellary, Bidar, Bijapur, Dharwar, Gulbarga, North Kanara and Raichur; (c) the Mysore University with headquarters at Mysore and territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Chik-magalore, Chitradurga, Coorg, Hassan, Mandya, Mysore, South Kanara and Shimoga. 1 [(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), on and from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act - (a) the Karnataka University shall cease to have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bellary, Bidar, Gulbarga and Raichur; (b) the Mysore University shall cease to have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu; (c) there shall be established the following Universities, namely - (i) the Gulbarga University with headquarters at Gulbarga and territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bellary, Bidar, Gulbarga and Raichur; (ii) the Mangalore University with headquarters at Konaje and territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu.] 2 [(1-B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), on and from the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 - (a) the Mysore University shall cease to have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Shimoga, Chitradurga and Chickmagalur; (b) there shall be established the Kuvempu University with headquarters at Bhadra Reservoir Project area, Shimoga and territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Shimoga, Chitradurga and Chickmagalur.] 3 [(1-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1), (1-A) and (1-B), after the formation of new districts on or after 1st day of August, 1986, in accordance with Section 4 of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1964) - (a) the Bangalore University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bangalore, Bangalore Rural, Kolar and Tumkur; (b) the Gulbarga University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bellary, Bidar, Gulbarga, Koppala and Raichur; (c) the Karnataka University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Bagalkot, Belgaum, Bijapur, Dharwar, Gadag, Haveri and Uttara Kannada; (d) the Mysore University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Chamarajanagar, Hassan, Mandya and Mysore; (e) the Kuvempu University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Chickmagalur, Chitradurga, Davanagere and Shimoga; (f) the Mangalore University shall have territorial jurisdiction over the area comprising the districts of Dakshina Kannada, Kodagu and Udupi.] (2)(i) The Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor and the members of the Senate, the Syndicate and the Academic Council of the University shall constitute a body corporate by the name of the University specified in sub-section (1), 4 [sub-sections (1-A) and (1-B)]. (ii) Each of the said Universities shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may, by its name, sue and be sued. (3) The University shall be competent to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which may have become vested in or been acquired by it, for the purposes of the University and to contract and to do all other things necessary for the purposes of this Act. (4) In all suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University, the pleadings shall be signed and verified by, and all processes in such suits and proceedings shall be issued to and be served on, the Registrar. Sub-section (1-A) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (1-B) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987 w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Sub-section (1-C) inserted by Act No. 8 of 1999, w.e.f. 17-4-1999 Substituted for the words, brackets, figure and letter "and sub-section (1-A)" by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of this Act and such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances, the University shall have the following powers and perform the following duties namely - (i) provide for instruction (including instruction by correspondence), teaching and training in such branches of learning and courses of study as it may think fit and make provision for research and dissemination of knowledge; (ii) hold examinations and grant and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions on persons who - (a) have pursued a course of study in the University or in any college, unless exempted therefrom in the manner prescribed by the Statutes. Ordinances or Regulations, and have passed the examinations prescribed by the University; or (b) have carried on research under conditions prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances; (iii) confer honorary degrees or other distinctions on persons in the manner laid down by the Statutes; (iv) grant diplomas and provide such lecturers and instruction for persons not being enrolled students of the University, as the University may determine; (v) co-operate with other Universities and authorities in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine; (vi) institute, suspend or abolish Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and any other teaching posts required by the University; (vii) institute and award fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, stipends, medals and prizes; (viii) maintain and administer Colleges, Laboratories, Libraries, Museums, Printing Presses, Institutes of Research and other institutions necessary to carry out the objects of the University; (ix) establish, maintain and administer hostels; (x) supervise and control the residence and discipline of students of the University; (xi) make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the students of the University; (xii) fix fees, demand and receive 1 [or collect] such fees and other charges as may be prescribed by Ordinances; (xiii) make special arrangements in respect of residence, discipline and teaching of women students and persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and such socially and educationally backward classes as the State Government may, from time to time, declare; (xiv) create administrative, ministerial and other necessary non-teaching posts; (xv) accept, hold and manage any endowments, donations or funds which may become vested in the University for the purpose of the University by grant, testamentary disposition or otherwise and invest such endowments, donations or funds in any manner that may be deemed fit: Provided that no donation from a foreign country, foreign foundation or any person in such country foundation shall be accepted 2 [by the University] save with the approval of the State Government; (xvi) undertake publication of works of merit 3 [, research] and general knowledge; (xvii) organize, encourage, regulate and control University Unions 4 [and Associations] pertaining to the students or to employees; (xviii) maintain - (a) a Bureau of information; (b) an employment Bureau; (c) a Publications Department; (d) University Extension Boards; (e) a Student Welfare Bureau; and (f) an inter-disciplinary centre; (xix) admit educational institutions not maintained by the University to the privileges of the University as affiliated colleges and suspend or withdraw such affiliation; (xx) make grants from the funds of the University for - (a) extra-mural teaching; (b) physical and military training; (c) students unions; (d) sports and athletic clubs; and (e) the maintenance of institutions or associations devoted to educational purposes; (xxi) provide through its Professors and other teachers and the Departments and special research Institutes, such teaching and guidance as the affiliated colleges may require; (xxii) recognise for any purpose, either in whole or in part, any institution on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be prescribed by statutes and to withdraw such recognition; (xxiii) do such other acts and things, whether incidental to the powers aforesaid or not, as may be required in order to further the objects of the University, in particular, generally to cultivate and promote arts, science and other branches of learning and culture. Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "and research" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the powers of the University conferred by or under this Act shall be exercised in the University Area and no educational institution beyond the said area shall be associated with or admitted to any privileges of the University: Provided that the benefit of correspondence courses or external degree courses may be extended by the University to students outside the University Area. (2) Subject to the provisions of any other law relating to Universities for the time being in force, no educational institution situate within the University Area shall be associated in any way with or be admitted to any privileges of and affiliated to any other University established and incorporated by law and any such affiliation granted by any such other University to any such institution, within the said territorial jurisdiction prior to the appointed date shall be deemed to be withdrawn on that date. (3) All educational institutions - (i) admitted to the privileges of the Bangalore University under the Bangalore University Act, 1964; (ii) admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Karnataka University under the Karnataka University Act, 1949; (iii) admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Mysore University under the Mysore University Act, 1956 except institutions situated in Bangalore, Kolar and Tumkur districts, before the appointed date, shall, with effect on and from that date and subject to the provisions of Chapter IX be deemed to be institutions admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Bangalore University or the Karnataka University or the Mysore University, as the case may be, established under this Act. The educational institutions situate in Bangalore, Kolar and Tumkur districts affiliated to the Mysore University before that date shall be deemed to be affiliated to the Bangalore University: Provided that any recommendation for affiliation made in accordance with any of the said enactments pending with the State Government on the appointed date shall be deemed to be a recommendation made for affiliation to the appropriate new University established under this Act and shall be disposed of by the State Government on this basis. (4) The colleges, attached hostels, other buildings together with the articles of furniture, libraries, books, laboratories, stores, instruments, apparatus, appliances and equipment and all other property, movable and immovable, belonging to the Bangalore, Karnataka and Mysore Universities and all proceedings, including legal proceedings pending prior to the appointed date shall, with effect on and from that date, stand transferred to or continued by or against, as the case may be, the Bangalore University, the Karnataka University and the Mysore University established under Section 3. 1 [(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) and (4) - (a) all educational institutions - (i) situated in Bellary, Bidar, Gulbarga and Raichur districts and admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Karnataka University; (ii) situated in Dakshina Kannada and Kodagu districts and admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Mysore University, immediately before the date of commencement of the Amendment Act shall, with effect on and from the said date and subject to the provisions of Chapter IX be deemed to be institutions admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, as the case may be, established under this Act: Provided that any application for affiliation made in respect of an institution situated in any of the aforesaid districts and pending with the Karnataka University or the Mysore University or the State Government on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act shall be deemed to be an application made for affiliation to the appropriate University established under sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 and shall be dealt with and disposed of by the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, or the State Government, as the case may be, on this basis; (b) all colleges, attached hostels, other buildings together with the articles of furniture, libraries, books, laboratories, stores, instruments, apparatus, appliances and equipment and all other property both movable and immovable - (i) at the postgraduate centres at Gulbarga and at Nandihalli in Bellary District and belonging to the Karnataka University; and (ii) at the postgraduate centre at Konaje and belonging to the Mysore University, shall, with effect on and from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act stand transferred to the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, as the case may be, established under sub-section (1-A) of Section 3; (c) all proceedings, including legal proceedings, pending immediately before the date of commencement of the Amendment Act relating to the affairs of - (i) the Karnataka University and arising out of the University Area of the Gulbarga University; (ii) the Mysore University and arising out of the University Area of the Mangalore University, shall, with effect on and from that date, stand transferred to or be continued by or against, the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, as the case may be, established under sub-section (1-A) of Section 3.] 2 [(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (3) and (4) - (a) all educational institutions situated in Chitradurga, Chickmagalur and Shimoga Districts and admitted to the privileges of or affiliated to the Mysore University immediately before the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987, shall, with effect on and from the said date and subject to the provisions of Chapter IX be deemed to be institutions admitted to the privileges or affiliated to the Kuvempu University established under this Act: Provided that any application for affiliation made in respect of any institution situated in any of the aforesaid districts and pending with Mysore University or the State Government on the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 shall be deemed to be an application made for affiliation to the Kuvempu University established under sub-section (1-B) of Section 3 and shall be dealt with and disposed of by the Kuvempu University or the State Government, as the case may be, on this basis; (b) the colleges, attached hostels, other buildings together with the articles of furniture, libraries, books, laboratories, stores, instruments, apparatus, appliances and equipment and all other property, both movable and immovable at the postgraduate centres at Bhadra Reservoir Project in Shimoga District and Davangere in Chitradurga District and belonging to the Mysore University shall, with effect on and from the date of the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987, stand transferred to the Kuvempu University established under subsection (1-B) of Section 3; (c) all proceedings, including legal proceedings, pending immediately before the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987, relating to the affairs of the Mysore University and arising out of the University area of the Kuvempu University shall, with effect on and from the date, stand transferred to or be continued by or against the Kuvempu University established under the sub-section (1-B) of Section 3.] Sub-section (5) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (6) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The University shall be open to all persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class and it shall not be lawful for the University to impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be admitted thereto as a teacher or a student or to hold any office therein or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the University shall, in accordance with the special or general directions of the State Government, reserve seats for purposes of admission as students in any college or institution maintained or controlled by the University for the following classes of persons, namely - (i) the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; (ii) classes declared by the State Government from time to time to be socially and educationally backward; (iii) nominees of the Central Government; (iv) defence personnel and ex-servicemen and their children or wards; and (v) children of freedom fighters. (3) The University may, subject to like orders, grant to persons falling under all or any of the categories specified in sub-section (2) any exemption from payment of such fees or boarding, lodging or other charges or from all fees and charges or provide special scholarships. Explanation -For purposes of this section - "Freedom fighter" means any person who on account of participation in the national movement - (a) had been sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months; or (b) had been kept in detention (including detention as under trial prisoner) for not less than six months; or (c) lost his job or means of livelihood or the whole or substantial part of his property; and who has 1 [been ordinarily residing] in the State of Karnataka for a period of not less than five years immediately preceding the date on which the application for admission or exemption is made. Substituted for the word "domiciled" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to the control of the Academic Council, all recognised teaching in connection with the University courses shall be conducted by the teachers of the University in accordance with any syllabus prescribed by Regulations and shall include lecturing, laboratory work and other teaching. (2) All such teaching shall be organised by such authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (3) The courses and curricula shall be as may be prescribed by the Ordinances and subject thereto, by the Regulations.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Chancellor shall, if so desired by the State Government and may, suo motu, cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipment and any institution maintained, administered, recognised or approved by the University and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University 1 [and to cause an inspection and inquiry] to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the University. 2 [(2) The person or persons directed to make an inspection or inquiry under sub-section (1) shall have access for that purpose to the concerned institutions and premises and to such accounts or other records as may be necessary.] (3) The said person or persons shall submit a report of the result of the inspection 3 [or inquiry] to the Chancellor and shall forward a copy thereof to the State Government. (4) The State Government may address the Vice-Chancellor with reference to any matter referred to in the report indicating its observations and the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate them to the Syndicate for taking necessary action. (5) The Syndicate shall communicate to the State Government through the Vice-Chancellor such action, if any, as it has taken or proposes to take. (6) Where the Syndicate does not within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the State Government, or fails to take any action the State Government may, require the Vice-Chancellor to issue such directions as are necessary and the Syndicate shall be bound to comply with the same. (7) The Syndicate shall furnish returns, statements, accounts or other particulars relating to the administration of the University as the State Government may, from time to time, require. (8) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding sub-sections the State Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, annual any proceedings of the University which, in its opinion is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances: Provided that before making any such order the State Government shall call upon the University to show cause why such an order should not be made and if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, shall consider the same. (9) Every order passed under sub-section (8) shall, as soon as may be, be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature. Substituted for the words "and to cause an inquiry" by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (2) substituted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka The following shall be the officers of the University, namely - (a) The Chancellor; 1 [(aa) The Pro-Chancellor;] (b) The Vice-Chancellor; 2 [(bb) The Deans;] (c) The Registrar; (d) The Controller of Examinations; (e) The Finance Officer; 3 [(f) x x x x;] (g) The Librarian; (h) The Dean of Student Welfare; (i) Such other officers of the University as the Chancellor may, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, from time to time, designate. Clause (aa) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (bb) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (f) omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Governor of Karnataka shall by virtue of his office, be the Chancellor of the University. (2) He shall be the Head of the University and shall, when present, preside at the meetings of the Senate and at any Convocation of the University. (3) He shall have such other powers as may be conferred on him by or under this Act or the Statutes.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 10A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Minister-in-charge of University Education in Karnataka shall, by virtue of his office be the Pro-Chancellor of the University. (2) He shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at any convocation of the University.] Section 10-A inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5- 1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole time officer of the University. (2) He shall be appointed by the Chancellor from out of a panel of not less than three persons recommended by a committee consisting of four persons of whom one shall be nominated by the Chancellor, 1 [x x x x], one by the University Grants Commission and 2 [two by the Syndicate]. No person nominated as a member of the committee shall be connected with 3 [the State Government] the University or any college or institution affiliated to the University. The Chancellor shall appoint one of the four members to be the Chairman of the committee: Provided that if the Chancellor 4 [approves of none of the] persons recommended by the committee he may call for fresh recommendation from the committee. (3) No person shall be appointed or hold office as Vice-Chancellor if he has attained the age of sixty-five years. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall, subject to the pleasure of the Chancellor and the provision of, sub-section (3) hold office for a period of three years; but he shall be eligible for reappointment: Provided that no person shall be appointed as Vice-Chancellor for more than two terms: 5 [Provided further that no Vice-Chancellor shall be removed from the office except by an order passed on the ground of misbehaviour, mismanagement, incapacity or otherwise after due enquiry by a serving or retired Judge of Supreme Court or High Court appointed by the Chancellor.] (5) The emoluments and other service conditions of the Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be determined by the Chancellor 6 [in accordance with the statutes, if any, framed in this behalf] and shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. (6) If a Professor in the service of any University in the State is appointed as Vice-Chancellor, his terms and conditions of service as Professor shall not be revised to his disadvantage during his tenure as Vice-Chancellor and he shall retain lien on his post. The words "one by the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "one by the Syndicate" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "does not approve of any one of the" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Second proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and shall exercise general control over the affairs of the University. He shall exercise all powers necessary for due maintenance of discipline in the University. (2) He shall ex officio be the Chairman of the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee. 1 [He shall also preside over the Senate in the absence of the Chancellor and at the convocation in the absence of the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor]. He shall be entitled to be present at and to address any meeting of any Authority or body of the University but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is member of such Authority or body. (3) He shall ensure the observance of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules and he shall have all powers necessary for that purpose. (4) He may, either himself or through any officer of the University authorised in writing by him convene the meetings of the Senate, the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall perform all such acts as may be necessary to carry out and give effect to the decision of the said Authorities. (5) In case of any emergency which, in his opinion, requires immediate action the Vice-Chancellor shall take such action as he deems necessary and shall at the earliest opportunity thereafter report the action taken to such Authority or body as would in the ordinary course have dealt with the matter: Provided that if the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor is not approved by the Authority or body concerned it may 2 [x x x x] refer the matter to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final: Provided further that if the decision taken by the Authority or body on the report of the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section affects adversely any person in the service of the University, that person may prefer an appeal to the Chancellor 3 [x x x x] within thirty days from the date on which the decision was communicated to him and the decision of the Chancellor on such appeal shall be final: 4 [Provided also that powers under this sub-section shall not be exercised to revise the pay scales of University employees or to grant affiliation to a college or for a course of instruction and if in the exercise of the powers under this sub-section statutes or regulations are framed, they shall be subject to the approval of the Chancellor under the relevant provisions of this Act and if Ordinances are made they shall be submitted to the Chancellor in accordance with this Act.] (6) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations. Substituted for the words "He shall also preside over the Senate and at the convocation in the absence of the Chancellor" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Third proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) During the temporary absence of the Vice- Chancellor by reason of leave, illness or any other cause, the Chancellor may make such arrangements for carrying on the duties of the Vice-Chancellor as he may deem fit: 1 [Provided that pending the making of such arrangements by the Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor may designate one among the Deans of the University to be in charge of the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor for a period not exceeding one month or till arrangements are made by the Chancellor, whichever is earlier.] (2) During the period a vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor remains unfilled, 2 [one among the Deans of the University] as the Chancellor may appoint shall act as Vice-Chancellor and the person so appointed shall have all the powers of the Vice-Chancellor and shall be entitled to the privileges of the Vice-Chancellor and to such emoluments and allowances as may be determined by the Chancellor 3 [in accordance with the statutes, if any, framed in this behalf]. Proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted tor the words "such person" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time officer of the University appointed by the 1 [Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Syndicate from out of a panel of not less than three persons recommended by the Vice-Chancellor to the Syndicate. If none in the panel is approved by the Syndicate within the time prescribed by the statutes, the Chancellor may in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor appoint such person as he deems fit to be the Registrar]. His emoluments and terms and conditions of service shall be such as may be determined by the Chancellor in like manner. (2) He shall ex officio be the Secretary of the Syndicate and member secretary of the Senate, the Academic Council and the Faculties. (3) It shall be the duty of the Registrar - (a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University as the Vice-Chancellor or the Syndicate shall commit to his charge; (b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Senate, the Syndicate, the Academic Council, the Faculties, the Boards of Studies and of any Committee appointed by the Authorities of the University and to keep minutes of all such meetings; (c) to conduct the official correspondence of the Authorities of which he is the Secretary; (d) to supply to the Chancellor and the State Government copies of the agenda of the meetings of the Authorities of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of meetings, ordinary within a month of the holding of the meeting. (4) He shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations or required from time to time by the Vice-Chancellor. (5) He may be assisted in his duties by one or more Deputy Registrars. Substituted for the words "Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor and the State Government" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The 2 [Registrar (Evaluation)] shall be a whole-time officer of the University appointed by the 3 [Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Syndicate from out of a panel of not less than three persons recommended by the Vice-Chancellor to the Syndicate. If none in the panel is approved by the Syndicate within the time prescribed by the statutes, the Chancellor may in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor appoint such person as he deems fit to be the Registrar (Evaluation)]. His emoluments and terms and conditions of service shall be such as may be determined by the Chancellor in like manner. (2) He shall be in charge of the conduct of examinations of the University and matters relating thereto and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances or as may be required by the Vice-Chancellor. (3) He may be assisted in his duties by one or more 4 [Deputy Registrars (Evaluation)]. Substituted for the words "Controller of Examinations" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "Controller of Examinations" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor and the State Government" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "Deputy Controllers" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole-time officer of the University appointed by the 1 [Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Syndicate from out of a panel of not less than three persons being officers of the Central or State Government, having experience in audit, accounting and financial administration recommended by the Vice-Chancellor to the Syndicate. If none in the panel is approved by the Syndicate within the time prescribed by the statutes, the Chancellor may, in consultation with the Vice- Chancellor, appoint such person as he deems fit to be the Finance Officer]. He shall be on deputation to the University for such period and on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Chancellor. (2) He shall, subject to the control of the Finance Committee, exercise and perform such powers and functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes 2 [, Ordinances or Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Vice-Chancellor.] Substituted for the words "Chancellor from among officers of the Central or State Government, having experience in audit, accounting and financial administration" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 16A--> State(s): Karnataka In the event of death, suspension or temporary absence of the Registrar, Controller of Examinations or the Finance Officer, 2 [or pending their appointment] the Chancellor may empower any other officers of the University to perform the duties of the Registrar, Controller of Examinations or the Finance Officer, as the case may be:] 3 [Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may empower an officer to perform such duties for a period not exceeding one month or till the Chancellor empowers an officer, whichever is earlier. The Vice-Chancellor shall immediately report the action taken by him under this proviso to the Chancellor.] Section 16-A inserted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [(1) Every Chairman of the Departmental Council of a Department of Studies, who is a Professor, shall, by rotation according to seniority, act as the Dean of the faculty for a period of two years. Where no Chairman is a Professor, a Professor shall, by rotation according to seniority, act as the Dean of the faculty for a period of two years:] 2 [Provided that if in any Faculty there is no Professor, the Senior-most Reader shall act as the Dean and if there is no Reader, such teacher as the Vice-Chancellor in accordance with seniority may designate shall act as the Dean: Provided further that where no person in any Department of Studies is available to act as the Dean of the Faculty or where the University does not have a Department of Studies for any Faculty, such Professor or Senior-most Reader or Teacher in a Department of Studies of an affiliated college as may be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor in accordance with seniority shall act as the dean of the Faculty.] (2) The Dean of each Faculty shall be the executive officer of the Faculty and shall preside at its meetings. (3) The Dean shall have such other powers and functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes and Ordinances. Sub-section (1) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Provisos inserted by Act No. 6 of 1989 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 16-12-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The 2 [Director of Student-welfare] shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Syndicate. (2) His term of office, emoluments and other conditions of service shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (3) He shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be conferred or imposed on him by the Chancellor or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or Ordinances or Regulations. Substituted for the words "Dean of student-welfare" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "Dean of student-welfare" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka The Librarian shall be a whole- time officer of the University and shall be appointed by the 1 [Syndicate] on the recommendation of the Board of Appointment referred to in Section 49. He shall possess such qualifications and exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes. His emoluments and terms and conditions of service shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 2 [x x x x]. Substituted for the word "Chancellor" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "He shall ex officio be the Head of the Department of Library Science" omitted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka The following shall be the Authorities of the University, namely - (a) The Senate; (b) The Syndicate; (c) The Academic Council; (d) The Finance Committee; (e) The Board of Studies; (f) The Faculties; and (g) Such other bodies as by Statutes may be declared to be the Authorities of the University.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Senate shall consist of the following members, namely - (1) The Chancellor; (2) The Vice-Chancellor; (3) All the Deans of Faculties; 1 [(4) The Commissioner for Public Instruction;] 2 [3 [(4)(a) The Commissioner of Collegiate Education, Karnataka];] (5) The Director of Collegiate Education, Karnataka; (6) The Director of 4 [Kannada and Culture], Karnataka; (7) The Director of Pre-University Education, Karnataka; (8) The Director of Youth Services, Karnataka; (9) The Director of Technical Education, Karnataka; 5 [(10) Director of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes;] (11) The Librarian; (12) The Director of Physical Education in the University; (13) The Director of Correspondence Course/External Course in the University; (14) Five Members of the Karnataka Legislative Assembly elected from amongst themselves; (15) Two members of the Karnataka Legislative Council elected from amongst themselves; 6 [(16) Director of Students Welfare;] (17) Ten Principals nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor, by rotation, for a period of one year; (18) Five representatives of teachers other than Principals, Professors and Directors in Postgraduate department elected from amongst themselves; 7 [(19) One Professor or Director in the Postgraduate Departments from each of the faculties, elected by Professors and Directors in Postgraduate Departments of that faculty:] 8 [Provided that where the number of Professors in any Faculty does not exceed two, one Professor shall be nominated according to seniority by rotation for a period of one year by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor;] (20) 9 [five] persons elected by the Registered Graduates in the manner specified below - (a) one by Registered Graduates in Law from amongst themselves; 10 [(b) x x x x]; (c) one by Registered Graduates in Commerce from amongst themselves; 11 [(d) x x x x]; (e) three by Registered Graduates other than those specified in clauses 12 [(a) and (c)] from amongst themselves: Provided that for the purpose of election of members by the Registered Graduates, a person entitled to stand as a candidate or to vote in more than one constituency shall before such date as may be appointed by the Statutes, choose the constituency from which he desires to stand as a candidate or to vote at the election and shall not be entitled to stand or vote in more than one constituency; (21) One woman registered graduate elected by the registered graduates; 13 [(22)(a) Five elected representatives of students of the University, two from among Postgraduate students and three from among Under-Graduate students, for a term of one year and they shall be elected through such electoral college, as the case may be, of the department or college consisting of such members and in such manner as may be prescribed by statutes: Provided that one each among the representatives of the Postgraduate students and Under-Graduate students shall be a woman elected, as the case may be, from such electoral colleges consisting of woman members of the department or college, and in such manner as may be prescribed by statutes. (b) three representatives of students nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, of whom one shall represent Postgraduate students, one shall be a cadet of National Cadet Corps and one shall be a sportsman or sports woman of such outstanding merit as may be prescribed by statutes: Provided that no student shall be eligible for election or nomination - (i) unless his name appears on the rolls of the University or a college affiliated to the University; (ii) unless he is following a course in the University or a college affiliated to the University leading to a degree or a Postgraduate degree or Post-Graduate diploma of the University; (iii) if he is studying in a morning college or an evening college or having examination as an external candidate or through correspondence courses; (iv) if he has failed to complete a course in six years: Provided further that in the Senate to be constituted for the first time after the appointed date, five representatives specified at item (i) of clause (22) of sub-section (1) shall be nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor for a term of one year at a time: Provided also that when representatives of students are elected, the term of office of the students nominated under the preceding proviso shall come to an end.] (23) Fifteen persons nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor from among persons having special knowledge of Literature, Science, Arts, Co-operation and Social service of whom - (i) five shall be persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes; (ii) one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Tribes; (iii) five, of whom at least one is a woman, belonging to any of the classes declared by the State Government from time to time to be socially and educationally backward; (iv) two shall be persons belonging to religious minorities; (v) one shall be a person nominated by the Chancellor from a penal of five persons recommended by the Karnataka Union of working Journalists; and (vi) one shall be a person representing trade and commerce. 14 [15 [(24) The Director of Medical Education].] (2) No non-teaching employee of the University or an affiliated college shall be eligible to be elected or nominated to the Senate. (3) The Controller or Examinations and the Finance Officer shall be permanent invitees to all the meetings of the Senate; Clause (4) substituted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Clause (4)(a) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (4)(a) substituted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Substituted for the words "Languages and Development of Kannada" by Act No. 9 of 1978 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 24-12-1977 Clause (10) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (16) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (19) substituted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Proviso inserted by Act No. 6 of 1989 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 16-12-1987 Substituted for the word "seven" by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Sub-clause (b) omitted by Act No. 20 of 1999 and shall be deemed to have been omitted w.e.f. 1-6-1998 Sub-clause (d) omitted by Act No. 20 of 1999, and shall be deemed to have been omitted w.e.f. 1-6-1996 Substituted for the word, brackets and letters "(a) to (d)" by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Clause (22) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (24) inserted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Clause (24) substituted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka (1) A meeting of the Senate shall be held at least twice every year on dates to be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor. One of such meetings shall be the annual meeting. (2) A report of the working of the University during the previous year together with a statement of receipts and expenditure, the financial estimates and the last audit report shall be presented by the Syndicate at the annual meeting. (3) The Vice-Chanellor may, whenever he thinks fit and shall, when a requisition in writing signed by not less than twenty-five members of the Senate is made, convene a special meeting of the Senate.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Senate shall have power to review from time to time the policies of the University and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University and to consider the annual accounts and audit reports of the University. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Senate shall have the following powers, namely - (a) providing for instruction, teaching and training in such branches of learning and courses of study as it may think fit for research and for the advancement and dissemination of learning; (b) making provision as will enable affiliated colleges and recognised institutions to undertake specialisation of studies; (c) establishing and maintaining departments of research and specialised studies; 1 [(d) instituting professorships, lecturerships or any other posts of teachers required by the University on the recommendation of the Academic Council. The appointments to these posts shall however be made after obtaining, if need be, financial approval from the State Government or any other authority or agency to which the State Government may delegate this function;] (e) instituting fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (f) instituting and conferring degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (g) conferring on the recommendation of the Syndicate, honorary degrees, titles or other academic distinctions; (h) making, amending or repealing Statutes; (i) considering the annual financial estimates prepared by the Syndicate; (j) electing members to such authorities as provided in this Act or the Statutes; (k) conferring on the recommendation of the Syndicate, the title of Professor Emeritus; (l) exercising such other powers and performing such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations: Provided that the power under clauses (a) to (g) shall not be exercised except on the recommendations made by the Syndicate and the Academic Council. Clause (d) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka The Syndicate shall consist of the following members, namely - (i) The Vice-Chancellor; 1 [(i-a) The Commissioner of Collegiate Education, Karnataka;] (ii) The Director of Collegiate Education, Karnataka; (iii) The Director of Technical Education, Karnataka; (iv) One Dean, by rotation according to seniority, nominated by the Chancellor 2 [in consultation with the State Government] from among those who are not Principals of Colleges, for a period of one year; 3 [(v) Principals of three Colleges, of whom one shall be Principal of Womens College one shall be Principal of a Professional College, and one shall be Principal of a University or affiliated nonprofessional college by rotation according to seniority nominated by the Chancellor, in consultation with the State Government, for a period of one year;] (vi) Three persons, none of whom being an employee of the University or an affiliated college or a representative of students, elected by the Senate from among its members; (vii) One professor of postgraduate studies, by rotation according to seniority, nominated by the Chancellor 4 [in consultation with the State Government] for a period of one year; (viii) Three persons nominated by the Chancellor 5 [in consultation with the State Government] of whom one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes, one shall be a person belonging to such socially and educationally backward classes of citizens as may be specified by State Government from time to time; 6 [(ix) 7 [Two members] of the Academic Council elected by its members; 8 [(x) the Director of Medical Education;] (xi) The Commissioner for Public Instruction; Explanation -For the purposes of clauses (iv), (v) and (vii) seniority of Deans, Principals and Professors, as the case may be, shall be determined on the basis of length of service as a Dean or as a Principal or as a Professor as the case may be, in the University;] 9 [10 [(xii) The Director of Pre-University Education, Karnataka;]] Clause (i-a) inserted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (v) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clauses (ix) and (x) substituted for clause (ix) by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Substituted for the words "One member" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f 14-5-1986 Clause (x) and (xi) substituted for clause (x) by Act No. 25 of 1980 Clause (xii) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (xii) substituted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to the general directions of the Senate, the Syndicate shall have the power of management and administration of the revenues and properties of the University and the control of all administrative affairs of the University. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Syndicate shall have the following powers, namely - (a) to manage and regulate the finances and all other administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit; (b) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University; (c) to appoint, subject to the provisions of Section 31, examiners and moderators and if necessary to change or to remove them and also to fix their fees, emoluments and travelling and other allowances; (d) to make arrangements for the conduct of examinations in the prescribed manner; (e) to receive, acquire, hold, control and administer the properties of the University, both movable and immovable and to invest the funds of the University; (f) to cause to be maintained proper accounts regarding the funds of the University and its properties; (g) to prescribe, charge and collect fees for - (i) tuition and research; (ii) admission to examinations and convocations; (iii) such other services as the University may undertake; (iv) affiliation and inspection of colleges and registration of graduates; and (v) such other purposes as may be prescribed by the Statutes; (h) to prepare the financial estimates of the University and to submit the same to the Senate; (i) to administer and control the colleges, hostels, libraries, laboratories, museums and other Institutions established or maintained by the University; (j) to make recommendations regarding admission of colleges as affiliated colleges; (k) to recognise hostels not administered by the University and to suspend or withdraw such recognition; (l) to supervise and control the residence and discipline of the students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and well being; (m) to constitute and regulate the working of the Employment Bureau and the Bureau of Information; (n) to delegate such of its functions to the Vice-Chancellor as may be prescribed by the Statutes; (o) to select a common seal for the University and to provide for its custody and use; (p) to arrange for the conduct of litigations by or against the University; (q) to exercise such other powers and performs such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely - (i) The Vice-Chancellor; (ii) Three members of the Syndicate nominated by the Chancellor 1 [in consultation with the State Government]; (iii) One member of the Senate elected by its members; (iv) The Dean of Faculties; (v) The Professors of Postgraduate Departments of Studies 2 [where no such Professor is available then the Head of the Postgraduate Department of Studies shall be a Member;] (vi) Twenty-five per cent of the Principals of Colleges nominated by the Vice-Chancellor by rotation according to seniority, for a period of one year; (vii) Eight lecturers and two readers who are not Deans of Faculties of Heads of Postgraduate Departments of Studies or Principals of colleges, elected by the teachers; (viii) Six persons nominated by the Chancellor 3 [in consultation with the State Government] from amongst eminent educationists, of whom not less than two shall be persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and not less than two shall be persons belonging to such socially and educationally backward classes of citizens specified by the State Government from time to time; 4 [(ix) The Commissioner for Public Instruction;] 5 [(ix-a) The Director of Pre-University Education, Karnataka;] 6 [(ix-b) The Commissioner of Collegiate Education, Karnataka;] (x) The Director of Collegiate Education, Karnataka; (xi) The President of the Adult Education Council; (xii) The Director of Physical Education in the University; (xiii) The Director of Technical Education, Karnataka; 7 [(xiv) x x x x] 8 [(xv) The Director of Medical Education.] Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 57 of 1976 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 21-6-1976 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (ix) substituted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Clause (ix-a) as inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 substituted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Clause (ix-b) inserted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Clause (xiv) omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (xv) as inserted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 substituted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act the Statutes and the Ordinances, have the control and general regulation of and be responsible for the maintenance of the standards of instruction, education and examinations of the University. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by or under the provisions of this Act, the Academic Council shall exercise the following powers, namely - (a) to make proposals for Ordinances relating to academic matters; (b) to make Regulations regarding the courses of study insofar as they are not covered by the Ordinances; (c) to make Regulations regarding the schemes of examinations and conditions on which the students shall be admitted to the examinations, degrees, diplomas, certificates or other academic distinctions; (d) to make Regulations for declaration of the results of the various University Examinations; (e) to arrange for co-ordination of studies and of teaching in colleges and in recognised institutions; (f) to formulate schemes for promoting research within the University or for promoting other specialised studies; (g) to make proposals for allocating subjects to the Faculties and to assign its own numbers to the Faculties; (h) to fix the conditions under which exemptions relating to the admission of students to examinations may be given; (i) to make proposals for the institution of posts of Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other posts of teachers required by the University and for prescribing the duties of such posts; (j) to make proposals for the institution of fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, exhibitions and for their award; (k) to make Regulations prescribing equivalence of examinations; (l) to make Regulations for granting exemptions from approved courses of study in the University or in affiliated colleges for qualifying for degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (m) to exercise such other powers and to perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations; and (n) generally to advice the University on all academic matters.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The University shall have the Faculties of Arts, Commerce, Education, Engineering, Medicine, Law, Science and Technology and such others as may be prescribed by the Statutes from time to time. (2)(a) Each Faculty shall consist of such Departments of Studies as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances. (b) No Department of Studies shall be established or abolished except by Statutes. (c) Each Department of Studies shall consist of the following members, namely - (i) Teachers of the Department; (ii) Persons appointed to conduct research in the Department; (iii) The Dean of the Faculty; (iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; (v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinances. 1 [(d)(i) Each Department of studies shall have a Chairman, who shall also be the Chairman of the Departmental Council. (ii) Each Department shall have a Departmental Council consisting of all the Professors, Readers and two senior-most lecturers in the Department. (iii) The Chairman shall be appointed by the Syndicate for a specified term provided that the Syndicate shall be competent to vary the term after review from time to time. (iv) The Chairman shall be in charge of the administration of the department in consultation with the Departmental Council. The powers, duties and functions of the Departmental Council and the Chairman shall be as prescribed by the statutes.] (3) Each Faculty shall consist of the following members, namely - (i) The Dean of the Faculty; 2 [(ii) The Chairman of Departments of Studies in the Faculty;] (iii) All Professors in the Faculty from each Department in the Faculty; (iv) One Reader and one Lecturer in each Department of Studies nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, by rotation according to seniority, for a period of two years; (v) Five teachers of colleges and two experts from another University in the State, nominated by the Vice-Chancellor for a period of two years; (vi) Such other persons as may be specified by the Statutes. (4) The Faculties shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Clause (d) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f 14-5-1986 Clause (ii) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be a Board of Studies for every subject or group of subjects as may be prescribed by the Ordinances: 1 [Provided that separate Board of studies for under-graduate studies and for postgraduate studies in any subject or group of subjects may be constituted by the Syndicate wherever felt necessary.] (2) The constitution, functions and powers of the Board of Studies shall be as prescribed by the Statutes. Proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of the following members, namely - (i) the Vice-Chancellor, ex officio Chairman; (ii) one member of the Syndicate elected by its members; (iii) one member of the Senate elected by its members; (iv) two officers nominated by the State Government; (v) the Finance Officer, ex officio 1 [x x x x] Secretary. (2) The Register shall be a permanent invitee to the Finance Committee. (3) The Finance Committee shall perform the following functions, namely - (i) to scrutinise the annual budget estimates and make its recommendations to the Syndicate; (ii) to conduct the general examinations of the accounts of the University, review the yearly audit reports and make its recommendations thereon; (iii) to examine all proposals of the University involving expenditure for which no provision is made in the budget or involving expenditure in excess of the amount provided for in the budget; (iv) such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes; (4) Notwithstanding anything in the proceeding sub-section, the Vice-Chancellor may, in case of urgency and for reasons to be recorded in writing, incur any expenditure not exceeding rupees ten thousand in any one case for which no provision is made in the budget or which is in excess of the provision made in the budget without reference to the Finance Committee, but such expenditure shall be reported at the next earliest meeting of the finance Committee. (5) Where the votes on any subject considered by the Finance Committee are equally divided, the Vice-Chancellor shall have the casting vote. The word "Member" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka (1) A Board shall be constituted every year for each Faculty for the purpose of preparing lists of persons for appointment as University Examiners and the Board shall consist of - (i) the Vice-Chancellor-ex officio Chairman; (ii) the Dean of the Faculty concerned; 1 [(iii) xxxx (iv) x x x x] (v) the Chairman of the Board of Studies in the particular subject; and (vi) the Controller of Examinations-ex officio 2 [x x x x] Secretary. (2) The Board shall prepare the lists from amongst persons included in the panels to be prepared by the Board of Studies and shall submit them for approval to the Syndicate which shall then appoint the examiners: Provided that no change in the list shall be suggested or made by the Syndicate except by passing a resolution stating the specific ground on which each change suggested or made is based. (3) If, for any reason, any examiner is unable to accept the examinership and a fresh appointment cannot be made in time by the Syndicate, the Vice-Chancellor shall appoint another examiner and report such appointment to the Syndicate. (4) No member 3 [x x x x] of the Board shall be appointed as examiner except by a resolution of the Syndicate passed by two-thirds of the members present. Clauses (iii) and (iv) omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The word "Member" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "of the Syndicate or" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The University may establish - (i) a Board of Extramural studies; (ii) a Board of Student-Welfare; and (iii) such other Boards as may be prescribed by Statutes. (2) The constitution, functions and powers of the Boards established under sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by Ordinances.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Save as otherwise provided, the term of office of the members other than the ex officio members of the Senate, Syndicate and Academic Council shall be three years. (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the Senate, the Syndicate and the Academic Council shall be reconstituted at or about the same time and the members of the said Authorities shall, except in the case of ex offico members, hold office as members thereof up to the date of next reconstitution: Provided that the term of a member appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall be the residuary term of his predecessor. 1 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 21, 24 and 26 or in any law or judgment or decree or order of any Court, the Senate or the Syndicate or the Academic Council shall be deemed to have been duly constituted or reconstituted, when it is constituted or reconstituted with not less than three-fourth of the total number of members thereof.] Sub-section (3) inserted by Act No. 10 of 1984 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 24-11-1983
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 33A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any member nominated to any of the authorities specified in Section 20 shall hold office during the pleasure of the person or authority nominating him. (2) No person nominated or elected to any of the authorities specified in Section 20 shall hold office for more than two consecutive terms in such authority.] Section 33-A inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5- 1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka The method of election of the members of the Senate, the Syndicate and the Academic Council shall be as prescribed by the Statutes.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 34A--> State(s): Karnataka Where an ex officio member specified in items (iv) to (x) of sub-section (1) of Section 21 or items (ii), (iii), (x) and (xi) of Section 24 or items (ix), (xiii) and (xv) of Section 26 is unable to attend any meeting as the case may be, of the Senate Syndicate or the Academic Council, he may, subject to the general or special orders of the Government, authorise in writing any officer to attend such meeting and the person so attending shall have the same rights at the meeting as the ex officio member.] Section 34-A inserted by Act No. 24 of 1982 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 1-5-1982
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely - (a) the constitution, functions and powers of the Authorities of the University and such other bodies as may be declared to be the Authorities of the University from time to time; (b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said Authorities or bodies, including the continuance in office of the first members and the filling of vacancies of members and all other matters relating to those Authorities or bodies of which it may be necessary or desirable to provide; (c) the conferment of Honorary Degrees; (d) holding of convocations for conferring degrees and diplomas; (e) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions; (f) the establishment, maintenance and abolition of faculties, departments, hostels, colleges and institutions; (g) the conditions under which colleges may be affiliated and such affiliation may be withdrawn; (h) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (i) the institution, suspension or abolition of Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships, ministerial and non-teaching posts; 1 [(i-a) Institution of temporary posts of Lecturers, part-time posts of Lecturers, Assistant Professors, Readers and Professors or temporary posts of any class or classes of non-teaching staff, for any specified period not exceeding one year.] (j) the procedure to be followed at meetings of such other Authorities or bodies including the quorum for the transaction of the business by them; (k) the classification of teachers of the University and to the affiliated colleges; (l) the method of recruitment of teachers; (m) the conditions of service including emoluments of the employees of the University; (n) the acceptance and management of bequests, donations and endowments; (o) the registration of graduates and maintenance of the register of registered graduates; and 2 [(p) fees to be charged for the courses of study in the University and in the affiliated colleges and for admissions to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University; (q) fees to be charged for the services rendered by the University.] 3 [(r)] all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes. Clause (i-a) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Clauses (p) and (q) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Existing clause (p) renumbered as clause (r) by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 36--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Statutes may be made, amended or repealed by the Senate in the manner hereinafter provided. (2) The Senate may take into consideration the draft of a Statute either of its own motion or on a proposal made by the Syndicate. Where the draft is not proposed by the Syndicate, the Senate shall obtain the opinion of the Syndicate thereon before considering the same: Provided that if the Syndicate fails to submit its opinion within three months from the date it receives the draft, the Senate may proceed to take into draft into consideration. (3) The Senate if it thinks necessary, may also obtain the opinion of any officer, Authority or body of the University in regard to the draft Statutes before it takes them into consideration: Provided that where such draft Statutes pertain to academic matters, the Senate shall obtain the opinion of the Academic Council before considering it. 1 [(4) Every statute passed by the Senate shall be sent to the State Government for submission to the Chancellor for assent. The State Government shall transmit the statutes along with its comments to the Chancellor within three months of the date on which it received the statutes from the University. The Chancellor may within one month of the date of receipt of the statutes from the State Government give or withhold his assent thereto or refer it to the Senate for further consideration.] (5) No statute passed by the Senate shall have validity until assented to by the Chancellor. Sub-section (4) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 37--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely - (a) admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such; (b) courses of study for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University; (c) degrees, diplomas and certificates and other 1 [requirements] for the same and the measures to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining the same; 2 [(d) x x x x] (e) conditions relating to the award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (f) conduct of examinations including the term of office and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; (g) conditions of residence of the students of the University; (h) special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching of women students and prescribing for them special courses of study where necessary; (i) regulating the giving of religious instruction; (j) management of colleges and other institutions founded or maintained by the University; (k) supervision and inspection of colleges and other institutions affiliated to the University; 3 [(l) x x x x] (m) conditions for recognition of hostels not maintained by the University; (n) health and discipline of 4 [and disciplinary proceedings against] students in the University and in the affiliated colleges and other institutions; (o) rules to be observed and enforced by the colleges and recognised institutions in respect of transfer of students; and (p) all other matters which by this Act or by the Statutes are to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances. Substituted for the word "qualifications" by Act No 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (d) omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (1) omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 38--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Ordinances may be made by the Syndicate in the manner hereinafter provided. (2) In making the Ordinances, the Syndicate shall consult - (a) the Board or the Boards of Studies concerned when such Ordinances affect the duties of examiners; and (b) the Academic Council, when such Ordinances affect the courses of study, conduct or standard of examinations or the conditions of residence of students. (3) The Syndicate shall not have power to amend the draft of any Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council but it may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Council for reconsideration, either in whole or in part, together with such amendments as the Syndicate may suggest. (4) All Ordinances made by the Syndicate shall have effect from such date as it may direct. But every Ordinance shall be submitted 1 [x x x x] to the Chancellor within two weeks from the making thereof. The Chancellor may, within four weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance, by order direct, that the operation of any Ordinance shall be suspended and shall as soon as possible inform the Syndicate of his objection to it. He may after receiving 2 [x x x x] the comments of the Syndicate either withdraw the order of suspension or disallow the Ordinance. His decision shall be final. (5) Where the Syndicate has rejected the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic Council, the Academic Council may appeal to the Chancellor 3 [x x x x]. (6) The Chancellor may, after obtaining 4 [x x x x], the comments of the Syndicate, either reject the appeal or approve the Ordinance as proposed by the Academic Council. Thereupon, the Ordinance shall have effect as if made by the Syndicate. The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 39--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Academic Council may, subject to the approval of the Chancellor sought and obtained through the State Government make Regulations consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances. 1 [The State Government shall transmit the regulations within two months from the date of receipt thereof from the University to the Chancellor with its comments.] (2) The Regulations may provide for exercising all or any of the powers enumerated in Section 27 and particularly for the following matters, namely - (a) admission of students to the University; (b) recognition of examinations and degrees of other Universities as equivalent to the examinations and degrees of the University; (c) the University courses and examinations and conditions on which students of the University or the affiliated colleges or of other University Institutions shall be admitted to examinations or degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University; (d) the granting of exemptions. (3) Every Regulation shall come into force on the date it is approved by the Chancellor or on such other date as the Chancellor may direct. The Regulations shall also be published in the Official Gazette. Added by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 40--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any Authority of the University specified in clauses (d) to (g) of Section 20 and any Board of the University may, subject to the approval of the Syndicate, make rules consistent with this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations. (2) The rules may provide for - (a) the giving of notice to the members of each Authority or Board of the dates of meetings and of the business to be transacted at the meetings and also for keeping a record of the proceedings of meetings; (b) the procedure to be followed at meetings and the number of members required to form the quorum for meetings; and (c) all matters solely concerning such Authority or Board and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes the Ordinances or the Regulations. (3) The Syndicate may refuse to approve the rules submitted or may return them to the Authority or Board concerned for further consideration or may approve the rules without modification or subject to such modification as the Syndicate deems fit. (4) Every rule made under this section shall come into force on the date it is approved by the Syndicate. It shall also be published in the official Gazette.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 41--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The amounts received from any of the following sources shall form part of the University Fund - (a) any contribution or grant made by the State Government; (b) any contribution or grant made by the University Grants Commission or the Central Government; (c) any bequests, donations, endowments or other grants made by private individuals or institutions; (d) the income received by the University from fees and charges; and (e) the amounts received from any other source. (2) The said Fund shall be kept in the Scheduled Bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, or in a corresponding new bank constituted under the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or may be invested in securities authorised by the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, as may be decided by the Syndicate. (3) The said Fund may be employed for any of the purposes of the University in the manner prescribed by Statutes.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 42--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the Syndicate. (2) The accounts of the University shall, at least once in a year, be audited by the Controller of State Accounts. (3) The accounts when audited shall be published by the Syndicate in the Official Gazette and a copy of the accounts together with the audit report shall be placed before the Senate and shall also be submitted to the State Government. The State Government shall lay the same before both Houses of the State Legislature at their next earliest session. (4) The annual accounts shall be considered by the Senate at its annual meeting. The Senate may pass resolutions with reference thereto and communicate the same to the Syndicate. The Syndicate shall consider the suggestions made by the Senate and take such action thereon as it thinks fit. The Syndicate shall inform the Senate at its next meeting all action taken by it or the reasons for not taking action.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 43--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Syndicate shall prepare before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes the financial estimates for the ensuing year and place the same before the Senate. (2) The Syndicate may, in cases where expenditure in excess of the amount provided in the Budget is to be incurred or in cases of urgency, for reasons to be recorded in writing, incur expenditure subject to such restrictions and conditions specified in the Statutes. Where no provision has been made in the Budget in respect of such excess expenditure, a report shall be made to the Senate at its next meeting. 1 [(3) The Budget estimate of the University shall be prepared keeping in view the anticipated grants from the State Government and other sources. However, supplementary Budget may be placed before the Senate in October in anticipation of additional grants from the State Government, but, no expenditure on this part should be incurred unless such additional grant is received. (4) The University shall not divert for other purposes ear-marked funds or revise the scales of pay of its staff or implement any scheme which involves any matching contribution from the State Government or a scheme which imposes a recurring liability on the State Government after the assistance from the sponsoring authorities ceases, without the prior approval of the State Government.] Sub-sections (3) and (4) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 44--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government shall have the power to direct, whenever deemed necessary, an audit of the accounts of the University, including those of the institutions managed by it, such auditors as it may specify.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 45--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Syndicate shall prepare the Annual Report containing such particulars as the State Government may specify, covering each financial year and submit it to the Senate on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes. The Senate may pass resolutions thereon and the Syndicate shall take action in accordance therewith. The action taken shall be intimated to the Senate. (2) Copies of the Annual Report along with the resolution of the Senate thereon shall be submitted to the State Government. The State Government shall lay the same before both Houses of the State Legislature at their next earliest session.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 46--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any member, other than the ex officio member, of any Authority or body of the University may resign his office by a letter addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect on receipt of such letter by the Registrar. (2) No member of any Authority or body of the University who is elected, appointed or nominated in his capacity as a member of a particular electorate or body or as a teacher or, where expressly stated so, as the holder of a particular appointment, shall continue to be a member of such Authority or body on his ceasing to be a member of the particular electorate or body or a teacher or the holder of that particular appointment. (3) A member of any Authority or body of the University shall cease to be a member on his being convicted by a Court of law for any offence involving moral turpitude.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 47--> State(s): Karnataka All vacancies among the members (other than ex officio members) of any Authority or other body of the University arising by reason of death, resignation or otherwise shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by the person or body who appointed, nominated, elected or co-opted the member whose place has become vacant and the person so appointed, nominated, elected or co-opted shall be a member of such Authority or body for the unexpired portion of the term for which the member in whose place such person is appointed, nominated elected or co-opted, would otherwise have continued in office: Provided that pending the appointment, nomination or election of any person to fill any such vacancy in the manner aforesaid the vacancy (other than a vacancy in the Senate, may be filled by the person or body who appointed, nominated, qualified to fill such vacancy under the provisions of this Act and any person so nominated shall hold office as a member of such Authority or body until a person is appointed, nominated, elected or co-opted thereto in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 48--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If any question arises whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any Authority or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor. (2) The decision of the Chancellor on that question shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court of law.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 49--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be a Board of Appointment for selecting persons for appointment as Professors, Librarian, Readers and Lecturers in the University. (2) Every such Board shall consist of - (a) for selections to the posts of Professors 1 [, Readers] and to the post of Librarian - (i) the Vice-Chancellor-ex officio Chairman; (ii) 2 [the Chairman of the Departmental Council concerned], if he is a Professor and if he is not a Professor, a Professor from any other University in the State nominated by the Chancellor 3 [in consultation with the State Government] 4 [and where no such Professor is available in any University within the State, such Professor in the concerned Department from a Central Institute within the State or from a University in any other State, nominated by the Chancellor] 5 [in consultation with the State Government]; (iii) 6 [four] experts nominated by the Chancellor, 7 [in consultation With the State Government] two of whom from a panel furnished by the University Grants Commission and the 8 [others] from amongst persons serving in 9 [any University established by law in India or any other Institution recognised by the State Government]; (b) for selections to the posts of 10 [x x x x] Lecturers - (i) the Vice-Chancellor-ex officio Chairman; (ii) two experts nominated by the Chancellor 11 [in consultation with the State Government]; 12 [(iii) 13 [the Chairman of the Departmental Council] concerned if he is a Professor, and if he is not a Professor, a Professor in the concerned Department of any other University within the State nominated by the Chancellor 14 [in consultation with the State Government] and where no such Professor is available in any University within the State such Professor in the concerned department from a Central Institute within the State or from a University in any other State nominated by the Chancellor 15 [in consultation with the State Government]; (iv) one Professor from any other University in the State nominated by the Chancellor 16 [in consultation with the State Government], 17 [x x x x] 18 [and where no such Professor is available in any University within the State, such Professor in the concerned Department from a University in any other State, nominated by the Chancellor 19 [in consultation with the State Government]]. (3) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board of Appointment. (4) Every post of Professor, Librarian, Reader or Lecturer to be filled by selection shall be duly and widely advertised together with the minimum and other qualifications, if any, required, the emoluments and the number of posts to be filled, and reasonable time shall be allowed within which the applicants may apply. (5) The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Appointment shall be four of whom in the case of selections to the posts of Professors 20 [, Readers] and the Librarian at least two shall be the experts and in the case of selections to the other posts, at least one shall be the expert. (6) The Board shall interview, adjudge the merit of each candidate in accordance with the qualifications advertised and prepare a list of persons selected arranged in the order of merit. It shall forward the list to the 21 [Syndicate], who shall make appointments in accordance with the same. 22 [In case of difference between the Board and the Syndicate, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision shall be final.] 23 [Explanation -Nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as 24 [requiring the Syndicate] to make appointments in accordance with the list where he is of the opinion that it does not satisfy the provisions of this Act or the statutes relating to such appointments.] (7) In preparing the list under sub-section (6) the Board shall follow the orders issued by the State Government from time to time in the matter of reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens. (8) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (7), preference shall be given to persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in any selection if in the opinion of the Board such persons 25 [x x x x] the minimum qualification prescribed and are suitable. (9) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding sub-sections, appointments to the posts of Professors and Readers in under-graduate colleges maintained by the University shall be made by such authority as may be prescribed in the Statutes by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit from Readers and Lecturers respectively: Provided that whenever any new subject is introduced, appointment of Professors, Readers and Lecturers in such new subject shall be made in such manner as may be prescribed by Statutes. 26 [(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding subsections the Syndicate shall be competent to invite, on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor, a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept the post of visiting Professor in the University on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon: Provided that there shall not be more than four such visiting Professors in a University at any given time.] Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "the Head of the Department concerned" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 9 of 1978 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 24-12-1977 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the word "three" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the word "other" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "any other University in the State" by Act No. 25 of 1980 The words "Readers and" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Item (iii) substituted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Substituted for the words "the Head of the Department" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "where the Head of Department concerned is not a Professor" omitted by Act No. 57 of 1976 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 21-6-1976 and Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 9 of 1978 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 24-12-1977 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the word "Chancellor" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Explanation inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 and shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted Substituted for the words "requiring the Chancellor" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The words "merit a little above" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Sub-section (10) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 49A--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 49 but subject to the rules and orders issued by the State Government from time to time for reservation of appointments and posts for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes, appointments to the posts of Readers and Professors in University institutions and departments may be made by the syndicate in accordance with a promotion scheme, if any, prescribed by statutes made in this behalf, if the University institution or department has both under-graduate and post-graduate courses.] Section 49-A inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 50--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be constituted a Board of Appointment to select candidates for appointment to the non-teaching posts 2 [and] ministerial posts in the University. (2) The Board shall consists of - (i) the Vice-Chancellor-ex officio Chairman; (ii) the Registrar; 3 [(iii) One person supervising the work of the section for which recruitment is made nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and where there is no such person the 4 [Chairman of the Departmental Council] of the concerned section;] (iv) 5 [three persons] nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government, one of whom shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and the 6 [another] shall be a person belonging to any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens declared as such by the State Government or any religious or linguistic minority.7 [The terms of such members shall be three years.] 8 [(2-A) The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be four.] (3) Such of the posts as according to the Statutes are to be filled by direct recruitment shall be filled from among persons selected by the Board in the order in which their names are arranged in the list prepared by the Board Appointment to posts by promotion 9 [, deputation or transfer or on contract as may be prescribed in the statute in respect of any category of posts] shall be made after consulting the Board. (4) While preparing the list of candidates selected for appointment to the direct recruitment vacancies, the Board shall comply with the orders issued by the State Government from time to time for reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens. (5) All appointments shall be made by the 10 [Syndicate]. 11 [In case of difference between the Board and the Syndicate, the matter shall be referred to the Chancellor, whose decision shall be final]: Provided that appointments to posts the maximum of the scale of pay of which does not exceed rupees 12 [two thousand and twenty-four] shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor. 13 [(6) Notwithstanding anything in the preceding sub-sections, appointments to posts in the University equivalent to Group C and D posts in the State Civil Services shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor in accordance with the statutes to be framed for this purpose, and in accordance with the order issued by the State Government from time to time for reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Communities.] Substituted for the words "Appointment of other non-ministerial staff" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5- 1986 Substituted for the words "other than" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (iii) substituted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Substituted for the words "Head of the Department" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "two persons" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the word "other" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Sub-section (2-A) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the word "Chancellor" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Added by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "one thousand five hundred and ninety-nine" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Sub-section (6) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 51--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Section 51 omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 51A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be a Board of Appointment for selecting persons for appointment as part-time Lecturers, Assistant Professors, Readers and Professors in the University. (2) The Board shall consist of - (i) the Vice-Chancellor-Ex officio Chairman; (ii) the two experts nominated by the Chancellor; (iii) the Head of the Department concerned; (iv) the Secretary to the Government of Karnataka in the Education Department or a person nominated by him: Provided that for appointment to any post in the Law College the two experts shall be the Advocate General in Karnataka and the Secretary to Government of Karnataka in the Department of Law and Parliamentary Affairs. (3) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board. (4) Every part-time post shall be duly and widely advertised with all necessary particulars and shall be filled by selection after interviewing the candidates: Provided that the Board may invite eminent persons in the field to fill any post without such advertisement and interview. No part-time appointment shall be made for a period exceeding one year. (5) The quorum for a meeting of the Board shall be three. (6) The Board shall prepare a list of persons selected and forward the list to the Syndicate which shall make the appointment. Sections 51-A to 51-C inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 51B--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything in Sections 49, 50, 1 [x x x x] and 51-A, the Vice-Chancellor may make temporary appointments of not more than six months duration to posts of Lecturers and such non-teaching staff as may be specified in the Statutes provided such posts are either temporary or appointments to such posts cannot be made in accordance with Sections 49, 50, 2 [x x x] and 51-A without delay. (2) The appointments under sub-section (1) shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.] The figures "51" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 The figures "51" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 51C--> State(s): Karnataka Where appointment to any post in the University is made by promotion the authority empowered to make such appointment shall comply with the orders issued by the State Government from time to time for reservation of posts in promotional vacancies for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other socially and educationally backward class of citizens.]
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 52--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything in any contract, agreement or in any other law for the time being in force, the Chancellor may, for administrative reasons, transfer any person holding any post in the University to any other University established under this Act and the person so transferred shall carry with him to the University to which he is transferred such conditions of service as may be specified in the order of transfer. Such person shall on transfer, be deemed to be appointed by the competent authority of the other University. For purposes of ordering transfers under this section the Chancellor shall be deemed to be the appointing authority in respect of the posts held by the persons transferred.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 53--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Colleges within the University Area may, on satisfying the conditions specified in this section, be affiliated to the University as affiliated colleges 1 [by the University on the recommendations made by the State Government]. (2) A college applying for affiliation to the University shall send an application to the Registrar within the time limit fixed by Ordinances and shall satisfy the Syndicate and the Academic Council - (a) that it will supply a need in the locality, having regard to the type of education intended to be provided by the college, the existing provision for the same type of education made by other colleges in the neighbourhood and the suitability of the locality where the college is to be established; (b) that it is to be under the management of a regularly constituted governing body; (c) that the strength and qualifications of the teaching staff and the conditions governing their tenure of office are such as to make due provision for the courses of instruction, teaching or training to be undertaken by the college; (d) that the buildings in which the college is to be located are suitable and that provision will be made in conformity with the Ordinances for the residence in the college of in lodgings approved by the college, for students not residing with their parents or guardians and for the supervision and welfare of students; (e) that due provision has been made or will be made for a library; (f) where affiliation is sought in any branch of experimental science, that arrangements have been or will be made in conformity with the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations for imparting instruction in the branch of science in a properly equipped laboratory or museum; (g) that due provision will, as far as circumstances may permit, be made for the residence of the Principal and members of the teaching staff in or near the college or the place provided for the residence of students; (h) that the financial resources of the college are such as to make due provision for its continued maintenance and efficient working; and (i) that rules fixing the fees (if any) to be paid by the students have been framed or will be framed. (3) The application shall further contain an assurance that after the college is affiliated, any transference of management and all changes in the teaching staff and all other changes which result in any of the aforesaid requirements not being fulfilled or continued to be fulfilled shall be forthwith reported to the Syndicate and to the State Government or such authority as the State Government may specify. (4) On receipt of a letter of application under sub-section (2), the Syndicate shall - (a) direct a local inquiry to be made by a competent person or persons authorised by the Syndicate in this behalf in respect of such matters as may be deemed necessary and relevant; (b) make such further inquiry as may appear to it be necessary; and (c) record its opinion after consulting the Academic Council on the question whether the application should be granted or refused, either in whole or in part, stating the result of any inquiry under clauses (a) and (b). (5) 2 [The Registrar shall, within such time as the Government may from time to time specify] submit the application and all proceedings, if any, of the Academic Council and of the Syndicate relating thereto to the State Government which after such inquiry as may appear to it to be necessary 3 [shall make their recommendations for the grant of the application or any part thereof or refuse the application or any part thereof and the University shall issue orders accordingly]. (6) Where the application or any part thereof is granted, the 4 [order of the University] shall specify the courses of instruction in respect of which and the period for which the college is affiliated, and where the application or any part thereof is refused, 5 [by the State Government or the University] the grounds of such refusal shall be stated: 6 [Provided that on the 7 [recommendation of the State Government], permanent affiliation may be granted to a college which was affiliated continuously for a period not less than five years and fulfilled all the conditions of affiliation and attained the academic and administrative standards prescribed by the University from time to time.] (7) As soon as possible after the State Government 8 [or the University] makes its order, the Registrar shall submit to the Senate a full report regarding the application, the action taken thereon under sub-sections (4) and (6) and of all proceedings connected therewith. (8) An application under sub-section (1) may be withdrawn at any time before an order is made under sub-section (5). (9) Where a college desires to add to the courses of instruction in respect of which it is affiliated, the procedure prescribed by sub- sections (2) to (8) shall, so far as may be, followed: 9 [Provided however, that continuation of affiliation for existing courses of study and extension of affiliation for follow on courses may be granted by the Syndicate in consultation with the Academic Council.] 10 [(10)(a) No admission of students shall be made by a new college seeking affiliation to any University or by an existing college seeking affiliation to a new course of study to such course, unless, as the case may be, affiliation has been granted to such new college or to the existing college in respect of such course of study. (b) The maximum number of students to be admitted to a course of study shall not exceed the intake fixed by the University or the Government, as the case may be and any admission made after this section came into force in excess of the intake shall be invalid. (c) No student whose admission has become invalid under clause (b) shall be eligible to appear nor shall he be presented by the college to appear at any examination conducted by the University.] Substituted for the words "by the State Government" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "The Registrar shall" by Act No. 25 of 1980 Substituted for the words "shall grant or refuse the application or any part thereof" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "order of the State Government" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Proviso inserted by Act No. 24 of 1982 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 1-5-1982 Substituted for the words "recommendation of the University" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Proviso inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Sub-section (10) inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 54--> State(s): Karnataka (1) 1 [Any institution situated within or outside] the University Area other than a college which conducts research or specified studies, may be recognised by the Syndicate as a recognised institution for such purpose and in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (2) Any such recognition may be withdrawn either in whole or in part or modified in such manner and for such reasons as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Substituted for the words "Any institution in" by Act No. 9 of 1978 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 24-12-1977
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 55--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every affiliated college shall furnish to the Registrar such reports, returns and other information as the Syndicate after consulting the Academic Council may require to enable it to judge the efficiency of the college or institution. (2) The Syndicate shall cause every such college to be inspected from time to time by one or more competent persons authorised by it in this behalf. (3) Syndicate may call upon any college so inspected to take, within a specified period, such action as may appear to it to be necessary in respect of any of the matters referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 53.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 56--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The rights conferred on a college by affiliation may be withdrawn in whole or in part of modified if the college has failed to comply with any of the provisions 1 [x x x x] of Section 53 or the college has failed to observe any of the conditions of its affiliation or the college is conducted in a manner which is prejudicial to the interests of education. (2) A motion for the withdrawal or the modification of such rights shall be initiated only in the Syndicate. The member of the Syndicate who intends to move such a motion shall give notice of it and shall state in writing the grounds on which it is made. (3) Before taking the said motion into consideration, the Syndicate shall send a copy of the notice and written statement mentioned in sub-section (2) to the Principal of the college concerned together with an intimation that any representation in writing submitted within a period specified in such intimation on behalf of the college will be considered by the Syndicate: Provided that the period so specified may, if necessary, be extended by the Syndicate. (4) On receipt of the representation or on the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (3) the Syndicate after considering the notice of motion, statement and representation and after such inspection by any competent person or persons authorised by it in this behalf and such further inquiry as may appear to it to be necessary and after consulting the Academic Council shall make a report to the Senate. (5) On receipt of the report under sub-section (4) the Senate shall, after such further inquiry, if any, as may appear to it to be necessary record its opinion in the matter: Provided that no resolution of the Senate recommending the withdrawal of affiliation shall be deemed to have been passed by it unless the resolution has obtained the support of two-thirds of the members present at a meeting of the Senate, such majority comprising not less than one-half of the members of the Senate. (6) The Registrar shall submit the proposal and all proceedings, if any, of the Academic Council, the Syndicate and the Senate relating thereto, to the State Government which after such further inquiry, if any, as may appear to it to be necessary, 2 [shall make their recommendations to the University which shall thereafter make such order as it deems fit.] (7) Whereby an order made under sub-section (6), the rights conferred by affiliation are withdrawn in whole or in part or modified, the grounds for such withdrawal or modification shall be stated in the order. The words, brackets and figure "of sub-section (2)" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Substituted for the words "shall make such order as it deems fit" by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 56A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations made thereunder, the University may, with the prior concurrence of the State Government and the University Grants Commission, designate for such period as may be specified, an affiliated college, department or unit as an Autonomous College for any course of study, after following the procedure and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in the statutes made in this behalf and with a view to improve the quality of education and to introduce new and relevant courses of study. (2) Subject to statutes made in this behalf, an autonomous college so designated shall be entitled to design the courses of studies, devise appropriate teaching methods, devise methods of evaluation examination and tests pertaining to the award of the degree or diploma by the University and frame principles of admission of students. (3) Subject to such periodic review as may be prescribed in the Statutes, the University may, with the prior concurrence of the State Government, continue the designation of the autonomous college for such further period as may be specified or cancel such designation. (4) The Statutes for this purpose shall be made in consultation with the Academic Council of the University and shall provide for - (a) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an affiliated college, department or unit may be designated as an Autonomous College or the designation of such college may be cancelled; (b) matters incidental to the administration of an Autonomous College including the constitution or reconstitution, functions, powers and duties of the Governing body, Academic Council, Board of Studies and Board of Examiners of the Autonomous College; (c) matters relating to admission of students; (d) periodic review for continuance or cancellation of designation of Autonomous College; and (e) such other matters as may be relevant to the work of an Autonomous College including the matters mentioned in sub-section (2).] Section 56-A inserted by Act No. 10 of 1984, w.e.f. 12-4-1984
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 57--> State(s): Karnataka No student shall be eligible for admission to a course of study for a degree or diploma unless he possesses such qualifications as may be prescribed.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 58--> State(s): Karnataka Every student of the University shall reside in a hotel recognised by the University or under such conditions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 59--> State(s): Karnataka If not less than two-thirds of the members of the Syndicate recommend that a honorary degree or academic distinction be conferred on any person on the ground he is, in their opinion, by reason of eminent attainment and position, fit and proper receive such degree or academic distinction, the Syndicate may recommend the same for the approval of the Chancelor for conferment on the person concerned.] Section 59 substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 60--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Senate may on the recommendation of the Syndicate withdraw any distinction, degree, diploma or privilege conferred on or granted to any person by a resolution passed by a majority of the total membership of the Senate and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Senate present and voting at the meeting, if such person has been found convicted by a Court of law for an offence which, in the opinion of the Senate, involves moral turpitude or if he has been guilty of gross misconduct. (2) No action under this section shall be taken against any person unless he has been given an opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken. (3) A copy of the resolution passed by the Senate shall be immediately sent to the person concerned. (4) Any person aggrieved by the decision taken by the Senate may appeal to the Chancellor 1 [x x x x] within thirty days from the date of receipt of such resolution. (5) The decision of the Chancellor on such appeal shall be final. The words "through the State Government" omitted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 61--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Chancellor shall once at least in every five years constitute a Commission to review the working of the University and make recommendations. (2) The Commission shall consist of not less than three eminent educationists, one of whom shall be the Chairman, appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government. (3) The terms and conditions of appointment of the members shall be such as the Chancellor may, in consultation with the State Government, determine. (4) The Commission shall after holding such enquiry as it deems fit make its recommendations to the Chancellor through the State Government. (5) The Chancellor may, in consultation with the State Government, take such action on the recommendations as he deems fit. (6) The State Government shall lay a copy of the recommendations together with a memorandum indicating the action taken before both Houses of the State Legislature.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 61A--> State(s): Karnataka The Chancellor may, in consultation with the State Government, constitute a Planning Board consisting of not more than five eminent educationists to advise with regard to any matter connected with the development of the University and the standards of higher education and research. Every report of the Planning Board shall be placed before the Academic Council and the Senate for consideration and such action as deemed fit.] Section 61-A inserted by Act No. 10 of 1984, w.e.f. 12-4-1984
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 61B--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be an inter-University Board for the State of Karnataka, called the Karnataka State inter-University Board consisting of the following members - (a) Minister-in-charge of University Education; (b) Vice-Chancellors of Universities established under this Act; (c) Commissioner for Public Instructions; 2 [(cc) the Commissioner of Collegiate Education, Karnataka]. (d) Director of Collegiate Education; (e) Director of Technical Education; (f) Director of Medical Education; 3 [(g) The Director of Pre-University Education, Karnataka;] (h) Secretary to Government, Finance Department; (i) Secretary to Government, Education Department incharge of University Education. (2) The Minister-in-charge of University Education shall be the Chairman of the Board and shall preside over its meeting. (3) The Secretary to Government, Education Department in charge of University Education shall be the Member-Secretary of the Board. (4) The Board may meet as often as necessary but at least once in three months. The Board may invite such other persons as may be required to assist its deliberations. (5) The quorum for the meetings of the Board shall be five. (6) The functions of the Board shall include - (a) co-ordinating development of academic facilities, specialisations and standards; (b) co-ordinating matters affecting students such as eligibility for admissions, mobility, examinations, etc.; (c) studying the finances of Universities as well as the administrative problems of Universities; and (d) acting as a co-ordinating agency for the financial programme of the Universities funded by the University Grants Commission, and by the State Government respectively. (7) The Board would be advisory insofar as academic and financial matters are concerned. The recommendations on academic matters shall be placed before the concerned bodies of the University for their consideration. The recommendations on financial matters shall be placed before the concerned bodies of the University or the State Government, as the case may be, for consideration. (8) The Board shall review whether the orders issued by the State Government from time to time for reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes has been followed in the preparation of the list as required under sub-section (7) of Section 49 and sub-section (4) of Section 50 or in the appointments made under Section 49-A or have been complied with as required under Section 51-C and make a report in that regard. The report shall be placed before the concerned bodies of the University or the State Government.] Section 61-B inserted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986 Clause (cc) inserted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999 Clause (g) substituted by Act No. 20 of 1999, w.e.f. 3-8-1999
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 62--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The final authority responsible for maintenance of discipline among the students of the University shall be the Vice-Chancellor. His directions in that behalf shall be carried out by the heads of colleges hostels and other institutions. 1 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) - (a) the punishment of debarring a student from examinations shall, on the report of the Vice-Chancellor be considered and imposed by the Syndicate; and (b) the punishment of rustication from a college or a hostel or an institution shall be imposed by the head of the college or hostel or institution concerned.] Sub-section (2) substituted by Act No. 23 of 1986, w.e.f. 14-5-1986
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 63--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever in accordance with this Act or the Statutes any person is to hold an office or be a member of any Authority or body of the University according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined by the order in which the names are arranged in the seniority list pertaining to that cadre or class of posts.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 64--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding that the Senate, the Syndicate or the Academic Council or any other authority or body of the University is not duly constituted or there is a defect in its constitution or reconstitution at any time and notwithstanding that there is a vacancy in the membership of any such authority or body, no act or proceeding of such authority or body shall be invalidated merely on any such ground or grounds. (2) No resolution of any Authority or body of the University shall be deemed invalid on account of any irregularity in the service of notice upon any member provided that the proceedings of such authority or body were not prejudicially affected by such irregularity. Section 64 substituted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 65--> State(s): Karnataka This Act and any statute or Regulation or Ordinance made thereunder shall in respect of any college in the University Area have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment with respect to matters enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 66--> State(s): Karnataka No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against and no damages shall be claimed from, the University or its Authorities, bodies or officers for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this act, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations or Rules made thereunder.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 67--> State(s): Karnataka The relations of the affiliated colleges with the University shall be governed by the Statutes to be made in that behalf and such Statutes shall provide in particular for the exercise by the University of the following powers in respect of the college affiliated to the University - (1) to lay down minimum educational qualifications for the different classes of teachers and tutorial staff employed by such colleges; (2) to co-ordinate and regulate the facilities provided and expenditure incurred by such colleges in regard to libraries, laboratories and other equipments for teaching and research; (3) to regulate conditions of service of teachers of such colleges including the grant of leave with or without allowances and the constitution of pension insurance and provident funds for the benefit of such teachers; and (4) to require satisfactory arrangements for tutorial and similar other work in such colleges and to inspect such arrangements from time to time: Provided that such colleges shall supplement such teaching by tutorial or other institution or training in a manner to be prescribed by the Regulations to be made by the Academic Council.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 68--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette transfer to the University with effect from such date and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order, any of its colleges, any hostel or other building of such college and the articles of furniture, library, books laboratory, stores, instruments, apparatus, appliances and equipments of such college. Upon the publication of such order, the college shall become a college maintained and administered by the University as its college and the properties mentioned in the order shall become the properties of the University: Provided that until arrangements are made by the University, the State Government shall be and continue to be responsible for keeping the transferred building of the said college, including fixtures, fittings and connections in a proper state of repairs, as may from time to time be required by the University. (2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to authorities the University to sell, lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of any land or building transferred to the University under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (4) of Section 5. (3) Where any college has been transferred to the maintenance and control of the University by an order under sub-section (1), then, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act - (a) all members of the teaching staff and other servants of the State Government who, immediately before the date of the publication of the said order, were serving in or were attached to that college shall stand transferred to the appropriate cadre or category of posts in the University; (b) the University shall, consider in consultation with the State Government, the claims to appointment in the University of such teachers employed in any other educational institutions either within or without the territorial limits of the University as were in the service of the State Government immediately before the date of such transfer in vacancies which in the event of such vacancies being filled by appointment or promotion of the teachers in the University who were immediately before the date of such transfer in the service of the State Government, may involve the supersession of the claims of the teachers employed in the educational institutions referred to above.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 69--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever the University receives funds from State Government, University Grants Commission or other agencies sponsoring a scheme to be executed by the University, notwithstanding anything in this Act - (1) the amount received shall be kept by the University separately from the University Funds and utilised only for the purposes of the scheme; and (2) the staff required to execute the scheme shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisation.
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 70--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises with respect to the establishment of the University or in connection with the first meeting of any Authority of the University or otherwise in first giving effect to the provisions of this Act 1 [or the provisions of this Act as amended by the Amendment Act] 2 [or by the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987] or the Statutes the Chancellor may, at any time before all Authorities of the University have been constituted by order make any appointment or do anything consistent, so far as may be, with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, which appear to him necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty and every such order shall have effect as if such appointment or action had been made or taken in the manner provided in this Act: Provided that before making any such order the Chancellor shall ascertain and consider the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor and of such of the appropriate Authorities of the University as may have been constituted, on the proposed order. Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 71--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [(1)] Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Vice-Chancellor may, with the previous approval of the Chancellor and subject to the provision of funds by the State Government or otherwise, discharge all or any of the, functions of the University for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and for that purpose may exercise any powers or perform any duties which by this Act are to be exercised or performed by any Authority of the University until such Authority comes into existence as provided by this Act. 2 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act - (a) the first Vice-Chancellor of the Gulbarga University and the Mangalore University 3 [and the Kuvempu University] shall be appointed by the Chancellor in consultation with the State Government for a period of three years; (b) the first Registrar, Controller of Examinations, Finance Officer and Librarian of the Gulbarga University and the Mangalore University 4 [and the Kuvempu University] shall be appointed by the Chancellor on contract basis for a period not exceeding three years after ascertaining and considering the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor; (c) subject to clauses (d), (e) and (f); (i) appointment of Professors in the Gulbarga University and the Mangalore University shall, during the first three years after the commencement of the Amendment Act 5 [and such appointment in the Kuvempu University, during the first three years after the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987] be made by the Chancellor on contract basis in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor; (ii) appointment of other ministerial and non-ministerial staff shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor by appointing such of the persons in the office of the Special Officer as are willing to be so appointed and by deputation of officers of equivalent grade in the service of the Karnataka University or the Mysore University or by direct recruitment; Explanation -In this clause "Special Officer" means the officer appointed as officer on special duty in Government Order No. DPAR 51 SAS 80, dated 12th February, 1980. (d) every teacher and other employee - (i) of the Karnataka University and serving in or attached to the Postgraduate Centre at Gulbarga and at Nandihalli immediately before the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, shall, as from such date, stand transferred to the appropriate cadre or category of posts in the Gulbarga University; (ii) of the Mysore University and serving in or attached to the Postgraduate Centre at Konaje immediately before the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, shall, as from such date stand transferred to the appropriate cadre or category of posts in the Mangalore University: Provided that any teacher or other employee so transferred may, within ninety days or within such further period not exceeding six months as the State Government may by order direct, from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act apply to the Chancellor for retransfer to the University of which he was an employee prior to such transfer and the decision of the Chancellor thereon shall be final; 6 [(iii) Of the Mysore University and serving in or attached to the Postgraduate Centres at Bhadra Reservoir Project, Shimoga District and Davangere in Chitradurga District immediately before the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 shall, as from such date and transferred to the appropriate cadre or category of posts in Kuvempu University;] (e) any teacher or other employee of the Karnataka University or the Mysore University who desires to get transferred to the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University may, within ninety days or within such further period not exceeding six months as the State Government may by order direct, from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act apply to the Chancellor for such transfer and the decision of the Chancellor thereon shall be final; 7 [(ee) any teacher or other employee of the Mysore University who desire to get transferred to the Kuvempu University may within ninety days or within such further period not exceeding six months as the State Government may by order direct from the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 apply to the Chancellor for such transfer and the decision of the Chancellor thereon shall be final;] (f) the Chancellor may, in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor of the Karnataka University and the Mysore University determine the excess teaching, ministerial and other staff, if any, in these Universities and transfer the staff so in excess to the Gulbarga University 8 [or the Mangalore University or Kuvempu University], as the case may be, after following such principles and procedure as he may consider appropriate; (g) the financial estimates for the year 1980-81 in respect of the Gulbarga and the Mangalore Universities shall be determined by the State Government;] 9 [(h) the financial estimate for the year 1987-88 in respect of the Kuvempu University shall be determined by the State Government.] Section 71 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (2) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Item (iii) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Clause (ee) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Substituted for the words "or the Mangalore University" by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Clause (h) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 72--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Until Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules are made under the appropriate provisions of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and rules which were in force under the Bangalore University Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 26 of 1964), the Karnataka University Act, 1949 (Bombay Act 20 of 1949) and the Mysore University Act, 1956 (Mysore Act 23 of 1956), immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, subject to such adaptations or modifications as may be made therein by the Vice-Chancellor with the approval of the Chancellor obtained through the State Government, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules made under the appropriate provisions of this Act. (2) The person holding the office of the Vice-Chancellor of the Bangalore University, the Karnataka University or the Mysore University on the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to hold office till the date he would have held that office if this Act had not been passed. 1 [(3) The persons holding the office of the Librarian of the Bangalore University, Karnataka University and the Mysore University on the date of the commencement of this Act shall continue to hold office till the date they would have held that office if this Act had not been passed.] 2 [(4) Until Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules are made by the Gulbarga University and the Mangalore University, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules applicable to - (a) the Karnataka University as in force on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act shall be deemed to be the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules made under this Act by the Gulbarga University; (b) the Mysore University as in force on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act shall be deemed to be Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules made under this Act by the Mangalore University: Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may, with the approval of the Chancellor obtained through the State Government, make such modifications and adaptations therein as he may consider necessary.] 3 [(5) until Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules are made by the Kuvempu University, the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules applicable to the Mysore University as in force on the date of the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 shall be deemed to be the Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules made by the Kuvempu University under this Act: Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may with the approval of the Chancellor obtained through the State Government, make such modifications and adaptations therein as he may consider necessary.] Sub-section (3) inserted by Act No. 18 of 1977, w.e.f. 28-7-1977 Sub-section (4) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (5) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 73--> State(s): Karnataka The Vice-Chancellor shall take necessary action for elections being held, appointments, nomination and co-options being made under this Act so that the Senate, the Syndicate, the Academic Council and other authorities shall come into existence not later than 1 [twenty four months] from the appointed date 2 [and in the case of Universities established under sub-section (1-A) of Section 3 not later than one year from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act] 3 [and in the case of the University established under 4 [sub-section (1-B) of Section 3, not later than two years] from the date of commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987]. Substituted for the words "eighteen months" by Act No. 5 of 1977 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 4-3-1977 and Act No. 24 of 1982 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 1-5-1982 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987 Substituted for the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-section (1-B) of Section 3, not later than one year" by Act No. 7 of 1999 and shall be deemed to have been substituted w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 74--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [(1)] Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances or the Regulations - (a) any student who immediately prior to the commencement of this Act was studying for a degree of the Bangalore University, the Karnataka University or the Mysore University established under the Bangalore University Act, 1964, the Karnataka University Act, 1949 and the Mysore University Act, 1956, in accordance with the Regulations in force under those Acts, may until such examination is provided by the University, be admitted to the examinations of the Universities of Bangalore, Karnataka and Mysore established and incorporated under Section 3 and be conferred the degree of the latter Universities for which he qualifies on the result of such examination; (b) if the Bangalore University, the Karnataka University or the Mysore University established under the Bangalore University Act, 1964, the Karnataka University Act, 1949 and the Mysore University Act, 1956 has held any examination the result of which has been published but the degrees relating thereto have not been conferred or issued or the result of any such examination has not been published by the said University, then such examination shall be deemed to have been held by the Bangalore University, the Karnataka University or the Mysore University established and incorporated under Section 3. 2 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances, the Regulations, and the Rules, any student who immediately prior to the commencement of the Amendment Act was studying for a degree of the Karnataka University or the Mysore University in an educational institution situated within the territorial jurisdiction of the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, in accordance with the Regulations in force, may, until such examination is provided by the Gulbarga University or the Mangalore University, as the case may be, be admitted to the examination of the Karnataka University or the Mysore University, as the case may be, and be conferred the degree of the Karnataka University or the Mysore University, as the case may be, for which he qualifies on the results of such examination.] 3 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Statutes, the ordinances or the Regulations and the Rules, the student who immediately prior to the commencement of the Karnataka State Universities (Amendment) Act, 1987 was studying for a degree of the Mysore University in an educational institution situated within the territorial jurisdiction of the Kuvempu University in accordance with the Regulation in force, may until such examination is provided by the Kuvempu University, be admitted to the examination of the Mysore University and be conferred the degree of the Mysore University for which he qualifies on the results of such examinations.] Section 74 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (2) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1980 Sub-section (3) inserted by Act No. 25 of 1987, w.e.f. 29-6-1987
Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976_Section 75--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka State Universities Ordinance, 1975 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 12 of 1975) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal - (i) anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act; and (ii) the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) of Section 74 of the said Ordinance shall continue to have effect as if enacted in this Act. 
