Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958.1 2 Received the assent of the Governor on the Nineteenth day of December, 1958. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the heading to Section 3 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words "Deputy Commissioners of Commercial Taxes", the words "Commercial Tax Officers" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act - (1) in the proviso to sub-section (1), for the words "pulses and their products, sweet potatoes and turmeric", the words "pulses including their dhals, flour and husks, sweet potatoes, turmeric and turmeric powder" shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), a dealer registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, shall, whatever be the quantum of his total turnover, be liable to pay tax at the rate specified in this Act, on the sale of any goods in respect of which he has furnished a declaration under sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956"; (3) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) a tax under this Act shall be levied in respect of the sale or purchase of any of the declared goods mentioned in column (2) of the Fourth Schedule at the rate and only at the point specified in the corresponding entries of columns (4) and (3) of the said Schedule on the dealer liable to tax under this Act on his turnover of sales or purchases in each year relating to such goods: Provided that where tax has been paid in respect of the sale or purchase of any of the declared goods under this sub-section and such goods are subsequently sold in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, the tax paid under this Act shall be refunded to the dealer on production of proof that the subsequent sale has been subjected to the tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956: Provided further that in the case of a dealer who purchases goods mentioned in Serial Numbers 5(a) and 6 of the Fourth Schedule and who subsequently sends those goods outside the State without transfer of title in such goods to a dealer in another State for sale in that State, one-half of the tax paid under this Act shall be refunded to the dealer on production of proof that the goods have been so sent outside the State for sale in that State and that tax under the Sales Tax law of that State has been paid in respect of such sale by such dealer or the dealer in the other State: Provided also that for levy of tax on the sale of cottonseeds mentioned in Serial Number 5(c) of the Fourth Schedule, twenty per cent of the purchase price paid by the dealer concerned for the unginned cotton ginned by him on which tax is paid shall be deducted from the turnover of cottonseeds. Explanation - The expression "declared goods" means goods declared under Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956), to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce".. (4) in item (ii) of the explanation to sub-section (5), after the words "in the course of export", the words "out of the territory of India" shall be added.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, clauses (iv) and (v) of sub-section (1) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1) - (i) for the words "Every dealer whose total turnover in any year is not less than seven thousand and five hundred rupees shall, and any other dealer may", the words, figures and brackets, "Every dealer whose total turnover in any year is not less than seven thousand and five hundred rupees, and every dealer who is registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956), whatever be the quantum of his total turnover in any year, shall, and any other dealer may" shall be substituted; and (ii) after the words "as may be prescribed", the words "and different rates of fee may be prescribed for the registration of different classes of dealers" shall be added. (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "A dealer who has got himself registered", the words, figures and brackets "Except a dealer registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956), any dealer who has got himself registered" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In proviso (i) to Section 11 of the principal Act after the words "the agent shall be assessed to the tax or taxes leviable under this Act in respect of the transaction", the words "provided that the agent may voluntarily pay the tax or the taxes collected, as and when collected, to the State Government pending assessment of the tax payable by him" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "12-A. Assessment of escaped turnover - (1) Where for any reason the whole or any part of the turnover of a dealer has escaped assessment to tax or licence fee or has been assessed at a lower rate than the rate at which it is assessable, the assessing authority, Appellate Authority or the revising authority may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), at any time within a period of five years from the expiry of the year to which the tax or licence fee relates, assess to the best of its judgment, the tax or licence fee payable on the turnover referred to after issuing a notice to the dealer and after making such enquiry as it considers necessary. (2) In computing the period of limitation for assessment of the escaped turnover under this section, the time during which an assessment has been deferred on account of any stay order granted by any Court or other authority in any case, or by reason of the fact that an appeal or other proceeding is pending before the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court or the Supreme Court, shall be excluded: Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the revisional powers of the Deputy Commissioner and Commissioner under Section 21 of this Act".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 29 of the principal Act, at the end of clause (c), the word "or" shall be added and at the end of clause (d), the word "or" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 38 of the principal Act - (1) in clause (e) the words "and the period within which such assessment may be made not exceeding five years" shall be omitted; (2) after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(j-1) the fees payable for the grant of duplicate certificates of registration or licences or copies of such certificates and licences or of any other document".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 43 of the principal Act, for the word and figures "Section 41", the word and figures "Section 40" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka The First Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act - (1) for Serial Numbers 8 and 9, the following shall be substituted, namely - "8. All hosiery goods not made wholly of cotton except hosiery cloth in length Nine per cent 9. All hosiery goods made wholly of cotton except hosiery cloth is length Three per cent"; (2) in the third column of Serial Number 10, for the words, "five per cent", the words "seven per cent" shall be substituted; (3) in the second column of Serial Number 11, for the word "Druggets", the words "Druggets, durries and carpets" shall be substituted; (4) in the second column of Serial Number 14, for the words, "and cycle combination", the words "cycle combination and parts and accessories and tyres and tubes thereof" shall be substituted; (5) in the third column of Serial Number 18, for the words, "four per cent", the words "seven per cent" shall be substituted; (6) Serial Number 46 shall be omitted; (7) in the second column of Serial Number 47, for the words and figures "Groundnut oil other than groundnut oil falling under Item 28 of the Fifth Schedule", the words and figures "Groundnut oil, coconut oil, cottonseed oil, and all other edible oils other than such oils falling under Item 28 of the Fifth Schedule" shall be substituted; (8) in the second column of Serial Number 48, for the words, "bone, meal", the word "bone-meal" shall be substituted; (9) after Serial Number 51, the following serial numbers shall be added, namely - "52. Refrigerators, air-conditioning plants, component parts of refrigerators or air-conditioning plants Seven per cent 53. Wireless reception instruments and apparatus and component parts thereof including all electrical valves, accumulators, amplifiers and loudspeakers which are not specially designed for purposes other than wireless reception Seven per cent 54. Radio-gramophones including component parts of radio-gramophones Seven per cent 55. Cinematographic, photographic and other cameras, projectors and enlargers, lenses and other parts of and accessories to such cameras, projectors and enlargers and films, plates, paper and cloth required for use therewith Seven per cent 56. Binoculars, opera glasses and telescopes Seven per cent 57. Gramophones of every description (other than radio-gramophonese, records and needles, including accessories and spare parts thereof Seven per cent 58. Upholstered furniture, tubular, iron and steel furniture of every description including safes and treasure chests Seven per cent 59. Cigar and cigarette cases, lighters and holders of cigars and cigarettes Seven per cent 60. Playing cards of every description Seven per cent 61. All electrical goods, instruments, apparatus and appliances including fans and lighting bulbs, electrical earthenware and porcelain and all other accessories Four per cent 62. Any pen, pencil; or pen and pencil set, sold for ten rupees or more Five per cent 63. All clocks, timepieces and watches and parts thereof Seven per cent 64. Precious stones, namely, diamonds, emeralds, rubies, real pearls, sapphires, whether they are sold loose or as forming part of anything in which they are set Five per cent 65. Toilet articles, except such toilet articles as may be specified by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette Five per cent 66. Fireworks Six per cent 67. Furs and skins (other than those of cattle, sheep and goats) and articles of personal or domestic use made therefrom Nine per cent 68. Stainless steel sheets and articles made of stainless steel other than such articles as are used as parts of industrial machinery or plant Four per cent 69. Leather goods of all kinds other than Footwear and goods falling under Item 28 of the Fifth Schedule Five per cent 70. Motor vehicles including motor cars, motor taxi cabs, motor cycles and cycle combinations, motor scooters, motorettes, motor omnibuses, motor vans and motor lorries Seven per cent 71. Chassis of motor vehicles Seven per cent 72. Component parts of motor vehicles Seven per cent 73. Articles (including rubber and other tyres and tubes and batteries) adapted for use as parts and accessories of motor vehicles, not being such articles as are ordinarily also used for purposes other than as parts or accessories of motor vehicles Seven per cent 74. Bullion and Specie One half per cent 75. Tarpaulins and water-proof cloth not manufactured in mills or power-loom factories Three per cent"; (10) after Explanation III, the following explanation shall be added, namely - "Explanation IV - "Toilet article" means any article which is intended for use in the toilet of the human body or in perfuming apparel of any description, or any substance intended to cleanse, improve or alter the complexion, skin, hair or teeth and includes deodorants and perfumes".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act - (1) Serial Number 1 shall be omitted; (2) for Serial Number 2, the following shall be substituted; namely - "2. Tarwar, Tangadi, Kakke and other tanning barks, Alalekai (Myrobolan), Halmaddi, Antwala and Seegekai (Soapnut) Purchase by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent"; (3) at the end of the Schedule the following explanation shall be inserted, namely - "Explanation -Where a tax has been levied in respect of cashew under Item 11, the kernel pressed out of the said cashew shall not be liable to tax under this Act".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka For the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely - "Fourth Schedule Declared goods in respect of which a single point tax is leviable under Section 5(4) SI. No. Description of the goods Point of levy Rate of tax (1) (2) (3) (4) 1. Coal including coke in all its forms Sale by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent 2. Iron and Steel, that is to say -  (a) pig iron and iron scrap;  (b) iron plates sold in the same form in which they are directly produced by the rolling mill;  (c) steel scrap, steel ingots, steel billets, steel bars and rods; Sale by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent (d) (i) steel plates (ii) steel sheets (iii) steel bars and tin bars (iv) rolled steel section (v) tool alloy steel Sold in the same form in which they are directly produced by the rolling mill 3. Hides and skins, whether in a raw or dressed state Purchase by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent 4. Jute, that is to say, the fibre extracted from plants belonging to the species corchorus capsularies and corchorus olitorious and the fibre known as mesta or bimili extracted from plants of the species hibiscus cannapinus and hibiscus sabdariffavar altissima, whether baled or otherwise Sale by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act. Two per cent 5. (a) Groundnut including groundnut seed Purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent (b) Coconut and copra Purchase by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent (c) Cottonseed Sale by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act One per cent (d) Other oil-seeds, that is to say, seeds [other than those mentioned in sub-items (a), (b) and (c)] yielding non-volatile oils used for human consumption, or in industry, or in the manufacture of varnishes, soaps and the like, or in lubrication, and volatile oils used chiefly in medicines, perfumes, cosmetics and the like Purchase by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Two per cent 6. Cotton, that is to say, all kinds of cotton (indigenous or imported) in its unmanufactured state, whether ginned, baled, pressed or otherwise, but not including cotton waste Purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax under this Act One per cent 7. Cotton yam, but not including cotton yarn waste Sale by the first or earliest of successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act Three-fourths per cent"
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act - (1) after Serial Number 5, the following entry shall be inserted, namely - "5-A. Fresh fruits"; Note - No tax shall also be payable under the principal Act in respect of the sale of fresh fruits sold on or after the first day of April, 1958 and before the date of commencement of this Act: Provided that every dealer who has collected any amount by way of tax under Section 18 of the principal Act in respect of the sale of fresh fruits during the said period shall be liable to pay the amount so collected to the State Government as tax under the principal Act whatever his total turnover during the year relating to such fruits may be. (3) for the entry relating to Serial Number 8-A, the following entry shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1958, namely - "8-A. All varieties of textiles, namely, cotton, woollen or silken including rayon, art silk or nylon whether manufactured in mills or powerlooms including hosiery cloth in lengths, but exclusive of pure silk"; (4) in the entry relating to Serial Number 9, for the words "All India Spinners Association", the words "Khadi and Village Industries Commission" shall be substituted; (5) in the entry relating to Serial Number 27, for the words "Khadi and Village Industries Board", the words "Karnataka Khadi and Village Industries Board or the Khadi and Village Industries Commission" shall be substituted; (6) after Serial Number 31, the following entries shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the first day of April, 1958, namely - "31-A. Tobacco and all its products. 31-B. Sugar other than sugarcandy, confectionery and the like"; (7) after Serial Number 33, and before the explanations, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "34. (i) Canteen stores sold to the Canteen Stores Department of the Government of India and such stores sold by the said Department to the Regimental or Unit-run Canteens in the State; (ii) Canteen stores sold by the Regimental or Unit-run Canteens to the Armed Forces in the State, provided the canteen stores are those obtained from the Canteen Stores Department of the Government of India and the sale price does not exceed the sale price fixed by the Government of India. 35. Books meant for reading".
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act as amended by the Karnataka Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 9 of 1958), the sale from the 14th day of December, 1957 of cloth woven on handlooms, shall be deemed to have been exempt from taxation under the principal Act.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1958_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka The rules made under Section 38 of the principal Act with retrospective effect from first October, 1957, shall be deemed to have been validly made. 
