Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette appoint. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-eighth day of September, 1962
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the words "by or under this Act", the words "or by or under any other law for the time being in force" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the principal Act, after the words "by or under this Act", the words "or by or under any other law for the time being in force" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1) - (a) in the proviso, after the word "Provided", the word "further", shall be inserted, and the words "or to articles made of gold or silver" shall be omitted; and (b) before the proviso as amended by sub-clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided that if and when to the extent to which such turnover relates to articles made of gold or silver, the tax shall be calculated at the rate of one and a half per cent of such turnover"; (2) in sub-section (4), the third and fourth provisos shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (2), for the words "licence fee may be computed", the words "licence fee shall be computed" shall be substituted, and the proviso shall be omitted; (2) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be added, namely - "(3) On every one thousand rupees or part thereof of the total turnover of a dealer the rate of licence fee payable under sub-section (2), shall, (a) in respect of the sale of the goods specified in clause (ii) of sub-section (1), be two rupees; and (b) in respect of the sale of the goods specified in clause (iii) of sub-section (1), be five rupees: Provided that the licence fee shall in no case exceed- (i) two thousand and five hundred rupees in the case of a dealer liiable to pay licence fee under clause (a); and (ii) eight thousand rupees in the case of a dealer liable to pay licence fee under clause (b)."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After sub-section (2) of Section 43 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be and shall always be deemed to have been inserted, namely - "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where in respect of the sale or purchase of any goods, the rate of tax (hereinafter referred to as the original rate) is revised, or no tax is payable, from any date during any year, the turnover of a dealer or other person during the period up to that date in that year shall be liable to tax at the original rate, and his turnover during the period from that date till the end of that year shall be liable to tax at the revised rate, or shall not be liable to tax, as the case may be."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act - (1) in the third column of Serial Number 14, for the words "Four per cent", the words "Five per cent" shall be substituted; (2) in the third column of Serial Number 16, for the words "Six per cent", the words "Ten per cent" shall be substituted; (3) in the third column of Serial Number 23, for the words "Six per cent", the words "Eight per cent" shall be substituted; (4) for the entry relating to Serial Number 24, the following entry shall be substituted, namely - "24. All kinds of mill yarn (other than cotton yarn and sewing thread and filature silk) - One per cent"; (5) in the third column of Serial Number 25, for the words "Three-fourths per cent", the words "One and a half per cent" shall be substituted; (6) in the third column of Serial Number 35, for the words "Five per cent", the words "Six per cent" shall be substituted; (7) in the third column of Serial Number 36, for the words "Five per cent", the words "Six per cent" shall be substituted; (8) Serial Number 45 shall be omitted; (9) in the third column of Serial Number 48, for the words "One per cent", the words "One and a half per cent" shall be substituted; (10) in the third column of Serial Number 61, for the words "Four per cent", the words "Six per cent" shall be substituted; (11) in the third column of Serial Number 65, for the words "Five per cent", the words "Eight per cent" shall be substituted; (12) in the third column of Serial Number 66, for the words "Six per cent", the words "Eight per cent" shall be substituted; (13) after the entry relating to Serial Number 75, the following entries shall be added, namely - "76. Aerated waters Three per cent 77. Mosaic tiles and chips Four per cent 78. Cement and Asbestos sheets, hard boards, plywood and the like Three per cent 79. Heavy chemicals (such as Sulphuric Acid, Hydrochloric Acid, Caustic Soda, etc.) Three per cent 80. Chicory Five per cent 81. Chillies Two per cent."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act - (i) in the fourth column of Serial Number 4, for the words "One per cent", the words "Three per cent" shall be substituted; (ii) the entry relating to Serial Number 5 shall be omitted; (iii) after the entry relating to Serial Number 13, the following entries shall be added, namely - "14. Tamarind seeds Purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax under this Act Three per cent."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In the fourth column of Serial Number 7 of the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, for the words "Three-fourths per cent", the words "One per cent" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act - (i) for the entry relating to Serial Number 5, the following entry shall be substituted, namely - "5. Vegetables and vegetable seeds including onion seeds but excluding potatoes, sweet potatoes, dried vegetables and dehydrated vegetables"; (ii) after the entry relating to Serial Number 35, the following entries shall be added, namely - "36. Goods sold to the World Health Organisation and to the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund for their official use. 37. Plantain leaves. 38. Carpets woven on handlooms when sold at a price not exceeding rupees fifteen per piece. 39. Educational films certified as such by the Commissioner." 
