Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957). Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1969.1 2 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-fourth day of September, 1969
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 28-A of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), after sub-section (3), the following explanation and sub-sections shall be inserted, namely - "Explanation - For purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the officer-in-charge of check-post or barrier shall be an officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commercial Tax Officer and not higher in rank than an Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes. (4) The officer-in-charge of a check-post or barrier or any other officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commercial Tax Officer and not higher in rank than an Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes may, in respect of any contravention of or non-compliance with the provisions of sub-section (2) or (3) and for which sufficient cause is not furnished, levy a penalty not exceeding the limits specified in sub-section (5). The aforesaid officer may also levy penalty where the declaration made under sub-section (2) is false in respect of the materials furnished therein or where the particulars furnished in the records do not tally with the goods actually being transported or are found to be not relating to such goods: Provided that before levying any penalty under this sub-section, the officer shall give the person in charge of the goods vehicle or boat a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (5) The penalty leviable under sub-section (4) shall not exceed - (a) in the case of goods specified in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule, the amount of tax leviable in-respect of the goods under transport; and (b) in the case of any other goods, double the amount of tax leviable in respect of the goods under transport: Provided that in the case of goods - (i) not liable to tax under this Act, or (ii) referred to in clause (a), if their owner or the person in-charge of the goods vehicle or boat produces proof to show that the goods in question have already suffered the single point tax under this Act, no penalty shall be leviable. (6) Where the penalty levied is not paid, the officer levying the penalty shall have power to take possession of so much of the goods as in his opinion would be sufficient to meet the amount of penalty levied and retain the same with him until the penalty in paid for ten days, whichever is earlier. After the expiry of the period of ten days if the penalty is not paid, the officer shall dispose of the goods in. public auction and adjust the sale proceeds towards the penalty. If the sale proceeds are more than the penalty, the excess amount shall, after deducting the charges incurred by the State, be refunded in the manner prescribed: Provided that in the case of perishable goods, the officer may dispose of the same before the expiry of the period of ten days if in his opinion such disposal is necessary. (7) (a) The person aggrieved by the levy of penalty under this section may, in cases not covered by Section 20, appeal - (i) to the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes of the area, if the levy is made by an Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes; and (ii) in other cases to the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes of the area concerned. (b) Such appeal shall be dealt with as if it were an appeal filed under Section 20 and the provisions of that section shall apply to such appeal accordingly."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 28-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "28-C. Submission of certain records, by owners, etc., of goods vehicles and boats - The owner or other person in charge of a goods vehicle or boat shall in respect of the goods under transport submit to the Commercial Tax Officer having jurisdiction over the area in which the goods are delivered, the documents referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 28-A, or copies thereof within such time as may be prescribed." 
