Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 2 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), - (1) in clause (c), after the words "include tea", the following words shall be inserted, namely :- "and such produce as has been subject to any physical, chemical or other process for being made fit for consumption, save mere cleaning, grading, sorting, or drying."; (2) clause (m1) shall be renumbered as clause (m2) and before the clause (m2) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(m1) "goods vehicle" means any kind of vehicle used for carriage of goods either solely or in addition to passengers (other than aeroplanes and rail coaches) and includes push cart, animal drawn cart, tractor-trailer and the like."; (3) in clause (t), - (i) after Explanation (3), the following Explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :- "Explanation (3-A). - Every transaction of supply by way of or as a part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the supply and purchase of these goods by the person to whom such supply is made."; (ii) Explanation (5) shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (4) in clause (v), - (a) after the words "valuable consideration", the following words shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided that the proceeds of the sale by a person of agricultural or horticultural produce grown within the State by himself or on any land in which he has an interest whether as owner, usufructuary mortgagee, tenant or otherwise, shall be excluded from his turnover."; (b) item (iii) of the explanation shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 5A of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (2), clause (ii) shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (2) in explanation (1), - (a) after the word "include", the words "wood, bamboo and timber and" shall be inserted; (b) the words "or goods of any other nature" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6A of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(3) Where a dealer knowingly issues or produces a false bill, voucher, declaration, certificate or other document with a view to support or make any claim that a transaction of sale or purchase effected by him or any other dealer, is not liable to be taxed, the assessing authority shall, on detecting such issue or production, direct the dealer issuing or producing such document to pay as penalty, - (i) in the case of first such detection, three times the tax due in respect of such transaction; and (ii) in the case of second or subsequent detection, five times the tax due in respect of such transaction : Provided that before issuing any direction for the payment of the penalty under this section, the assessing authority shall give to the dealer an opportunity of making representation against the levy of such penalty."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 6B of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the first proviso, after clause (vii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely : "(viii) turnover relating to sales of agricultural produce by a commission agent or broker on behalf of principals who are agriculturists."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of April, 1976, namely :- "(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any State Government or the Central Government."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10A of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(5) A certificate issued under sub-section (2) shall be renewed from year to year on payment of the fee specified in sub-section (1) until it is cancelled."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka For section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "11. Agents liable to pay tax - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force including this Act, every person who for an agreed commission or brokerage buys or sells on behalf of any principal who is an resident of the State of Karnataka shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 5 or section 6B be assessed to tax or taxes under this Act at the rate or rates leviable thereunder in respect of such purchase or sale notwithstanding that such principal is not a dealer or that the turnover of sale or purchase relating to such principal is less than the minimum specified in sub-section (5) of section 5 or section 6B : Provided that the principal, shall not be assessed to tax on his turnover in respect of which, the agent is liable to tax or taxes under sub-section (1) and the burden of proving that the turnover has been effected through an agent liable to tax under the said sub-section, shall be on such principal. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in respect of goods taxable at the point of purchase by the last dealer in the State liable to tax under this Act, the agent (other than the agent of a non-resident principal) purchasing such goods shall not be assessed to tax but the principal who has effected such purchases through the agent shall be assessed to tax as if he is the last dealer in the State. (3) Without prejudice to his other rights, the agent who is assessed under sub-section (1), may retain out of the moneys payable to his principal other than a principal who is an agriculturist a sum equal to the amount of tax assessed on or paid by the agent."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In section 12B of the principal Act, the words "sub-section (3) of" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "the tax", the words "or any other amount due" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In section 15 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :- "(2A) Where any firm is liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount under this Act, the firm and each of the partners of the firm shall be jointly and severally liable for such payment. (2B) Where a partner of a firm liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount under this Act retires, he shall, notwithstanding any contract, to the contrary, be liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount remaining unpaid at the time of his retirement and any tax or penalty or any other amount due up to the date of retirement, though unassessed."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In section 17 of the principal Act, in the Table below clause (i) of sub-section (4), after serial number 7, the following serial numbers and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "8. Where the total turnover is not Nine thousand nine hundred less than tow lakh fifty rupees. thousand rupees but less than three lakh fifty thousand rupees. 9.Where the total turnover is not Fourteen thousand four less than three lakh fifty hundred rupees. thousand rupees but less than four lakh fifty thousand rupees. 10.Where the total turnover is not Twenty thousand one less than four lakh fifty hundred rupees. thousand rupees but less than five lakh fifty thousand rupees. 11. Where the total turnover is not Twenty seven thousand less than five lakh fifty three hundred rupees. thousand rupees but less than six lakh fifty thousand rupees. 12. Where the total turnover is not Thirty five thousand less than six lakh fifty four hundred rupees." thousand rupees but less than seven lakh fifty thousand rupees.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In section 18A of the principal Act, the first proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In section 27 of the principal Act, - (1) in the heading, after the word "issue" the words "and obtain" shall be inserted; (2) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(1A) Every dealer who purchases goods from another dealer shall obtain a bill or cash memorandum in respect of a transaction whose total value exceeds ten rupees in each case."; (3) in sub-section (2) after the words "sub-section (1)", the words, "or sub-section (1A)" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In section 28A of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (2), after the words "a delivery note", the words, "obtained from the prescribed authority" shall be inserted; (2) in the explanation appearing after sub-section (3), after the words "Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes", the words "and any other officer not below the rank of a Commercial Tax Inspector as may be empowered by the Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In section 38 of the principal Act, after clause (b) of sub-section (2), the following clause shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of April, 1976, namely :- "(b1) the procedure for assessment of Central and State Government Departments."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, - (1)(a) after the entries relating to serial number 20, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 15th day of March, 1980, namely :- "20-A (i) Power-tillers Five per cent (ii) Parts and accessories of Ten per cent." power-tillers (b) in the entries relating to item (i) of serial number 20A, in column 3, for the words "five per cent", the words "six per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 1st day of October, 1982; (2) in the entries relating to serial number 23, for the entries in column 2, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely :- "Rail coaches and aeroplanes, helicopters, jet planes, gliders and all other types of flying machines (other than balloons), and parts and accessories thereof."; (3)(a) in the entries relating to serial number 43, in column 2, for the words "including french coffee but not including coffee drink", the words "excluding coffee drink" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from fifteenth day of November, 1979; (b) in the entries relating to serial number 43, in column 2, for the words "excluding coffee drink", the words "including french coffee but not including coffee drink" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from fifth day of October, 1982; (4)(a) after the entries relating to serial number 43, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from fifteenth day of November, 1979, namely :- "43A. French coffee (on the turnover relating Ten per cent."; to components thereof, viz., coffee and chicory which have not already suffered tax). (b) the entries relating to serial number 43A so inserted shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from fifth day of October, 1982; (5) for the entries relating to serial number 48, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from first day of April, 1974, namely :- "48. Bone meal and Oilcake Three per cent."; (6)(a) after the entries relating to serial number 48, as so substituted, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from first day of April, 1974, namely :- "48A. (i) Chemical fertilisers other than Three per cent. those falling under sub-item (ii) (ii) Chemical fertilser mixtures of Three per cent."; two or more chemical fertilisers on the turnover relating to components thereof viz., individual chemical fertilisers which have not already suffered tax. (b) in the entries relating to serial number 48A as so inserted, in column 3, for the words "Three per cent", in the two places, where they occur, the words "Two per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from first day of August, 1980; (7) serial number 86 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (8) for the entries relating to serial number 122, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "122. Articles made of brass, copper and Eight per cent."; bronze, other than those falling under any of the entries in this Schedule. (9) in the entries relating to serial number 124-A, in column 2, the words "power-tillers" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (10) in the entries relating to serial number 146 as it stood prior to the first day of April, 1983, for the words "four per cent" the words "three per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from twenty-ninth day of March, 1981, and for the words "three per cent" as so substituted, the words "two per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from first day of October, 1981 : (11) after the entries relating to serial number 149, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "150. All kinds of padlocks and locks Eight per cent."
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, after the entries relating to serial number 4a, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "4b. Arecanut Purchase by the first or earliest Five per cent." of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) in the entries relating to serial number 5(a), in column 2, for the words "Groundnut including groundnut seeds" the words "Groundnut or peanut including groundnut or peanut seeds" shall be substituted; (2) in the entries relating to serial number 5(b), in column 2, the words "peanuts, coconuts (i.e., copra, excluding tender coconuts)" shall be omitted; (3) after the entries relating to serial number 5(d), the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "5(e) Coconuts (i.e. copra excluding tender coconuts) - (i) Purchased within Purchase by the first Three per cent. Karnataka or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act. (ii) Obtained from Sale by the first Three per cent." outside Karnataka or earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act.
Karnataka Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In the Fifth Schedule to the principal Act, - (1)(a) after the entries relating to serial number 30 the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of July, 1972, namely :- "30A. Cashew shell oil"; (b) the entries relating to serial number 30A so inserted, shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 29th day of March, 1981; (2)(a) after the entries relating to serial number 42A, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from 1st day of April, 1982, namely :- "42B. Student note books, exercise books, copy books, outline maps, pencils, erasers, instrument box, dissection box, T-squares and drawing boards, provided that the price of such goods does not exceed Rs. 50". (b) the entries relating to serial number 42B so inserted, shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 1st day of September, 1982. 
