Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1979) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 19841 2 . (2) It shall come into force at once. First published in the Karnataka Gazette Extraordinary on the Third day of March, 1984, Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-ninth day of February, 1984 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands). Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in sub-section (2) for the words "any order passed", the words "subject to the orders of the Deputy Commissioner under Section 5-A, any order passed" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 5 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely:- "5-A. Appeal to the Deputy Commissioner - (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed after the commencement of the Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984 by the Assistant Commissioner to take possession of land under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 or to restore the land under clause (b) of the said sub-section may prefer an appeal to the Deputy Commissioner having jurisdiction within a period of three months from the date on which the order was communicated to him: Provided that the Deputy Commissioner may admit an appeal preferred against such order after the period referred to in sub-section (1) if satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period: Provided further that the Deputy Commissioner shall admit an appeal against an order passed by the Assistant Commissioner before the date of such commencement if, on the said date, a writ petition preferred against such order or an appeal preferred against the order passed in such writ petition is pending in any Court. (2) The Deputy Commissioner shall dispose of the appeal in the prescribed manner and the order passed by him shall be final." 
