Karnataka Sales Tax and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 1998_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax and certain other law. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), and the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Sales Tax and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Sales Tax and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 19981 . (2) Provisions of sub-sections (1) and (4) of Section 2 and of Section 3 shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the First day of April, 1998 and the remaining provisions shall come into force at once. (First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Twenty-eighth day of May, 1998)(Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-seventh day of May, 1998)
Karnataka Sales Tax and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) - (1) in Section 19-AA, in sub-section (1), after clause (a) the following shall be inserted, namely - (aa) no such deduction shall be made by any industrial, commercial or trading undertaking of the Government of Karnataka, as may be notified by the Commissioner from time to time; or (2) in Section 30, in sub-section (1), for the word Commissioner the words Joint Commissioner shall be substituted; (3) In Section 31, in sub-section (1) - (i) in clause (a) - (a) for the letter and brackets (d) the letter and brackets (c) shall be substituted; (b) for the letter and brackets (c) the letter and brackets (e) shall be substituted; (c) for the words one thousand the words five thousand shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (aa) - (a) for the words one thousand the words five thousand shall be substituted; (b) for the words five thousand the words ten thousand shall be substituted; (iii) in clause (b), for the words two thousand the words ten thousand shall be substituted; (4) in the Fourth Schedule, for the entries relating to serial number 6, in Column 3, the following shall be substituted, namely - Purchase by the first or the earliest of the successive dealers in the State liable to tax under this Act.
Karnataka Sales Tax and Certain Other Law (Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958), in Section 4, for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely - (1) In the case of cinematograph shows, in addition to the tax leviable under Section 3 or the tax leviable under Section 4-A, there shall be levied and paid to the State Government a tax calculated at the following rates, namely - Table SI. No. Payment for admission (excluding entertainment tax) of a person to the highest class of seat or accommodation Rate of tax per show a. does not exceed five rupees One hundred rupees b. exceeds five rupees but does not exceed fifteen rupees One hundred and twenty-five rupees c. exceeds fifteen rupees but does not exceed twenty rupees One hundred and fifty rupees d. exceeds twenty rupees Two hundred and fifty rupees Provided that in the case of a cinematograph show of Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film, in addition to tax leviable under Section 3, the tax payable under this sub-section shall be at the following rates, namely - SI. No Payment for admission (excluding entertainment tax) of a person to the highest class of seat or accommodation Rate of tax per show a. does not exceed five rupees Fifty rupees b. exceeds five rupees but does not exceed fifteen rupees Seventy rupees c. exceeds fifteen rupees but does not exceed twenty rupees Ninety rupees d. exceeds twenty rupees One hundred and ten rupees. Provided further that in respect of cinema theatres paying tax in the manner specified in Section 4-A, the tax under this section shall be paid at the following rates, namely - Sl. No. Total payment for admission of a person to the highest class of seat or accommodation Rate of tax per show (a) does not exceed eight rupees Eighty rupees (b) exceeds eight rupees but does not exceed fifteen rupees Ninety rupees (c) exceeds fifteen rupees One hundred rupees. Provided also that in respect of cinema theatres paying tax in the manner specified in Section 4-A, the tax payable under this sub-section in respect of cinematograph show of a Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film shall be at the following rates, namely - Sl. No. Total payment for admission of a person to the highest class of seat or accommodation Rate of tax per show (a) does not exceed eight rupees Twenty-five rupees (b) exceeds eight rupees but does not exceed fifteen rupees Fifty rupees (c) exceeds fifteen rupees Seventy-five rupees 
