Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments, etc.) (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments Etc.) Act, 1990. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments Etc.) Act, 1990 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1991), for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-eighth Year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments, etc.) (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments, etc.) (Amendment) Act, 1997.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-ninth day of September, 1997
Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments, etc.) (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After section 4 of the Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation Appointments, etc.) Act, 1990 (Karnataka Act 7 of 1991) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be inserted, namely - "4-A. Issue of Caste Certificate and Income and Caste Certificate -(1) Any candidate or his parent or guardian belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes may, in order to claim benefit of reservation under Section 4, either for appointment to any service or post or for admission to a course of study in a University or any educational institution make an application to the Tahsildar in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed for issue of a Caste Certificate. (2) Any candidate or his parent or guardian belonging to Other Backward Classes may, in order to claim benefit of reservation under Section 4, either for appointment to any service or post or for admission to a course of study in University or any Educational Institution, make an application to the Tahsildar in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed for issue of an Income and Caste Certificate. (3) The Tahsildar may on receipt of an application under sub-section (1) or(2), and after holding such enquiry as he deems fit and satisfying himself regarding the genuineness of the claim made by the applicant pass an order issuing a caste certificate or, as the case may be, an income and caste certificate in such form as may be prescribed, or rejecting the application. (4) The Tahsildar shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed before passing the order under sub-section (3). (5) The burden of proving that the candidate or his parent or guardian belongs to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes shall be on the applicant. 4-B. Appeal against order under Section 4-A -(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Tahsildar under Section 4-A may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to Assistant Commissioner of the Revenue sub-division. (2) The Assistant Commissioner of the Revenue sub-division may after giving both parties an opportunity of being heard pass orders allowing or dismissing the appeal and in appropriate cases directing issue of a caste certificate, or as the case may be, an income and caste certificate to the applicant. 4-C. Verification of Caste Certificate and Income and Caste Certificate -(1) The State Government shall constituted one or more verification committees for each district consisting of such person or persons as may be prescribed for verification of caste certificate and income and caste certificate issued under Section 4-A or Section 4-B. (2) Any person who has obtained a caste certificate or an income and caste certificate under Section 4-A or 4-B or the Appointing Authority or any authority making admission to a course of study in the University or any Educational Institution may make an application to the verification committee in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed for issue of a validity certificate. (3) The verification committee may after holding such enquiry as it deems fit within thirty days from the date of the application either grant a validity certificate in a prescribed from or reject the application. 4-D. Appeal -(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the verification committee under Section 4-C may within thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, appeal to the Divisional Commissioner of the concerned revenue division, in such form and in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed. (2) The Divisional Commissioner shall after giving to both parties an opportunity of being heard pass such order in appeal as he deems fit."
Karnataka Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes (Reservation of Appointments, etc.) (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka The Verification Committee constituted by or under the principal Act shall be deemed to have been constituted under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, and shall continue to exercise its powers till a new committee is constituted in its place. 
