Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1959. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 19691 2 . (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification in the official Gazette appoint. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Eighteenth day of October, 1969, Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixteenth day of October, 1969 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as the " principal Act"), for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely - "(e) "Licensing Authority" means the Director of Sericulture in Karnataka and includes such other officers as the Government may by notification appoint for such areas and for such purposes as may be specified in the notification."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(1) No person shall engage in the rearing of silkworms for the production of silkworm cocoons except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this Act."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, the words "for reeling or for reproduction" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "7. Regulation of sale or purchase of silkworm cocoons for reeling - (1) In any area in which a cocoon market is established under this Act - (a) no rearer shall sell or agree to sell; and (b) no person shall purchase or agree to purchase, silkworm cocoons except in such cocoon market and except in accordance with such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) After a cocoon market is established for any area, no person shall except in such cocoon market, use or permit the use of assist in the use, of, any building, room, tent, enclosure, vehicle, vessel or place in such area for the sale or purchase of silkworm cocoons or in any manner aid or abet the sale or purchase of silkworm cocoons."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 11 of the principal Act - (i) in clause (c), the words, figures and letters "between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m." shall omitted; (ii) in clause (d), for the words "silkworm or silkworm seed" in the three places where they occur, the words "silkworm, silkworm seed or silkworm cocoon" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "one hundred rupees", the words "two hundred rupees" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "Section 6 or 7 or any other provision of this Act or any rule, order or notification made thereunder", the words, figures, brackets and letters, "Section 6 or clause (a) of subsection (1) of Section 7" shall be substituted; (3) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) Any person who contravenes the provisionss clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 7 or sub-section (2) of that section shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both"; (4) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - "(3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of Section 8 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees"; (5) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figures "sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)", the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-sections (1), (2), (2-A) and (3)" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "12-A. Abetment - Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall be punished with the punishment provided in this Act for such offence. 12-B. Certain offences to be cognizable - The offences under sub-section (2-A) of Section 12 shall be cognizable."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "any offence", the words "an offence other than a cognizable offence" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed and Cocoon (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) (Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, persons who on the date of commencement of this Act are engaged in the rearing of silkworms for the production of silkworm cocoons may obtain the licence under the said sub-section within six months from the date of commencement of this Act. 
