Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 . Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yam (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 19841 2 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of December, 1983. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, dated on the Twenty-third day of April, 1984, Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-first day of April, 1984 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 16 of the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as the "Principal Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely - "16-A. Mode of recovery of dues - Any amount due to the Government under this Act, whether as fees, penalty or otherwise may, without prejudice to any other mode of collection, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Principal Act, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) A rule under this Act may be made with retrospective effect and when such a rule is made the reasons for making the rule shall be specified in a statement laid before both the Houses of the State Legislature Subject to any modification made under sub-section (3) it shall have effect as if enacted in this Act."
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Karnataka Ordinance 13 of 1983) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
