Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 . Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yam (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 19801 2 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Sixth day of November, 1979. First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Eleventh day of April, 1980, Received the assent of the Governor on the Tenth April, 1980 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w. e. f. 29-11-2000
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8-A of the Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as the "Principal Act") - (1) in clause (1) - (a) in sub-clause (a) - (i) for the words "or twister", the words "or a reeler who is also a twister" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "twisted by him", the words "reeled and twisted by him" shall be substituted; (b) for sub-clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(b) no person, whether a licenced trader or not, shall purchase or agree to purchase silk yarn from a reeler or from a reeler who is also a twister, except in a silk exchange, and except in accordance with such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed"; (2) in clause (2), the words "or a twister" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10-A of the Principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(3) Subject to the pleasure of the Government the members of the committees constituted under clause (b) of sub-section (1), shall hold office for a period of one year".
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 18 of the Principal Act, in clause (h-a) for the words "traders and twisters", the words "the reelers who are also twisters and traders" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Silkworm Seed, Cocoon and Silk Yarn (Regulation of Production, Supply, Distribution and Sale) (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1979 (Karnataka Ordinance 24 of 1979) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Principal Act as amended by this Act. 
