Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 19831 2 . (2) It shall come into force on the First day of April, 1983. Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-eighth day of September, 1984 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), in sub-section (1),- (1) in clause (4), the following words shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "and shall include any person who undertakes a work under a works contract." (2) for clause (5), the following clause shall be deemed to have been substituted, with effect from the First day of April, 1982, namely:- "(5) "Local area" means the area within the limits of a city under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977), a municipality under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964), a notified area committee, a town board, a sanitary board or a cantonment board constituted or continued under any law for the time being in force and the area comprised within a distance of five kilometres from the limits of such local areas;"; (3) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(8-a) "works contract" means any agreement for carrying out for cash or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of any building, road, bridge or other immovable property or the fitting out, improvement or repair of any movable property."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 3 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "3-A. Collection of tax by registered dealer - (1) A person who is not a registered dealer shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax under this Act, nor shall a registered dealer collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax at a rate or rates exceeding the rate or rates specified in a notification issued under Section 3. (2) No dealer shall collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax in respect of the entry of any goods on which no tax is payable by him under the provisions of this Act. 3-B. Forfeiture of amounts collected in excess of tax liability and penalty for collection of tax in contravention of Section 3-A - If any dealer contravenes any of the provisions of Section 3-A, the assessing authority may, after giving such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, forfeit by way of penalty the amount unauthorisedly collected or collected in excess of the prescribed rates and may, in addition, impose upon him by way of penalty a sum not exceeding one and half times of such amount: Provided that no proceedings under this Section shall be commenced after a period of five years from the expiry of the year in which the amount has been collected: Provided further that no prosecution for an offence under Section 21 shall be instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty has been imposed under this Section."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Principal Act, for the words "in scheduled goods", the words, figures and brackets "who buys or receives scheduled goods and who is doing business in a local area and whose total turn-over under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) or, in the case of a person executing works contracts, the gross receipts therefrom or the aggregate of both, as the case may be, during the year is not less than rupees forty thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 18 of the Principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "18-A. Recognition of sales tax checkposts or barriers for the purposes of the Act - (1) With a view to prevent or check evasion of tax under this Act, checkposts or barriers or both, as the case may be, established or erected under the provisions of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the " Sales Tax Act") shall be recognised for the uroses of this Act. (2) The owner or person-in-charge of a goods vehicle carrying any of the scheduled goods shall carry with him the documents prescribed for the purpose of sub-section (2) of Section 28-A of the Sales Tax Act and produce and give a copy of the same in the manner and to the officer prescribed in the said Section. (3) The officer referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 28-A of the Sales Tax Act may, in cases of the type and in the circumstances mentioned in the said sub-section levy penalty not exceeding double the amount of tax leviable under this Act in respect of the scheduled goods under transport. (4) The provisions of Section 28-A of the Sales Tax Act relating to the recovery of penalty and appeals shall mutatis mutandis apply to the penalty leviable under sub-section (3) of this Section.".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the Principal Act,- (1) for Item (1), the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) All varieties of textiles, namely cotton, woollen or artificial silk including rayon or nylon and other man-made or synthetic fabrics, manufactured in mills or powerlooms, and hosiery cloth in lengths."; (2) for Item (2), the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) All tobacco products like beedies, cigarettes, cigars, churuts, snuff, zarda, quimam, etc."; (3) for Items 4 to 16 and entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted on the First day of April, 1982, namely:- "4. Iron and steel, that is to say- (i) pig iron and cast iron including ingot moulds, bottom plates, iron scrap, cast iron scrap, runner scrap and iron skull scrap; (ii) steel semis (ingots, slabs, blooms and billets of all qualities, shapes and sizes); (iii) skelp bars, tin bars, sheet bars, hoe bars and sleeper bars; (iv) steel bars (rounds, rods, squares, flats, octagons and hexagons, plain and ribbed or twisted in coil form as well as straight lengths); (v) steel structurals (angles, joints, channels, tees, sheet piling sections, Z sections or any other rolled sections; (vi) sheets, hoops, strips and skelp, both black and galvanised, hot and cold rolled, plain and corrugated, in all qualities in straight lengths and in coil form as rolled and in rivetted condition; (vii) plates both plain and chequered in all qualities; (viii) discs, rings, forgings and steel castings; (ix) tool, alloy and special steels of any of the above categories; (x) steel melting scrap in all forms including steel skull, turnings and borings; (xi) steel tubes, both welded and seamless, of all diameters and lengths, including tube fittings; (xii) tin-plates, both hot dipped and electrolytic and tinfree plates; (xiii) fish-plate bars, bearing plate bars, crossing sleeper bars, fish-plates, bearing plates, crossing sleepers and pressed steel sleepers, rails, heavy and light crane rails; (xiv) wheels, tyres, axles and wheel sets;] (xv) wire rods and wires-rolled, drawn, galvanised, aluminised, tinned or coated, such as by copper; (xvi) defectives, rejects, cuttings or end pieces of any of the above categories. 5. Cement. 6. All kinds of paper including carbon paper, blotting paper, water proof paper, PVC coated paper, ferro paper, ammonia paper, stencil paper, pulp boards, art boards, duplex boards, triplex boards, card boards, corrugated boards and the like but excluding newsprint. 7. Industrial machinery and parts and accessories thereof. 8. Aluminium ingots. 9. Industrial gases other than LPG. 10. Coal and coke (excluding charcoal). 11. All petroleum products, that is to say,- petrol, diesel, crude oil, lubricating oil, transformer oil, brake or clutch fluid, bitumin (asphalt), tar and others, but excluding LPG, kerosene and naptha for use in the manufacture of fertilizers. 12. Refrigerators, air conditioners and parts and accessories thereof. 13. Electrical goods, that is to say, electrically operated motors, fans, geysers, hot plates, ovens, heaters, mixers and grinders, including parts and accessories thereof and such other items as may be notified by the State Government from time to time. 14. All kinds of automobiles, excluding passenger buses, tractors, tractor-trailers and power tillers. 15. All kinds of ores. 16. Jute". (4) Items 5, 6, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 16 shall be omitted; (5) After Item (16), the following items shall be inserted, namely: "(17) All industrial packaging materials; and (18) All raw materials, component parts and any other inputs (e.g. processing of any other chemicals solvents used in the solvent [extraction process], catalysts and the like), which go into or may be used in the manufacture of an intermediate or finished product, when brought into local area by an industrial unit or any other dealer. Explanation I - The words Industrial Unit means a manufacturing unit, which falls within the definition of a factory under the Factories Act, 1948, (Central Act LXIII of 1948), but excludes (i) Handicrafts Manufacturing Units, (ii) Hand-loom Weaving Units and (ii) Any other group or class of industries, which may with reference to their nature, competitiveness, employment potential or such other factors, be notified by the State Government. Explanation II - The words "raw materials, component parts and any other inputs" do not include sugar-cane, cereals, oil seeds, pulses, timber or wood of any species, silk cocoons, raw, thrown or twisted silk, or such other inputs as may be notified by the State Government for the purposes of exemption from the tax under Entry 18 from time to time; but include aluminium ingots and ores of all kinds." 
