Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) for the purposes hereinafter appearing : BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the first day of May, 1992.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "entry of any goods" the words "entry of any goods specified in the First Schedule" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (6), for the words "mentioned in the Schedule" the words "specified in the Second Schedule" shall be substituted;
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act, - (1) for the word "Schedule" the words "Second Schedule" shall be substituted; (2) in the entries relating to serial number 2, the words "but excluding oil seeds" shall be omitted; (3) after the entries relating to serial number 33, the following entries shall be inserted, namely - "33-A. Textiles, namely cotton, woollen, silk or artificial silk including rayon or nylon and other man-made or synthetic fabrics manufactured in handlooms."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted as "First Schedule" before the Second Schedule, namely :- "FIRST SCHEDULE" See section 3(1) 1. Air-conditioning plants, air-coolers and air-conditioners and parts thereof. 2. Arms of all kinds including guns, rifles, revolvers, pistols and ammunition for the same. 3. Batteries and parts thereof including dry cells and dry cell batteries. 4. Brass, bronze and copper articles including sheets, circles, rods, rounds, squares and flats made of brass, bronze and copper but excluding those specified elsewhere. 5. Bricks and tiles other than those specified elsewhere. 6. Bullion and specie and articles made of gold and silver other than those specified elsewhere. 7. Butter, ghee and cheese. 8. Cassette tape recorders and players (audio and video) including audio and video cassettes. 9. Cement and water and weather proofing compounds. 10. Chemicals of all kinds. 11. Chinaware, porcelainware and stoneware (articles) other than those specified elsewhere. 12. Chicory powder. 13. Cigar and cigarette cases, holders and lighters, and tobacco pipes. 14. Cinematographic, photographic and other cameras, projectors, enlargers, lenses and parts and accessories thereof. 15. Clocks, time-pieces and watches (all kinds) and parts thereof including watch straps and chains (made of base metals). 16. Coir products including rubberised coir products. 17. Confectionery, biscuits and cakes. 18. Coppersulphate. 19. Cotton yarn waste and cotton waste. 20. Crockery and cutlery. 21. Deodorants, disinfectants, germicides other than those falling under any other entry. 22. Dictaphones and other similar apparatus for recording sound and parts and accessories thereof. 23. Diesel engines and parts thereof. 24. Dry fruits including almonds, walnuts and pista. 25. Druggets and durries. 26. Dyes. 27. Edible oils including hydrogenated oils and cooking medium. 28. Electrical and electronic goods, appliances, instruments and apparatus and parts and accessories thereof but excluding those specified elsewhere. 29. Fibreglass sheets and article made of fibreglass. 30. Films (all kinds) including X-ray film. 31. Fire fighting equipments and devices. 32. Fire works and colour matches. 33. Foamed rubber, plastic foam or any other synthetic foam articles such as sheets, cushions, pillows, mattresses and the like. 34. Food and non-alcoholic drinks, that is to say - (i) Ready to serve foods, processed foods, semi-cooked, or semi-processed food stuffs, fruits (other than dry fruits including almonds, walnuts and pista) dried vegetable products (whether cooked or not), fruits and vegetable products when sold in tins, cans, bottles or in any kind of sealed containers. (ii) Instant mix, such as jamoon mix, idli mix, ice cream mix, jelly mix and the like; sambar and rasam powders and pastes, curry powder and pastes, and the like; soft drink concentrates (other than fruit and vegetable concentrates) whether in liquid or powder or crystal form. (iii) Aerated water including ready to drink soft drinks whether or not flavoured or sweetened and whether or not containing vegetable or fruit juice or fruit pulp when sold in bottles, tins, cans or in any kind of sealed containers but excluding soft drink concentrates. 35. Food preservatives, food colours and food flavours. 36. Footwear and polishes. 37. Furniture of all kinds, including treasure chest, safes and lockers and parts and accessories thereof. 38. Furs and skins and articles made therefrom including hides and skins. 39. Glass sheets and all articles made of glass. 40. Gramophones of every description and accessories and parts thereof. 41. Gramophone records and needles. 42. Hardware, that is to say : (i) fittings of doors, windows and furniture (made of base metal and alloy thereof). (ii) bolts, nuts, rivets, screws of base metal or alloy thereof including bolt ends, screw studding, self tapped screws, screw hooks, screw rings, wire nails, measuring tapes and scales. (iii) Metallic barbed wire, metallic wire, metallic wire mesh and metallic wire nettings. 43. Industrial gas, such as oxygen, acetylene, nitrogen and the like. 44. Insecticides, pesticides, weedicides, fungicides and plant nutrients and plant regulators. 45. Ivory and sandalwood articles including sandalwood oil. 46. Jaggery. 47. Kitchen ware (all kinds) used for cooking as well as serving. 48. Laminated, impregnated or coated matting materials such a linoleum generally used for floor covering (other than floor tiles). 49. Leather goods other than footwear and those specified elsewhere. 50. Lifts, elevators and escalators whether operated by electricity or hydraulic power. 51. Liquor including arrack and toddy. 52. Machinery (all kinds) and parts and accessories thereof but excluding agricultural machinery. 53. Man-made or synthetic staple fibres, fibre-yarn, or filament yarn (all kinds). 54. Marble slabs and articles made therefrom. 55. Medicinal and pharmaceutical preparations. 56. Mill yarn (all kinds) excluding cotton yarn and those specified elsewhere. 57. Mineral water sold in containers. 58. Motor vehicles (all kinds) and parts and accessories thereof including chassis of motor vehicles. 59. Non-edible oils (other than petroleum product and those specified elsewhere). 60. Non-ferrous castings and ingots and scrap of base metals (other than iron and steel scrap) and alloys thereof. 61. Oil cake. 62. Opium, ganja and bhang. 63. Optical goods (all kinds) including spectacles, sunglasses, goggles, lenses and frames including attachment parts and accessories thereof. 64. Paints, colours, varnishes, pigments, polishes, indigo, enamel, bale oil, white oil, turpentine (all kinds), tinners, primers and paint brushes. 65. Paper (all kinds) including carbon paper, blotting paper, water proof paper, PVC coated paper, ferro paper, ammonia paper, stencil paper, but excluding photographic paper; pulp boards, art boards, duplex boards, triplex boards, card boards, corrugated boards and the like; cellophane. 66. Packing materials, namely : (i) fibre board cases, paper boxes, folding cartons, paper bags, carrier bags and card board boxes, corrugated board boxes and the like. (ii) tin plate containers (cans, tins and boxes), tin sheets, aluminium foil, aluminium tubes, collapsible tubes, aluminium or steel drums, barrels and crates and the like; (iii) plastic, poly-vinyl chloride and polythelene films, bottles, pots, jars, boxes, crates, cans, carboys, drums, bags and cushion materials and the like; (iv) wooden boxes, crates, casks and containers and the like; (v) gunny bags, bardan (including batars), hessian cloth, and the like; (vi) glass bottles, jars, and carboys and the like; (vii) laminated packing materials such as bitumanised paper and hessian based paper and the like. 67. Petroleum products, that is to say, petrol, diesel, crude oil, lubricating oil, transformer oil, brake or clutch fluid, bitumen (asphalt), tar and others, but excluding aviation fuel, liquid petroleum gas (LPG), kerosene and naptha for use in the manufacture of fertilizers. 68. Photographic paper and photo albums. 69. Pipes, tubes and fittings of iron and steel other than those specified in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, cement and asbestos. 70. Plastic sheets, granules and articles made from all kinds and all forms of plastic including articles made of poly propelene, polyesterene and like materials. 71. Playing cards of every description. 72. Precious stones namely, diamonds, emeralds, rubies, real pearls and sapphires and articles in which such precious stones are set, semi-precious stones and articles in which such semi-precious stones are set. 73. Pressure cookers and parts and accessories thereof. 74. Raw-wool, woollen yarn and woollen blended yarn. 75. Readymade garments including caps, neck ties and bows. 76. Refrigerators, including deep freezers, bottles coolers, water coolers, cold storage equipments and the like and parts thereof. 77. Rolling shutters and collapsible gates whether operated manually, mechanically or electrically and their parts. 78. Roofing, light roofing and false roofing materials including cement and asbestos sheets, asphalt sheets, straw boards, hard and soft boards, plywood, veneered boards and panels and laminated sheets. 79. Rubber, that is to say - (i) rubber plates, sheets and strips unhardened whether vulcanised or not and whether combined with any textile material or otherwise; (ii) piping and tubing of unhardened vulcanised rubber; (iii) transmission, conveyor or elevator belts or belting of vulcanised rubber whether combined with any textile material or otherwise; (iv) synthetic rubber including butadiene rubber and butyls rubber, synthetic rubber latex including pre-vulcanised synthetic rubber latex; (v) rubber articles, that is, articles made wholly of rubber (other than those specified elsewhere). 80. Raw materials, component parts and inputs which are used in the manufacture of an intermediate or finished product (other than those specified in the Second Schedule). 81. Rubber and other tyres, tubes and flaps other than those specified in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. 82. Sanitary fittings of every description excluding pipes and fittings of stoneware, cement, iron and steel. 83. Slotted angles and ready to assemble parts of steel racks. 84. Soaps, soap flakes, soap powders, detergent powders and liquids and laundry brighteners. 85. Sound transmitting equipments including loudspeakers and parts thereof excluding telephones and its parts. 86. Spirits and alcohol, that is to stay - (i) denatured spirit; (ii) rectified spirit; (iii) ethyl-alcohol; 87. Stationery articles, namely - (i) account books, paper envelopes, diaries, calendars, race cards, catalogues, greeting cards, invitation cards, humour post cards, picture post cards, cards for special occasions and stamp albums. (ii) Office desk materials. 88. Stones, that is to say, - (i) granite stones, slabs and chips; (ii) cuddapah stones and slabs. (iii) shahabad stones and slabs. 89. Stoves and parts and accessories thereof. 90. Sugar other than confectionery and the like. 91. Suit cases, brief cases, attache cases and despatch cases including those made of leather but excluding steel trunks. 92. Silk yarn that is to say, twisted or thrown silk yarn, spun silk yarn and noil silk yarn. 93. Telephones of every description and parts thereof. 94. Textiles namely cotton, woollen or silk or artificial silk including rayon or nylon and other man-made or synthetic fabrics manufactured in mills or powerlooms and hosiery cloth in length, and including fabrics coated with or impregnated with PVC or cellulose derivatives (whether or not manufactured in mills or powerlooms). 95. Tiles (all kinds) used for floors and walls other than those specified elsewhere. 96. Tobacco products of all description including beedies, cigarettes, cigars churuts, snuff, zarda-quimam, etc. 97. Toilet articles (whether medicated or not) except toilet soaps but including razors and razor blades and cartridges. 98. Typewriters and parts and accessories thereof and typewriter ribbon. 99. Vacuum flasks and refills. 100. Weights and measures. 101. Wireless reception instruments and apparatus including televisions and components thereof; amplifiers and synthesisers. 102. X-ray apparatus. 103. Goods other than those specified in any of entries in this Schedule, but excluding those specified in the Second Schedule.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Amendment) (No. 2) Ordinance, 1992 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 10 of 1992) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
