Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 19871 2 . (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the Twelfth day of February, 1992 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 1 of the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words and figures " Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979", the words and figures " Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (A),- (1) clause (1) shall be re-numbered as clause (1-a) and before the clause (1-a) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(1) agricultural produce or horticultural produce shall not include tea, coffee, rubber, cashew, cardamom, pepper and cotton; and such produce as has been subjected to any physical, chemical or other process for being made fit for consumption, save mere cleaning, grading, sorting or drying". (2) after clause (1-a) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(1-b) "assessee" means a person by whom tax is payable". (3) after clause (2-a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-b) "business" includes any trade, commerce or manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on with a motive to make gain or profit and whether or not any profit accrues from such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern and any transaction in connection with or incidental or ancillary to such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern". (4) after clause (4), the following clause and explanations shall be inserted, namely:- "(4) "dealer" means any person who, in the course of business, whether on his own account or on account of a principal or any other person, brings or causes to be brought into a local area any goods or takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of goods on its entry into a local area and includes an occasional dealer. Explanation I - An industrial, commercial or trading undertaking of the Government of Karnataka, the Central Government or any other State Government, a local authority, company, a Hindu undivided family, an Aliyasanthana family, a firm, a society, a club or an Association which carries on such business shall be deemed to be a dealer for purposes of this Act. Explanation II - A society (including a co-operative society), club or firm or an association which, whether or not in the course of business, buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods from or to its members for cash or for deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act. Explanation III - The Central Government or a State Government other than the Government of Karnataka which whether or not, in the course of business, buys, sells, supplies or distributes goods, directly or otherwise, for cash or deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act. Explanation IV - When a consignee does not take delivery of goods upon its entry into a local area, and such goods are sold under the provisions of any law, the buyer who takes delivery of such goods upon the goods being sold shall be deemed to be the dealer thereof. Explanation V - A person undertaking the execution of works contract involving the use or consumption of goods entering into a local area shall be deemed to be the dealer thereof. Explanation VI - Any person who brings or causes to be brought any goods into a local area, but resides outside the State of Karnataka (hereinafter referred to as 'a non-resident dealer') including his agent or manager shall be deemed to be the dealer thereof. Exception - An Agriculturist who brings exclusively agricultural produce grown on land cultivated by him personally shall not be deemed to be a dealer within the meaning of this clause. " (5) clause (4-a) shall be re-numbered as clause (4-c) and before the clause as so re-numbered, the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(4-a) "goods" means all kinds of moveable property (other than newspapers, actionable claims, stocks and shares and securities) and includes livestock; (4-b) "goods vehicle" means any kind of vehicle used for carriage of goods either solely or in addition to passengers (other than aeroplanes and rail coaches) and includes push cart, animal drawn cart, tractor-trailer and the like". (6) for clause (5), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(5) "local area" means an area within the limits of a city under the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1977), a Municipality under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964), a Notified Area Committee, A Town Board, a Sanitary Board or a Cantonment Board constituted or continued under any law for the time being in force and a Mandal under the Karnataka Zilla Parishads, Taluk Panchayat Samithis, Mandal Panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats Act, 1983 (Karnataka Act 20 of 1985)" (7) after clause (5), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(5-a) "occasional dealer" means any person who, in the course of occasional transactions of business nature, whether on his own account or on account of a principal or any other person bring or causes to be brought into a local area any goods or takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of goods on its entry into local area. (5-b) "place of business" means any place where a dealer is doing business and includes:- (i) any warehouse, godown, or other place where the dealer stores or processes his goods; (ii) any place where the dealer produces or manufactures goods; (iii) any place where the dealer keeps his books of accounts; (iv) any place where the dealer carries on business through an agent (by whatever name called), the place of business of such agent". (8) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(7) "Schedule" means a schedule appended to this Act". (9) for clause (8-a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- "(8-a) "Value of the goods" shall mean the purchase value of such goods, that is to say, the purchase price at which a dealer has purchased the goods inclusive of charges borne by him as cost of transportation, packing, forwarding and handling charges, commission, insurance, taxes, duties and the like, or if such goods have not been purchased by him, the prevailing market price of such goods in the local area. (8-b) "works contract" means any agreement for carrying out for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of any building, road, bridge or any other immovable property, or manufacture, processing, fabrication, erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, modification, repair, conversion or commissioning of any movable property". (10) for clause (9), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(9) "year" means the year commencing on the First day of April".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "3. Levy of Tax - (1) There shall be levied and collected a tax on entry of any goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein, at such rates not exceeding five per cent of the value of the goods as may be specified by the State Government by Notification from time to time and different rates may be specified in respect of different goods or different classes of goods or different local areas. (2) The tax levied under sub-section (1) shall be paid by every registered dealer or a dealer liable to get himself registered under this Act who brings or causes to be brought into a local area the goods whether on his own account or on account of his principal or any other person or who takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of such goods on its entry into a local area. Explanation - Where the goods are taken delivery of on its entry into a local area or brought into a local area by a person other than a dealer, the dealer who takes delivery of the goods from such person shall be deemed to have brought or caused to have brought the goods into the local area. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), no tax shall be levied and collected from a dealer who brings or causes to be brought into a local area any goods in respect (4) The provisions of sub-section (3) shall not apply unless the dealer who brings or causes to be brought the goods into the local area claims exemption by furnishing to the assessing authority a declaration, in the prescribed form obtained from the prescribed authority duly filled and signed by the dealer who is liable to pay the tax on such goods. (5) Where a dealer brings or causes to be brought goods into a local area and claims exemption by furnishing a declaration as provided in sub-section (4) and it is found that the said declaration is false, he shall be liable to pay the tax on such goods in addition to the penalty if any payable under Section 28-A. (6) No tax shall be levied under this Act on any goods mentioned in the Schedule on its entry into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein. (7) A dealer who brings or causes to be brought the goods into a local area the aggregate value of which is less than seventy-five thousand rupees in a year shall not be liable to pay the tax for that year: Provided that every non-resident dealer including his agent or manager, or every occasional dealer shall be liable to pay the tax each year at the rates specified irrespective of the aggregate value of the goods brought or caused to be brought into the local area during the year. (8) The tax shall be assessed, levied and collected in such manner and in such instalments, if any, as may be prescribed. (9) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the Assessing Authority may assess a dealer for any year, as if, the aggregate value of the goods brought or caused to be brought into local area in such year had been received as in the previous year."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "4. Registration of dealers - (1) Every dealer,- (a) who buys or receives goods liable to tax under this Act and who is doing business in a local area and whose total turnover under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) is not less than seventy-five thousand rupees in a year, or (b) who brings or causes to be brought such goods into a local area or takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of such goods, the aggregate value of which is not less than seventy-five thousand rupees in a year, shall get himself registered under this Act in such manner on payment of such fee and within such period as may be prescribed. The registration shall be renewed from year to year on payment of the prescribed fee until it is cancelled. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),- (i) every dealer undertaking execution of works contract involving the use or consumption of goods entering into a local area; (ii) every non-resident dealer; (iii) every occasional dealer; (iv) every manager or agent of a non-resident dealer; other than a dealer dealing exclusively in the goods specified in the Schedule; shall get himself registered irrespective of the value of such goods. (3) No dealer who is already registered under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), shall be required to pay registration or renewal fee under this Act. (4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any State Government or the Central Government".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 11-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "11-A. Power of State Government to exempt or reduce tax - The State Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary in public interest so to do, by notification and subject to such restrictions and conditions and for such period as may be specified in the notification, exempt or reduce the tax payable under this Act,- (i) by any specified class of persons or class of dealers or in respect of any goods or class of goods; or (ii) on entry of all or any goods or class of goods into any specified local area".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "12. The Authorities - (1) The State Government shall, by notification, authorise the officers of the Commercial Taxes Department to exercise the powers and discharge the duties and perform the functions under this Act. (2) The officers authorised under sub-section (1) shall exercise, discharge and perform such powers, duties and functions and in respect of such areas or of such dealers or such classes of dealers, such cases or classes of cases as may be specified in the notification. (3) Where by the notification issued under sub-section (2) two or more officers are assigned the same area or the same dealers or classes of dealers or the same cases or classes of cases, they shall perform their functions in accordance with such orders, as the Commissioner may make for the distribution and allocation of the work. (4) The Commissioner may, by order in writing, at any time transfer any case pending before one officer to another officer and the officer to whom the case is so transferred may proceed either de novo or from the state at which it was transferred. (5) Where a case pending before an officer is transferred to another officer under sub-section (4), the officer to whom the case is transferred shall notwithstanding anything contained in this Act have the same powers and perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed on the officer from whom the case is so transferred. (6) The State Government and the Commissioner may, from time to time, issue such orders, instructions and directions to all officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act as they may deem fit for the administration of this Act and all such officers and persons shall observe and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the State Government and the Commissioner: Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued so as to interfere with the discretion of any appellate authority in the exercise of its appellate functions. (7) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Commissioner may on his own motion or on an application by a dealer liable to pay tax under this Act, if he considers it necessary or expedient so to do, for the purpose of maintaining uniformity in the work of assessments and collection of revenue or for the removal of any doubt, clarify the rate of tax payable under this Act in respect of goods liable to tax under the Act or the doubt, as the case may be, and all officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow such clarification. Explanation - In this Section, the word 'case' in relation to any dealer specified in any direction or order issued thereunder means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or before such date and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the date of such order or direction in respect of any year".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "12-A. State Representative - (1) The State Representative appointed or empowered under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), shall be the State Representative for the purpose of this Act. (2) In proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal, the State Representative shall be competent,- (i) to prepare and sign applications, appeals and other documents; (ii) to appear, represent, act and plead; (iii) to receive notices and other process; and (iv) to do all other acts connected with such proceedings, on behalf of the State Government or any officer appointed under this Act".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18-A of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-A) Where the owner or person in-charge of the goods vehicle carrying any goods is not required to carry the documents prescribed for the purpose of sub-section (2) of Section 28-A of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957, he shall give a declaration in the prescribed form to the officer prescribed in the said section".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 18-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "18-B. Transit of goods by road through the State and issue of Transit pass - (1) When a vehicle coming from any place outside the State and bound for any other place outside the State and carrying goods taxable under this Act, passes through the State, the driver or any other person in-charge of such vehicle shall furnish the necessary information and obtain a transit pass in duplicate containing such particulars as may be prescribed from the officer-in-charge of the first checkpost or barrier after his entry into the State; (2) The driver or the person in-charge of the vehicle shall deliver within the stipulated time a copy of transit pass obtained under sub-section (1) to the officer-in-charge at last checkpost or barrier before his exit from the State; (3) If for any reason, the goods carried in a goods vehicle are, after entry into the State not moved out of the State within the time stipulated in the transit pass, the owner of the goods vehicle shall furnish to the officer empowered in this behalf the reasons for such delay and other particulars if any thereof and such officer shall after due enquiry extend the time of exit by suitably amending the transit pass: Provided that where the goods carried by a vehicle are, after their entry into the State, transported outside the State by any other vehicle or conveyances, the onus of proving that the goods have actually moved out of the State shall be on the owner of the vehicle who originally brought the goods into the State. (4) If the driver or any other person in-charge of the vehicle does not comply with sub-section (2), it shall be presumed that the goods carried thereby have been sold within the State by the owner of the vehicle and shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be assessed to tax by the officer empowered in this behalf in the prescribed manner. (5) If the owner of the vehicle fails to obtain the transit pass as provided under sub-section (1), or fails to deliver the same as provided under sub-section (2), he shall be liable to pay by way of penalty a sum not exceeding double the amount of tax leviable on the goods transported; (6) The amount of tax and the penalty levied under this section shall be recovered in the prescribed manner. Explanation - In case where a vehicle owned by a person is hired for transportation of goods by some other person, the hirer of the vehicle shall for the purposes of this section be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 28-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "28-A. Burden of proof - (1) For purposes of assessment of tax under this Act, the burden of proving that goods brought into or caused to be brought into a local area or taken delivery of by a dealer, is not liable to tax under this Act shall be on such dealer. (2) Where a dealer furnishes, issues or produces bill of sale, voucher, the declaration, certificate or any other document which he knows or has reason to believe to be false with a view to support or make any claim that he or any other dealer is not liable to be taxed under this Act, the assessing authority shall on detecting such furnishing or issue or production, direct the dealer furnishing, issuing or producing such a bill of sale, voucher, the declaration, the certificate or other documents to pay as penalty,- (i) in the case of first detection, three times the tax levied or leviable in respect of such goods; and (ii) in the case of second or subsequent detection, five times the tax levied or leviable in respect of such goods: Provided that before issuing any direction for payment of penalty under this sub-section, the assessing authority shall give to the dealer an opportunity of being heard against the levy of such penalty."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka Sub-section (5) of Section 30 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka Section 31 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as Section 32 and before Section 32, as so re-numbered, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "31. Laying of Rules and Notifications before the State Legislature - Every rule made under this Act and every Notification issued under the provisions of this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is published before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the Rule or Notification or both Houses agree that the Rule or Notification should not be made, the Rule or Notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Rule or Notification".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In the principal Act, for the words "Scheduled goods" wherever they occur, the word "goods" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule in the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- "Schedule [See Section 3(6)] Sl. No. Description of goods 1. 2. 1. Agricultural implements 2. Agricultural produce including Tea, Coffee and Cotton (whether ginned or unginned) but excluding oil seeds 3. Agricultural machinery 4. Aviation fuel 5. Books meant for reading 6. Bread 7. Ballot boxes 8. Contraceptives 9. Coal including coke 10. Cotton Yarn 11. Charakas and its parts and accessories 12. Country bullock carts and spare parts thereof 13. Compost manure 14. Dinner leaves including plantain leaves 15. Electrical energy 16. Earthern pots 17. Fishmeal, poultry feed and processed animal feed 18. Fodder 19. Fish, eggs and meat except when sold in sealed containers 20. Firewood and charcoal 21. Gober gas and Bio-gas plants, their parts and accessories 22. Human blood 23. Horns and bones 24. Iron and steel as defined under Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 25. Kum kum 26. Mangalsutra 27. Fresh milk 28. Newspaper 29. National Flag 30. Plants 31. Slate and slate pencils 32. Stamp paper 33. Salt 34. Vegetables and fruits except when sold in sealed containers 35. Water other than mineral or Aerated water." 
