Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 19861 2 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1983. Received the assent of the President of India on the Fourteenth day of January, 1986 Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, use or Sale Therein (Second Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979), after Item 16 the following items shall be inserted, namely:- "16-A. Packing materials, namely - (i) wrapping paper, fibre board cases, paper boxes, folding cartons, paper bags, carrier bags, and board boxes, corrugated board boxes, and the like; (ii) tin plate containers (cans and boxes), aluminium foil, collapsible tubes, steel and aluminium drums and crates, and the like; (iii) plastic films, bottles, pots, (excluding country made earthen pots), jars, bags and cushioning material, and the like; (iv) wooden boxes, crates, casks and containers, and the like; (v) gunny bags, bardan (including batars), hessain cloth, and the like; (vi) glass bottles, jars and carboys, and the like. 16-B. All raw materials, component parts and inputs which are used in the manufacture of an intermediate or finished product,- (i) when brought into local areas by an industrial unit; or (ii) when brought into local areas by any dealer who, after having so brought, sells or supplies the same to an industrial unit located either within the same local area or outside it. Explanation I - The words "Industrial Unit" mean a manufacturing unit which falls within the definition of a 'factory under the Factories Act, 1948 (Central Act No. LXIII of 1948), but exdudes,- (i) Handicrafts Manufacturing Units (i) Hand-loom Weaving Units and (iii) Any other group or class of industries which may with reference to their nature, competitiveness, employment potential or such other factors, be notified by the State Government. Explanation II - The words 'raw materials, component parts and inputs do not include agricultural produce, horticultural produce, timber or wood of any species, silk cocoons, raw, thrown or twisted silk, tobacco (whether raw or cured), cement, paper, electrical goods or such other inputs as may be notified by the State Government for purposes of exemption from tax under Item 16-B from time to time, but include aluminium ingots and ores of all kinds." 
