Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1979. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1979), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985.1 2 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of August, 1985. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000. Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of September, 1985
Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 22, of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause (5), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(5) "luxury provided in a hotel" means accommodation for lodging provided in a hotel, the rate of charges for which (including charges for air-conditioning, telephone, television, radio, music, extra beds and other amenities for which charges are compulsorily payable, but excluding charges for food and drinks) is not less than fifty rupees per room per day."
Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act - (1) for sub-section (1) including the provisos, the following shall be substituted, namely - "(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be levied and collected a tax on the luxury provided in a hotel in respect of every room (to be known as 'Luxury tax') at the following rates, namely - (a) Where the charges for lodging per room per day are not less than rupees fifty but less than rupees one hundred and fifty. Ten per cent of such charges. (b) Where the charges for lodging per room per day are not less than rupees one hundred and fifty but less than rupees two hundred and fifty. Fifteen per cent of such charges. (c) Where the charges for lodging per room per day are not less than rupees two hundred and fifty. Twenty per cent of such charges: Provided that where charges for lodging are payable otherwise than on daily basis, then, for the purposes of determining the tax liability under this section, the charges shall be computed as for a day, based on the period of lodging for which the charges are payable: Provided further that where any charges for lodging are paid by any person who is a member of the Foreign Diplomatic Mission in India, then such person shall be exempt from the payment of tax;". (2) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 4 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely - "4-A. Registration of proprietors - (1) Every proprietor liable to pay tax under this Act, shall get himself registered under this Act in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed and shall pay a registration fee of two hundred and fifty rupees. (2) The registration granted shall be valid for one year and shall be renewed from year to year on payment of the fee specified in sub-section (1). (3) Where, however, the proprietor is already registered under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957, then, he shall not be liable to pay the registration or renewal fee prescribed under this section. (4) The Deputy Commissioner may for good and sufficient reasons, demand from a proprietor liable to pay tax under this Act, security for due payment of tax and on such demand the proprietor shall furnish security within eight days from the date of receipt of the order demanding security. (5) The amount of security payable under sub-section (4) shall not exceed an amount equivalent to one fourth of tax anticipated for the year from the proprietor. The Deputy Commissioner may demand an additional security, if he has reason to believe that the security furnished already is inadequate. (6) The security furnished shall be maintained in full unless the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied that there are no reasons for its continuance or until the registration certificate is cancelled." 
