Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983.1 2 (2) Section 8 shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1983 and the other provisions shall come into force at once. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-ninth day of December, 1984
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in sub-section (3), at the end, the following proviso, shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that the assessing authority may, if he is of the opinion that a person holding an enrolment certificate is liable to pay tax at a higher rate from any year, after giving such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, revise the certificate of enrolment of such person." (2) in sub-section (5),- (i) after the words "or enrolment", the words "or for the revision of the certificate of enrolment to pay tax at a higher rate" shall be inserted; (ii) after the words "such certificate", the words "or revised certificate" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "13. Recovery of tax, etc - Any tax, penalty, interest or other amount due under this Act from an employer or other person may, without prejudice to any other mode of collection, be recovered,- (a) as if it were an arrear of land revenue, or (b) on application to any Magistrate, by such Magistrate, as if it were a fine imposed by him".
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the words and figures "17 and 18" the words and figures and letter "8,17,18 and 18-A" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the words "subject to sub-section (4)", the words and figure "and Section 8" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 18 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "18-A. Revision by High Court in certain cases - (1) Within sixty days from the date on which an order under Section 17 of the Act was communicated to him, the appellant or the respondent may prefer a petition to the High Court against the order on the ground that the Appellate Tribunal has either failed to decide or decided erroneously any question of law: Provided that the High Court may admit the petition preferred after the period of sixty days aforesaid if it is satisfied that the petitioner had sufficient cause for not preferring the petition within that period. (2) The petition shall be in the prescribed form and shall, when it is preferred by any person other than the State Government, be accompanied by a fee of fifty rupees. (3) If the High Court, on persuing the petition, considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, it may dismiss the petition summarily: Provided that no petition shall be dismissed unless the petitioner has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support thereof. (4)(a) If the High Court does not dismiss the petition summarily, it shall, after giving both the parties to the petition a reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the question or questions of law raised and either reverse, affirm or amend the order against which the petition was preferred or remit the matter to the Appellate Tribunal with the opinion of the High Court on the question or questions of law raised or pass such other order in relation to the matter as the High Court thinks fit. (b) Where the High Court remits the matter to the Appellate Tribunal under clause (a) with its opinion on the questions of law raised, the latter shall amend the order passed by it, in conformity with such opinion. (5) Before passing an order under sub-section (4), the High Court may, if it considers necessary so to do, remit the petition to the Appellate Tribunal and direct it to return the petition with its finding on any specific question or issue. (6) Notwithstanding that a petition has been preferred under sub-section (1), the tax shall be paid in accordance with the assessment made in the case: Provided that if as a result of the petition, any change becomes necessary in such assessment, the High Court may authorise the assessing authority to amend the assessment and the assessing authority shall amend the assessment accordingly and thereupon the amount paid in excess by the assessee shall be refunded to him without interest or the additional amount of tax due from him shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the Act, as the case may be. (7)(a) The High Court may, on the application of either party to the petition, review any order passed by it under sub-section (4) on the basis of facts which were not before it when it passed the order. (b) The application for review shall be preferred within ninety days from the date of communication of the order sought to be reviewed and shall be in such form and such manner as may be prescribed, and shall, where it is preferred by any person other than the State Government shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty rupees. (8) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the High Court may, at any time within five years from the date of the order passed by it, amend such order: Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made without giving the parties affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (9) In respect of every petition preferred under this Section, the costs shall be in the discretion of the High Court."
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 28 of the principal Act, the following new Section shall be inserted, namely:- "28-A. Appearance before any authority in proceedings - Any person who is entitled to appear before any authority, other than the High Court, in connection with any proceedings under this Act, may be represented before such authority,- (a) by a legal practitioner; or (b) by a Chartered Accountant; or (c) by a Sales Tax Practitioner enrolled as such under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957)."
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act,- (1) for item 1, (including the Explanation) the following shall be substituted, namely:- "1. Salary or wage earners whose salary or wage or both, as the case may be, for a month is Rs. 1,500 or more. Rs. 20/- per month for the months from April to February & Rs. 30 for the month of March. " (2) in item 9,- (a) the words "according to that Act and the made thereunder" shall be omitted; (b) for the figures "Rs. 25,000", the figures "Rs. 40,000" shall be substituted; (3) in item 10, the words and figure "who are not dealers covered by Entry 9" shall be omitted; (4) in item 11, the words and figure "who are not dealers covered by Entry 9" shall be omitted; (5) in item 17, in sub-item (ii), for the words "and spinning mills", the words "spinning mills and banks" shall be substituted. 
