Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State legislature in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989.1 2 (2) It shall come into force on the First day of April, 1989. Repealed by Act No. 22 of 2000, w.e.f. 29-11-2000 Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixteenth day of April, 1989.
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in clause (j) as it existed prior to the First day of April, 1983, for the words "received by any person on regular basis", the words "received or receivable by any person including any amount received by way of arrears of salary or bonus by whatever name called" shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of April, 1976. (2) after clause (j) so amended, the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the First day of April, 1976, namely:- "Explanation - (i) Where bonus, by whatever name called is received in part or full, then such bonus shall be spread over for twelve months of the year or to such number months the bonus relates, for purposes of computation of 'Salary' or 'Wage' for such months; (ii) Where arrears of salary is received in part or full, then such arrears shall be spread over for the relevant months for which it relates, for purpose of computation of 'Salary' or 'Wage' for such months". (3) for clause (j) so amended including the explanation, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of April, 1983, namely:- "(j) 'Salary' or 'Wage' means the basic salary or wage received or receivable by any person including any amount received by way of arrears of basic salary whether in cash or kind but does not include any other allowances or remuneration or any perquisites or profits. Explanation - Where arrears of salary is received in part or in full, then such arrears shall be spread over for the relevant months for which it relates for purposes of computation of 'Salary' or 'Wage' for such months." (4) for clause (j) and the explanation as so substituted the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of April, 1987, namely:- "(j) 'Salary' or 'Wage' includes pay or wage, dearness allowance and all other remunerations received or receivable by any person including any amount received by way of arrears of salary or bonus by whatever name called whether payable in cash or kind and also includes perquisites and profits in lieu of salary as defined in Section 17 of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Explanation - (i) Where 'bonus' by whatever name called is received in part or full, then such bonus shall be spread over for twelve months of the year or to such number of months the bonus relates for purposes of computation of 'Salary' or 'Wage' for such months. (ii) Where arrears of salary is received in part or full, then such arrears shall be spread over for the relevant months for which it relates for purposes of computation of 'Salary' or 'Wage' for such months".
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2) and (3),- (i) the balance of interest payable upto 31st March, 1987 in respect of tax paid belatedly shall not be collected. (ii) any interest that has become payable in respect of tax due as on 31st March, 1987 shall not be collected provided such tax is paid in full on or before 30th June, 1989."
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act - (1) for item 5, the following shall be substituted namely:- "5 (a) Estate agents or brokers Rs. 250 per annum (b) Contractors executing works contracts (as defined under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957) the estimated cost of which is not less than Rs. Five lakhs in a year Rs. 2,500 per annum (c) Building contractors other than those specified at sub-item (b) above Rs. 250 per annum" (2) for item 7, the following shall be substituted namely:- "7. (a) Race horse owners, trainers and jockeys licenced by the turf clubs Rs. 250 per annum" (b) Book makers licenced by turf clubs. Rs. 2,500 per annum" (3) for item13, the following shall be substituted namely:- "13. (a) Licenced wholesale dealers of liquor other than toddy and arrack. Rs. 2,500 per annum" (b) Licenced foreign liquor vendors other than those mentioned on against (a) above and employers of residential hotels and theatres as defined in the Karnataka Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1961 . Rs. 250 per annum" (4) for item 15, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "15 Money lenders licenced under the Karnataka Money Lenders' Act, 1961 - Rs. 250 per annum" (a) Class-I money lenders and those who lend rupees Ten lakhs and above per annum. Rs. 2,500 per annum (b) Others Rs. 250 per annum" (5) in the entries relating to sub-items (i) and (ii) of item 17, in column 3, for the words and figures "Rs. 250 per annum", the words and figures "Rs. 2,500 per annum" shall be substituted. (6) in the entries relating to item 18, in column 3, for the words and figures, "Rs. 250 per annum", the words and figures "Rs. 2,500 per annum" shall be substituted. (7) in the entries relating to item 19, in column 3, for the words and figures, "Rs. 250 per annum", the words and figures "Rs. 2,500 per annum" shall be substituted. (8) for item 20, the following shall be substituted namely:- "20. Each partner of a firm registered under the Indian Partnership Act, 1982 and engaged in any profession, trade or calling. Rs. 500 per annum" (9) for item 20-C, the following shall be substituted namely:- "20-C. (a) Nursing home and hospital other than those run by the State or Central Government. Rs. 2,500 per annum" (b) Pathological testing laboratories and X-ray clinics. Rs. 250 per annum" (10) for item 20-E, the following shall be substituted, namely:- "20-E. (a) Film distributors and travel agents not falling under sub-item (b) below Rs. 250 per annum (b) Air travel agents Rs. 2,500 per annum"
Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in any Judgment, decree or order of any Court, Tribunal or other authority to the contrary any assessment, levy or collection of any tax made or purporting to have been made, any action, or thing taken or done (including any notices or orders issued or assessments made and all proceedings held for the levy and collection of tax or amount purported to have been collected by way of tax) in relation to such assessment, levy or collection under the provisions of the principal Act before the commencement of the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 1989, shall be and shall be deemed to be valid and effective as if such assessment, levy or collection or action or thing had been made, taken or done under principal Act as amended by Section 2 of this Act and accordingly - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done by any authority in connection with the assessment, levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been made, done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any Court or Tribunal or before any authority for the refund of any such tax; and (c) no Court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such tax. 
