Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) for the purchase hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-third year of the Republic of India as follows :
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the thirtieth day of September, 1992.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words "by the State Government, by notification from time to time" the words "retrospectively or prospectively by the State Government by notification and different dates" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word and figure "section 3", the words, figures and letter "section 3 or section 5C" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of May, 1992.
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After section 5B of the principal Act, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the first day of May, 1992, namely :- "5C. Composition of tax. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 but subject to the conditions laid down in this section and such other conditions and such circumstances as may be prescribed, any dealer liable to pay tax under this Act, may at his option, instead of paying tax under the said section pay such tax by way of composition amount at the following rates, namely :- (i) In the case of a dealer who brings or causes to be brought into a local area any goods liable to tax under this Act, whether on his own account or on account of his principal or any other person, or who takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of such goods on its entry into a local area for sale therein, the tax payable by such dealer shall be calculated at the rates notified under section 3 on the turnover of such goods : Provided that where the goods brought or caused to be brought into a local area are already subject to tax under section 3 or under this clause or are exempt from tax under any provisions of this Act, no tax shall be payable on the turnover of such goods subject to production of proof of payment of tax on such goods or proof of such goods having subject to tax earlier : Provided further that no tax shall be levied under this clause on the turnover relating to goods held in stock as on the 30th day of April, 1992 and were not liable to tax under the Act prior to the said date. Explanation 1. - For the purpose of this clause, the expression 'turnover' shall mean the aggregate of the total amount paid or payable to the dealer as consideration for sale, supply or distribution of any goods where such sale, supply or distribution has taken place inside the State, less any amount allowed as discount. Provided that the accounts show that the purchaser has paid only the sum originally charged less discount, any amount which is actually incurred under the head 'freight' when specified and charged for by the dealer separately without including such amounts in the price of the good sold and any amount charged for and collected separately in the sale bill by way of tax under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957). Explanation II. - For the purposes of levy of tax under this clause an amount equal to ten per cent of the turnover as determined under explanation I shall be deducted from such turnover. (ii) in the case of a dealer, who brings or causes to be brought into a local area any goods liable to tax under this Act, whether on his own account or on account of his principal or any other person or who takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery of such goods on its entry into a local area for use or consumption therein as raw materials, component parts and inputs in the manufacture of an intermediate or finished goods, the tax payable by such dealer on such raw materials, component parts and inputs shall be calculated at the rate of one per cent on the value of goods so manufactured within the State, wholly or partly out of such raw materials, component parts and inputs. Provided that for the purpose of this clause, - (i) the value of the raw materials, component parts and inputs brought into an area not being a local area and used or consumed in the manufacture of goods; and (ii) the value of the raw materials, component parts and inputs purchased and brought into a local area on or after the 1st day of May, 1992 but prior to the 1st day of August, 1992 which were not liable to tax during the said period and used or consumed in the manufacture of goods, shall be deducted from the value of the manufactured goods. Explanation I. - For the purposes of this sub-section the expression 'value of the manufactured goods' shall mean value of the manufactured goods offered for levy of excise duty under the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (Central Act 5 of 1986) or where no excise duty is leviable on such manufactured goods, the 'value of the manufactured goods' shall mean the sale value of such goods. Explanation II. - For the purposes of levy of tax under this sub-section, (i) an amount equal to forty per cent of the 'value' as determined under explanation I shall be deducted from such value; (ii) any amount paid as consideration towards the purchase of, (a) raw materials, component parts and inputs which are used in the manufacture of goods and on which entry tax under this Act is paid or payable by the seller of such goods; and (b) raw materials, component parts and inputs which are used in manufacture of goods and on which entry tax is exempt under this Act. shall be deducted from the value of the manufactured goods. (2) Any dealer may apply to the assessing authority to be permitted by him to pay tax under this section and, on being so permitted, he shall pay tax in advance as provided under sub-section (2) of section 5 and all the provisions of that sub-section shall mutatis mutandis apply to this section. (3) The amount paid under this section shall be subject to such adjustment as may be necessary on completion of final assessment. (4) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder relating to assessment, re-assessment, payment and recovery, refunds, appeal and revision shall mutatis mutandis apply in respect of tax payable under this section. (5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the tax payable by a dealer causing entry of the following goods into a local area for sale, namely :- (i) Liquor including arrack and toddy; (ii) Motor vehicles (all kinds) and parts and accessories thereof including chassis of motor vehicles; (iii) Opium, ganja and bhang; (iv) Petroleum products, that is to say, petrol, diesel, crude oil, lubricating oil, transformer oil, brake or clutch oil, bitumen (asphalt), tar and others but excluding aviation fuel, liquid petroleum gas (L.P.G.), kerosene and naptha for use in the manufacture of fertilizers; (v) Sugar other than confectionary and the like; (vi) Textile, namely, cotton, woolen or silk or artificial silk including rayon or nylon and other man-made or synthetic fabrics manufactured in mills or power-looms and hosiery cloth in length and including fabrics coated with or impregnated with P.V.C. or cellulose derivatives (whether or not manufactured in mills or power-looms); and (vii) Tobacco products of all description including beedies, cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, snuff, zarda, quimam, etc."
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act, as it stood prior to the first day of May, 1992, - (i) for Serial No. 1 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of October, 1980, namely :- "1. All varieties of textile namely cotton, woollen or artificial silk including rayon or nylon whether manufactured in mills, power-looms or handlooms and hosiery cloth in length but excluding khadi, cotton handloom fabrics, silk fabrics and artificial silk handloom fabrics." (ii) for serial No. 1 and the entries relating thereto as so amended, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1983, namely :- "1. All varieties of textiles namely cotton, woollen or artificial silk including rayon and other man-made or synthetic fabrics manufactured in mills or power-looms and hosiery cloth in length including fabrics coated with or impregnated with P.V.C. cellulose derivatives (whether or not manufactured in mills or power-looms)". (iii) for serial No. 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of October, 1980, namely :- "2. Tobacco and all its products". (iv) for serial No. 2 and the entries relating thereto as so amended, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April 1983, namely :- "2. All tobacco products".
Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1992 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 13 of 1992) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
