Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka WHEREAS it is expedient to amend certain taxation and other laws as in force in the State of Karnataka for the purposes hereinafter apppearing; BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982. (2) Section 5 shall come into force on the first day of July, 1982, and the other provisions shall come into force on the first day of April, 1982.
Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), - (1) in section 2, in clause (k) of sub-section (1), after item (v), the following item shall be inserted, namely :- "(vi) a miller who carries on such business"; (2) in section 5, - (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "four per cent", the words "five per cent" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (a) of sub-section (5), for the words "thirty-five thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (3) for section 6B, the following section shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the Twenty-ninth day of March, 1981, namely :- "6B. Levy of turnover tax. - (1) Every dealer whose total turnover in a year exceeds rupees one lakh, whether or not the whole or any portion of such turnover is liable to tax under any other provision of this Act, shall be liable to pay a tax at the rate of one-half per cent of his total turnover : Provided that no tax under this sub-section shall be payable on that part of such turnover which relates to, - (i) sale or purchase of goods specified in the Fifth Schedule; (ii) sale or purchase of gods specified in the Fourth Schedule; (iii) sale or purchase of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce; (iv) sale or purchase of goods in the course of export out of the territory of India or sale or purchase in the course of import into the territory of India; (v) all amounts collected by way of tax under the provisions of this Act or the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (Central Act 74 of 1956); (vi) all amounts falling under the head 'freight', when specified and charge for by the dealer separately without including such amounts in the price of the goods sold; and (vii) all amounts falling under the head 'charges for packing materials and cost of labour', when specified and charged for by the dealer separately without including such amounts in the price of goods sold : Provided further that save as otherwise provided in this sub-section, no other deduction shall be made from the total turnover of a dealer for the purposes of this section. (2) The provisions of this Act and the Rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the assessment, collection or refund of the turnover tax as they apply in relation to the assessment, collection or refund of tax under the other provisions of this Act."; (4) in section 6B, in sub-section (1), for the words "rupees on lakh", the words "rupees one and a half lakhs" shall be substituted; (5) in section 9, in clause (ii), after the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (5) of section 5", the words, figures and letter "or section 6B" shall be inserted; (6) in section 10, in sub-section (1), for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (7) in section 12, in sub-section (1), for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (8) in section 13, in sub-section (1), for the words "and in such instalments if any", the words "in such instalments, subject to such conditions, on payment of such interest" shall be substituted; (9) in section 17, - (a) for the table below sub-section (1), the following table shall be substituted, namely :- TABLE ---------------------------------------------------------------------- Sl. No. Total turnover Rate ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 1 2 3 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 1. Where the total turnover is Seven hundred and fifty not less than twenty-five rupees per annum. thousand rupees, but is less than thirty-five thousand rupees. 2. Where the total turnover is One thousand one hundred not less than thirty-five and twenty-five rupees thousand rupees but is less per annum. than forty-five thousand ruppes. 3. Where the total turnover One thousand five hundred is not less than forty-five rupees per annum. thousand rupees but is less than fifty-five thousand rupees. 4. Where the total turnover is One thousand eight hundred not less than fifty-five and seventy-five rupees thousand rupees but is less per annum. than sixty-five thousand rupees. 5. Where the total turnover Two thousand two hundred is not less than sixty-five and fifty rupees per annum. thousand rupees but is less than seventy-five thousand rupees. 6. Where the total turnover Three thousand one hundred is not less than seventy-five and twenty-five rupees thousand rupees but is less per annum. than one lakh rupees. 7. Where the total turnover Four thousand three hundred is not less than one lakh and seventy-five rupees rupees but is less than one per annum. lakh and twenty-five thousand rupees. 8. Where the total turnover Six thousand two hundred is not less than one lakh and fifty rupees per annum. and twenty-five thousand rupees but not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousand rupees. ---------------------------------------------------------------------- (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "seventy-five thousand rupees", the words "one lakh and fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted. (10) in section 18, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), not dealer who is liable to pay turnover tax under section 6B shall collect any amount by way of such turnover tax or purporting to be by way of such turnover tax payable by him."; (11) in section 25B, - (a) in sub-section (1), after clause (ii), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided that no tax shall be levied and collected on the last purchase of sugarcane in the State when purchased by a manufacturer to jaggery whose total turnover during the year does not exceed rupees five lakhs."; (b) in sub-section (4), the two provisos shall be omitted; (12) in section 27, - (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "fifteen thousand rupees", the words "twenty-five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (b) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided that, unless the purchaser so requires, it shall not be necessary for a dealer to issue a bill or cash memorandum in respect of a transaction whose total value does not exceed five rupees in each case but the dealer shall, in respect of all such transactions, prepare at the close of each day, a consolidated bill or cash memorandum and include them in his books of account and statements or returns of accordance with the provisions of this Act."; (13) in section 28, in sub-section (1), after the words "dealer carrying on business in any kind of goods", the words "or a miller whether he is a dealer or not" shall be inserted; (14) in section 29, in clause (f) of sub-section (1), after the words "being a dealer", the words "or a miller, whether he is a dealer or not" shall be inserted; (15) in section 43, - (a) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the Twenty-ninth day of March, 1981, namely :- "(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the assessment of a dealer whose total turnover for the year which ends on a date after the First day of April, 1981, is more than twenty-five thousand rupees but is less than thirty-five thousand rupees, shall be regulated as follows, namely :- (a) in the case of a dealer permitted to pay any amount by way of composition under section 17, such dealer shall pay the amount due in monthly instalments for the months immediately prior to the First day of April, 1981, and shall not be liable to pay monthly instalments for the remaining months thereafter; and (b) in the case of any other dealer, the turnover during the period from the commencement of the year up to the First day of April, 1981, shall be liable to tax and his turnover during the remaining period from the First day of April, 1981, shall not be liable to tax."; (b) after sub-section (6) as so inserted, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the assessment of a dealer whose total turnover for the year which ends on a date after the First day of April, 1982, is less than thirty-five thousand rupees but is more than twenty-five thousand rupees, shall be regulated as follows, namely :- (a) in the case of a dealer permitted to pay any amount by way of composition under section 17, such dealer shall not be liable to pay monthly instalments for the months immediately prior to the First day of April, 1982, and shall pay the amount due in monthly instalments for the remaining months thereafter; and (b) in the case of any other dealer, the turnover during the period from the commencement of the year up to the First day of April, 1982, shall not be liable to tax and his turnover during the remaining period from the First day of April, 1982, shall be liable to tax.", (16) in the Second Schedule, (a) after the entries relating to serial number 7, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "8. Hosiery of all kinds except hosiery Five per cent."; cloth in lengths. (b) for the entries relating to serial number 38, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the Fifteenth day of March, 1980, namely :- "38. All liquor (including bottled liquor) other than toddy and arrack, - (i) not covered by item (ii) below. Sixty per cent. (ii) where the consideration for Thirty per cent."; the sale or purchase of liquor includes the duties of excise payable under the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965. (c) in the entries relating to serial number 39, in column 3, - (i) for the words "Forty-five per cent", to words "Sixty per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of September, 1978; (ii) for the words "Sixty per cent" as so substituted, the words "Eight per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the Fifteenth day of March, 1980; (d) after the entries relating to serial number 44, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "45. Timber, rosewood and sandalwood. Eight per cent."; (e) in the entries relating to serial number 58, in the entries in column 2, for the words "wooden furniture ", the following shall be substituted, namely :- "wooden, bamboo and cane furniture."; (f) in the entries relating to serial number 61A, in column 3, for the words "Eight per cent", the words "Ten per cent" shall be substituted; (g) after the entries relating to serial number 73B, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the First day of April, 1981, namely :- "73C. Diesel engines and parts thereof. Ten per cent."; (h) in the entries relating to serial number 79, in column 3, for the words "Eight per cent" the words "Ten per cent" shall be substituted; (i) after the entries relating to serial number 79, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "79A. Copper sulphate. Six per cent."; (j) in the entries relating to serial number 82, in column 3, for the words "Four per cent", the words "Five per cent" shall be substituted; (k) in entries relating to serial number 97, in column 2, the word "dyes" shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the First day of September, 1978; (l) after the entries relating to serial number 97, the following entries shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the First day of September, 1978; namely :- "97A. Dyes. Four per cent."; (m) in the entries relating to serial number 108, for the entries in columns 2 and 3, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Wooden, bamboo and cane furniture Ten per cent."; and parts and accessories thereof. (n) in the entries relating to serial number 109, in column 3, for the words "Eight per cent", the words "Ten per cent" shall be substituted; (o) in the entries relating to serial number 110, in column 3, for the words "Eight per cent", the words "Ten per cent" shall be substituted; (p) in the entries relating to serial number 123, for the entries in column 2, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Footwear section more than thirty rupees per pair."; (q) in the entries relating to serial number 128, for the entries in columns 2 and 3, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Aerated waters including bottled Eight per cent."; soft drinks whether or not flavoured or sweetened and whether or not containing vegetable or fruit juice or fruit pulp. (r) after the entries relating to serial number 146, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "147. All kinds of man-made or Six per cent. synthetic staple fibres or fibres or filament-yarn. 148. Rayon - grade pulp or any Six per cent."; other pulp out of which the staple fibres or fibres or filament-yarn mentioned under serial number 147 can be made. (17) in the Third Schedule - (a) in the entries relating to serial number 13a, for the words in column 2, the words "shrimps, prawns and lobsters" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted and after the words as so substituted, the following shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the First day of September, 1978, namely :- "other than frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters."; (b) the explanation at the end shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (18) in the Fourth Schedule - (a) after the entries relating to serial number 7, the following entries shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the First day of January, 1970, namely :- "7A. Tyre-cord fabrics Sale by the first or One and a which have not been earliest of successive half per cent."; subjected to additional dealers in the State duty of excise under liable to tax under the Additional Duties of this Act. Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (Central Act 58 of 1957). (b) in the entries relating to serial number 7A, as so inserted, in column 4, for the words "One and a half per cent", the words "Three per cent" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of September, 1978; (c) in the entries relating to serial number 7A, in column 4, for the words "Three per cent", the words "Four per cent" shall be substituted; (d) after the entries relating to serial number 10, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "11 Cotton fabrics Sale by the first Four per cent."; (impregnated, coated or earliest of or laminated) with successive dealers preparations of in the State cellulose derivatives liable to tax under or of other plastic this Act. materials which have not been subjected to additional duty of excise under the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (Central Act 58 of 1957). (e) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I and after the Explanation I as so numbered, the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :- "Explanation II. - Where tax has been paid in respect of the sale or purchase of - (i) iron scrap, cast iron scrap, runner scrap and iron skull, turnings and borings referred to in entry (x) of serial in respect of steel melting scrap of all forms including steel skull turnings and borings referred to in entry (x) of serial number 2, and out of the said scrap, steel semis (ingots, slabs, blooms and billets of all qualities, shapes and sizes) referred to in entry (ii) of serial number 2 are manufactured and sold; or (ii) steel semis (ingots, slabs, blooms and billets of all qualities, shapes and sizes) referred to in entry (ii) of serial number 2, and out of the said steel semis any re-rolled products of iron and steel referred to in any one or more of the entries at (iii), (iv), (v), (vi), (vii) and (xv) of serial number 2 are manufactured and sold, no tax shall be leviable on the sale of the said steel semis or the re-rolled products as the case may be : Provided that the dealer claiming exemption of tax under this explanation furnishes before the assessing authority concerned proof of levy and payment of tax by the previous and earliest of successive dealers on the said scrap or steel semis used in the manufacture of the steel semis re-rolled products, as the case may be : Provided further that in respect of the said steel semis or the said re-rolled products of iron and steel, no amount was collected by the dealer from his customers by way of tax or purporting to be by way to tax."; (f) for Explanation II, the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the First day of April, 1978, namely :- "Explanation II. - Where tax has been levied in respect of any item of goods of iron and steel referred to in entries (i) to (xiv) of serial number 2, and out of the said goods any other item of goods of iron and steel referred to under the said serial number is manufactured in Karnataka and sold, the tax on the sale of such manufactured goods shall be reduced by the amount of tax already paid under this Act on the relative items of goods of iron and steel used in its manufacture : Provided that the burden of proving that the tax under this Act has already been paid and of establishing the exact quantum of tax so paid on such items of goods of iron and steel shall be on the dealer claiming the reduction."; (19) in the Fifth Schedule, - (a) in the entries relating to serial number 3, for the words "when sold at a price not exceeding rupees fifty", the words "when sold at a price not exceeding rupees 500 per piece" shall be substituted; (b) for the entries relating to serial number 6, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "6. Eggs and meat except when sold in sealed containers. 6A. Fish (excluding shrimps, prawns and lobsters), except when sold in sealed containers."; (c) for the entries relating to serial number 8A, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "8A. All varieties of textiles, namely, cotton, woollen, silk or artificial silk including rayon or nylon, whether manufactured in mills, power-looms or handlooms, and hosiery cloth in lengths which have been subjected to additional excise duty under the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (Central Act 58 of 1957)."; (d) after the entries, relating to serial number 45, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "46. Footwear costing not more than thirty rupees per pair. 47. Children's toys costing not more than twenty rupees per item."
Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority to the contrary, any assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of any tax made or purporting to have been made, any action, or thing taken or done (including any notices or orders issued or assessments, payments, recoveries or refunds made and all proceedings held for the levy or collection of tax or amount purported to have been collected by way of tax) in relation to such assessment, reassessment, levy or collection under the provisions of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957) (hereinafter in this section referred to as the principal Act), before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such assessment, reassessment, levy or collection or action or thing had been made, taken or done under the principal Act as amended by clause (3) and clause (18) of section 2 of this Act and accordingly - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the state Government or by any officer of the State Government or by any other authority in connection with the assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, and to have always been made, done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or before any authority for the refund of any such tax; and (c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such tax. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person - (a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, any assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of tax referred to in sub-section (1), or (b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by them in excess of the amount due from him by way of tax under the principal Act as amended by this Act. (Sections 4, 5, 6 and 7 of the Amendment Act dealing with amendments respectively to the Karnataka Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958, the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958, the Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments, Act, 1976, and the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale Therein Act, 1979, are not printed here.) The Statement of Objects and Reasons, Financial Memorandum and Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation appended to the Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1982 (L.A. Bill No. 15 of 1982) (Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary No. 239, Part IV-2A, dated 30th March, 1982, page 31.), run as follows :- STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS (As appended to at the time of introduction of the Bill) "In the budget speech for the year 1982-83, the Hon'ble Minister for Finance and Tourism has indicated several proposals in order to augment the revenue of the State. This Bill seeks to give effect to the said proposals. Opportunity is taken to make some other minor amendments." 
