Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend certain taxation laws as in force in the State of Karnataka. Whereas it is expedient further to amend certain taxation laws for the purposes hereinafter appearing: Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty- seventh year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-eighth day of August, 1996
Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Act, 1979, (Karnataka Act 27 of 1979), in Section 5, in sub-section (7), in clause (b), for the word "Commissioner" the words "Joint Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Tax on Luxuries (Hotels and Lodging Houses) Act, 1979, (Karnataka Act 22 of 1979), in Section 2, in clause (5), for the words "one hundred and twenty-five", the words "one hundred and fifty" shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from First day of April, 1996.
Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958. (Karnataka. Act 30 of 1958), after Section 7, the following shall be inserted, namely:- "7-A. Power of State Government to exempt or reduce Tax -(1) The State Government may, by notification, make an exemption of any tax or reduction in the rate of any tax payable under this Act, in respect of entertainments held in newly constructed cinema theatres situate within the limits of any specified local authority or class of local authorities. (2) Exemption of any tax or reduction in rate of any tax notified under sub-section (1), may be subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification. (3) The State Government may, by notification, cancel or vary any notification issued under sub-section (1). (4) If any condition or restriction specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1) is contravened or not observed by a proprietor, the entertainments held in the cinema theatres in respect of which such contravention or non-observance took place, be assessed to tax or taxes, as if the said notification did not apply to such entertainments".
Karnataka Taxation Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka [X X X X] 
