Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend taxation and other laws, as in force in the State of Karnataka. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend taxation and other laws as in force in the State of Karnataka for purposes hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Taxation and Certain other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1979. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957), after section 6B, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "6C. Levy of surcharge - (1) The tax payable under sections 5, 6 and 25B shall be increased by a surcharge calculated at the rate of ten per cent of such tax : Provided that, if, in the case of the declared goods specified in the Fourth Schedule, the tax payable under sections 5, 6 and 25B together with the additional tax payable under section 6B and the surcharge payable under this section exceeds four per cent of the sale or purchase price thereof, the rate of surcharge in respect of such goods shall be reduced to such an extent that the tax, additional tax and surcharge together shall not exceed four per cent of the sale or purchase price of such goods. (2) The provisions of this Act and the Rules made thereunder including those relating to refund or exemption from tax shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy, assessment and collection of the surcharge payable under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the levy, assessment and collection of sales tax or purchase tax under this Act." 12.Power to remove difficulties--If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the State Government may, by notification, make such provisions as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Karnataka Taxation and Certain Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 1979 (Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary No. 259, Part IV - 2-A, dated March 27, 1979, page 43.), runs as follows : "In order to augment the revenue of the State it is proposed to amend taxation and other laws. Opportunity is taken to make some other amendments also. Hence this Bill." 
