Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements Act, 1999. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements Act, 1999 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2000), for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 27th day of November, 2006.
Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements Act, 1999 (Karnataka Act 29 of 2000) (hereinafter referred to as the 'principal Act'):- (i) after clause (a), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(aa) "E-procurement" means purchase of goods, obtaining of services or undertaking of construction work by the procurement entity through e-Procurement platform; (aaa) "E-procurement platform" means a procurement platform of electronic media comprising of procurement process set up and managed by the State Government through integrated internet enabled procurement tools incorporated by customisation". (ii) after clause (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that for the purpose of e-procurement, the 'tender papers' means set of documents in electronic form".
Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely:- Chapter II-A : E-Procurement 18-A. E-Procurement - (1) There shall be a single unified e-procurement platform for all procurement entity which may be notified under sub-section (2). (2) With effect from such date, as may be specified by the Government, by notification, a procurement entity in respect of a class of procurement, it any, as may be notified shall procure its procurements through the e-procurement platform. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Government may make rules, for specifying a separate procedure to be followed by procurement entities notified under sub-section (2) for e-procurement through e-procurement platform; and for non-application of other procedure of procurement to e-procurement".
Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Act, 2007_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurements (Amendment) Ordinance, 2006 (Karnataka Ordinance 2 of 2006) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the Principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under principal Act as amended by this Act. 
