Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book Act, 1984. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book Act, 1984 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1986) for the purpose hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Kamataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 19861 . (2) It shall come into force at once. (First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Fourth day of June, 1987) (Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-second day of April, 1987)
Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book Act, 1984 (Karnataka Act No. 2 of 1986) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (c) - (1) sub-clause (i) shall be omitted. (2) for sub-clause (iv), the following shall be substituted, namely - (iv) National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development constituted under the National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development Act, 1981 (Central Act 61 of 1981).
Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (4) of Section 4 of the principal Act - (1) for the words shall make, or cause to be made, in such manner as may be prescribed, an inquiry about the creditworthiness of the applicant, and in doing so, in particular, he shall make an inquiry about the title of the applicant in relation to the land specified in the application or any interest held by the applicant therein or in respect of any crops standing thereon, the words shall make or cause to be made, in such manner as may be prescribed, an inquiry about the title of the applicant in relation to the land specified in the application or any interest held by the applicant therein or in respect of any crop standing thereon shall be substituted, and (2) the words the extent of creditworthiness of the applicant shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Credit Pass Book (Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - 5-A. Registration of charge-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act 16 of 1908), a charge in favour of the Bank on the property against which the endorsement has been made on the Pass Book under sub-section (1) of Section 5, shall be deemed to have been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of that Act with effect from the date of endorsement on forwarding a copy of every such endorsement to the Sub-Registrar under sub-section (2) of Section 5 within the time stipulated by the State Government for the purpose. 
