Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing: Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty Sixth year of the Republic of India as follows:
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 19851 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of April, 1985. (First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Sixth day of September, 1985)(Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of September, 1985)
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in sub-section (1),- (a) after the proviso to clause (e), the following shall be inserted, namely:- Explanation - For the purpose of this clause the property acquired by the assessee on hire purchase basis shall be deemed to be the property of the assessee; (b) for the proviso to clause (g), (h) and (i), the following shall be substituted, namely:- Provided that the interest allowable under clauses (g), (h) and (i) shall be the actual interest paid on such loans or the amount calculated at the rate of interest charged by the scheduled banks on such loans whichever is less; (c) for the second proviso to clause (j), the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- Provided further that the interest allowable under this clause shall be the actual interest paid on such loan or the amount calculated at the rate of interest charged by the scheduled banks on such loan whichever is less. (d) after the proviso to clause (k), the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- Explanation - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that deductions under this clause shall not include deductions, specifically provided for or allowed under other clauses of this section or rules made under this section. (2) in sub-section (2), for item (iii) of clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely:- (iii) a person deriving agricultural income from land on which coffee is grown may, in lieu of the deductions referred to in items (i) and (ii), at his option exercised in writing, deduct from his agricultural income a sum of twenty-five rupees for every fifty kilograms of coffee produced and delivered by him to the Coffee Board subject to a maximum of fifteen per cent of the average total of Agricultural income during the previous year and three years immediately preceding it towards expenditure for new cultivation, replanting and maintenance of immature plants and if the said expenditure is not incurred in that year the same may be carried forward for a period of five years beyond the year of assessment and any such sum which is spent for purpose other than those specified above or which remains unspent for five years shall be treated as income of the year succeeding the fifth year: Provided that subject to the conditions and restrictions specified in this clause, where the coffee produced and delivered by him to the Coffee Board is in excess of six hundred kilograms per acre, he may deduct from his agricultural income a sum of thirty rupees for every fifty kilograms of coffee produced and delivered to the Coffee Board: Provided further that the option once exercised shall be final and the said expenditure allowance shall be calculated on the same basis for purposes of future assessments: Provided also that if at any time during the said period of five years, there is a change of ownership of such land either by sale or otherwise, the amount referred to in item (iii) and remaining unspent on the date of such change of ownership shall be treated as income of the transferor for the year in which such change of ownership takes place. Explanation - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that where deduction is allowed under this clause, no further deduction shall be allowed towards expenditure for filing the vacancies of diseased or dead plants in a coffee plantation. (3) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- (3)(1) In respect of a machinery or plant specified by the State Government by Notification in the Official Gazette which is owned by the assessee and is wholly used for the purpose of deriving agricultural income by him, there shall be allowed a deduction, in respect of the previous year, in which the machinery or plant is first put to use of a sum by way of investment allowance equal to ten per cent of the actual cost to the assessee of the machinery or plant: Provided that- (a) the machinery or plant is a new machinery or plant acquired by the assessee; (b) the particulars specified in the notification by the State Government have been duly furnished by the assessee: Provided further that no deduction shall be allowed under this sub-section in respect of- (a) any machinery or plant installed in any office premises or any residential accommodation including any accommodation in the nature of a Guest House; (b) any office appliances or road transport vehicles other than the tractors. (2) If the machinery or plant in respect of which investment allowance is made under clause (1) of this sub-section is sold or otherwise transferred by the assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of five years from the end of the previous year in which it was first put to use whether during the continuation of agricultural operation or after the cessation thereof, the investment allowance made in respect of such machinery or plant shall be treated as the income of the assessee for the previous year in which such machinery or plant is sold or otherwise transferred.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 5-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 5-A. Exemption in respect of insurance premia, contribution to provident fund etc - (1) From the total agricultural income of the assessee computed under Section 5, there shall be deducted, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, an amount calculated with reference to the aggregate of the sums specified in sub-section (2), at the following rates, namely:- (a) Where such aggregate does not exceed Rs. 6,000. The whole of such aggregate. (b) Where such aggregate exceeds Rs. 6,000 but does not exceed Rs. 12,000. Rs. 6,000 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which such aggregate exceeds Rs. 6,000. (c) Where such aggregate exceeds Rs. 12,000. Rs. 9,000 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which such aggregate exceeds Rs. 12,000. (2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:- (a) where the assessee is an individual, any sum paid in the previous year by the assessee out of his agricultural income chargeable to tax,- (i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the life of the assessee or on the life of the wife or husband or any child of the assessee; or (ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of the assessee or on the life of the wife or husband or any child of the assessee; or (iii) as a contribution to any provident fund to which the Provident Fund Act, 1925 (Central Act 19 of 1925) applies; or (iv) as a contribution for participation in the Unit Linked Insurance Plan 1971 made under Section 19(1)(cc) of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (Central Act 52 of 1963); or (v) any sum deposited in a ten year account of fifteen year account under the Post Office Savings Bank (Cumulative Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to time; or (vi) as a subscription to the National Savings Certificate (VI issue) and the National Savings Certificate (VII issue). (b) where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family any sums paid in the previous year by the assessee out of its income chargeable to tax,- (i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the life of any member of the family; or (ii) as a contribution to any provident fund referred to in sub-clause (iii) of the clause (a) where such contribution is to an account standing in the name of any member of the family; or (iii) any sums deposited in a ten year account or a fifteen year account under the Post Office Savings Bank (Cumulative Time Deposit) Rules, 1959 as amended from time to time where such sums are deposited in an account standing in the name of any member of the family; or (iv) as a subscription to the National Savings Certificate (VI issue) and the National Savings Certificate (VII issue) : Provided that the amount deducted under this sub-section shall not exceed one sixth of the total agricultural income of the assessee or fifteen thousand rupees, whichever is less: Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section shall apply only to so much of any premium or other payments made on a policy other than a contract for a deferred annuity as it is not in excess of ten per cent of the actual sum assured. Explanation -In calculating any such actual sum no account shall be taken,- (i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be returned; or (ii) of any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and above the sum actually assured, which is to be or may be received under the policy by any person. (3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (1) and (2), no deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the claim is supported by proof to the effect that the assessee is not liable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961), or that similar deduction under the provisions of the said Act has not been claimed or allowed in respect of the sums on account of which the deduction is claimed.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 29. Application for registration - (1) An application for registration of a firm for the purposes of this Act may be made to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer on behalf of any firm, if,- (a) the partnership is evidenced by an instrument; and (b) the individual shares of the partners are specified in that instrument. (2) Such application may, subject to the provisions of this section, be made either during the existence of the firm or after its dissolution. (3) The application shall be made to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer having jurisdiction to assess the firm, and shall be signed,- (a) by all the partners (not being minors) personally; or (b) in the case of a dissolved firm, by all persons (not being minors) who were partners in the firm immediately before its dissolution and by the legal representative of any such partner who is deceased. Explanation -In the case of any partner who is absent from India or is a lunatic or an idiot, the application may be signed by any person duly authorised by him in this behalf, or, as the case may be, by a person entitled under law to represent him. (4) The application shall be made before the end of the previous year for the assessment year in respect of which registration is sought: Provided that the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may entertain an application made after the end of the previous year, if he is satisfied that the firm was prevented by sufficient cause from making the application before the end of the previous year. (5) The application shall be accompanied by the original instrument evidencing the partnership together with a copy thereof: Provided that if the Agricultural Income-tax Officer is satisfied that for sufficient reasons the original instrument cannot conveniently be produced, he may accept a copy of it certified in writing by all the partners (not being minors), or, where the application is made after the dissolution of the firm, by all the persons referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3), to be a correct copy, or a certified copy of the instrument; and in such cases the application shall be accompanied by a duplicate copy of the original instrument. (6) The application shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain the prescribed particulars. (7) Where registration is granted to any firm for any assessment year, it shall have effect for every subsequent assessment year: Provided that- (i) there is no change in the constitution of the firm or the shares of the partners as evidenced by the instrument of partnership on the basis of which the registration was granted; and (ii) the firm furnishes before the expiry of the time allowed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 18 (whether fixed originally or on extensions) for furnishing the return of income for such subsequent assessment year, a declaration to that effect, in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner, so however, that where the Agricultural Income-tax Officer is satisfied that the firm was prevented by sufficient cause from furnishing the declaration within the time so allowed he may allow the firm to furnish the declaration at any time before the assessment is made. (8) Where any such change has taken place in the previous year, the firm shall apply for fresh registration for the assessment year concerned in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 29 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- 29-A. Procedure on receipt of application - (1) On receipt of an application for the registration of a firm, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall inquire into the genuineness of the firm and its constitution as specified in the instrument of partnership, and,- (a) if he is satisfied that there is or was during the previous year in existence a genuine firm with the constitution so specified, he shall pass an order in writing registering the firm for the assessment year; (b) if he is not so satisfied he shall pass an order in writing refusing to register the firm. Explanation -For the purposes of this section and Section 29-B, a firm shall not be regarded as a genuine firm if any partner of the firm was, in relation to the whole or any part of his share in the income or property of the firm, at any time during the previous year, a benamidar- (a) of any other partner to whom the first mentioned partner does not stand in the relationship of a spouse or minor child; or (b) of any person, not being a partner of the firm and any of the other partners knew or had reason to believe that the first mentioned partner was such benamidar and such knowledge or belief had not been communicated by such other partner to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer in the prescribed manner. (2) Where the Agricultural Income-tax Officer considers that the application for registration is not in order, he shall intimate the defect to the firm and give it an opportunity to rectify the defect in the application within a period of one month from the date of such intimation; and if the defect is not rectified within that period, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall, by order in writing reject the application. (3) Where the Agricultural Income-tax Officer considers that the declaration furnished by a firm in pursuance of sub-section (7) of Section 29 is not in order, he shall intimate the defect to the firm and give it an opportunity to rectify the defect in the declaration within a period of one month from the date of such intimation; and if the defect is not rectified within that period, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall, by order in writing, declare that the registration granted to the firm shall not have effect for the relevant assessment year. (4) Where a firm is registered for any assessment year, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall record a certificate on the instrument of partnership or on the certified copy submitted in lieu of the original instrument, as the case may be, to the effect that the firm has been registered under this Act, for that assessment year; and where a declaration under sub-section (7) of Section 29 is furnished by the firm, for the relevant subsequent assessment year. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section where in respect of any assessment year, there is, on the part of a firm any such failure as is mentioned in Section 19, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may refuse to register the firm for the assessment year. 29-B. Cancellation of registration - (1) If, where a firm has been registered or its registration has effect under sub-section (7) of Section 29 for an assessment year, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer is of opinion that there was during the previous year no genuine firm in existence as registered, he may after giving the firm a reasonable opportunity of being heard cancel the registration of the firm for that assessment year: Provided that no such cancellation shall be made after the expiry of eight years from the end of the assessment year in respect of which registration has been granted or has effect. (2) If, where a firm has been registered or its registration has effect under sub-section (7) of Section 29 for any assessment year, there is, on the part of the firm, any such failure in respect of the assessment year as is mentioned in Section 19, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may cancel the registration of the firm for the assessment year, after giving the firm not less than fourteen days notice intimating his intention to cancel its registration and after giving it a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) Where the registration of a firm is cancelled for any assessment year, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall amend the assessments of the firm and its partners for that assessment year on the footing that the firm is an unregistered firm. (4) The provisions of Section 37 shall, so far as may be, apply to the amendments of the assessments of the firm and its partners under sub-section (3) of this section, the period of four years specified in sub-section (7) of that section being reckoned from the date of the order cancelling the registration.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 30 of the principal Act, after the proviso to sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where any crop is harvested but not disposed off before the partition of a Hindu Undivided family, or a branch, an Aliyasanthana family or Marumakkattayam tarwad or tavazhi hitherto assessed as undivided, the income from such crop shall be deemed to be the income of such Hindu Undivided Family or a branch or Aliyasanthana family or Marumakkattayam tarwad or tavazhi and the estimated value of such crop at the average market rate shall be assessed as the income for the year of harvest, or the cash amount received for such crop shall be assessed as the income for the year or years in which it is received, according to the method of accounting regularly employed by the assessee, and where no method of accounting has been regularly employed by the assessee, the estimated value of such crop at the average market rate shall be assessed as the income for the year of harvest.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 32-A of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the revisional power conferred on the Deputy Commissioner by sub-section (1) shall be exercisable in respect of an order passed under this Act by any authority subordinate to him before or after the conferment of revisional power on him.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 35 of the principal Act,- (1) for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:- (2) No power shall be exercisable under sub-section (1) after the expiry of four years from the date of the order sought to be revised. (2) after sub-section (3), the following explanation shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the revisional power conferred on the Joint Commissioner by sub-section (1) shall be exercisable in respect of an order passed under this Act, by any authority subordinate to him before or after the conferment of revisional power on him.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words at twelve per cent or as may be prescribed, the words at the rate charged by the Scheduled Banks for unsecured loans shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 61 of the principal Act, for the proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely:- Provided that no such extension shall be granted unless the assessee undertakes to pay in addition to the tax payable interest at the rate charged by Scheduled Banks for unsecured loans on the tax due as per the return from the due date specified in sub-section (1) of Section 18 upto the date of actual payment of such tax.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 65 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 66. Composition of Agricultural Income-tax - (1) Where the total extent of land under plantation crop held by any person does not exceed twenty-five acres and where the whole of such extent is used for deriving agricultural income by exclusively growing coffee such person may apply to the prescribed Officer for permission to compound the agricultural income-tax payable by him and to pay in lieu thereof a lumpsum at the rate specified in sub-section (2). (2) The rate of lumpsum payable under sub-section (1) shall be as follows: Where the extent of land does not exceed 15 acres Nil. Where the extent of land exceeds 15 acres but does not exceed 20 acres Rs. 1,500 Where the extent of land exceeds 20 acres but does not exceed 25 acres Rs. 2,500. (3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be submitted in such form, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (4) The prescribed Officer shall, after satisfying himself that the particulars specified in the application are correct, by order in writing grant the permission. (5) The permission granted under sub-section (4) shall be in force for the year for which it is granted and in respect of that period the provisions of this Act regarding the submission of returns, accounts or other documents, the assessment to agricultural income-tax or any other matter incidental thereto shall not apply in relation to the grantee.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- Schedule (See Section 3) Rates of Agricultural Income-tax Part I In the case of a person other than a Company,- Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 20,000 Nil Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 35,000 121/2 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 35,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs. 1,875 plus 20 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 35,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 75,000 Rs. 4,875 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 75,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 12,375 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 75,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 22,375 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Part II In the case of a Company,- Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 20,000 Nil Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 9,000 plus 45 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 5,00,000 Rs. 31,500 plus 55 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 2,51,500 plus 60 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000 Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 5,51,500 plus 65 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 10,00,000.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Anything done or any action taken or purported to be done or taken (including any notices or orders issued, and of all proceedings held for the levy, assessment, re-asssessment, revision of assessment and collection of tax) under the principal Act before the date of commencement of this Act, shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court, Tribunal, or other authority, be deemed to have been validly done, taken, issued, made or held and shall have effect for all purposes as if it had been done, taken, issued, made or held under the principal Act as amended by sub-clause (d) of Section 2, Section 6, Section 7 and Section 8 of this Act and accordingly,- (a) no suit or other proceeding shall be entertained or continued in any Court for the refund of any tax paid under the principal Act; (b) no Court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax paid under the principal Act. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person,- (a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, any assessment, re-assessment, revision of assessment, levy or collection of tax referred to in sub-section (1), or (b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him by way of tax under the principal Act as a amended by this Act. 
