Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1975. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twelfth day of March, 1976
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the agricultural income-tax payable for the financial year beginning on the first day of April, 1975 and ending on the thirty-first day of March, 1976; in respect of such income the provisions of the principal Act as they stood prior to the commencement of this Act shall be applicable.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the long title of the principal Act, the words "from lands on which commercial crops are raised" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In the preamble to the principal Act, the words "from lands used for growing commercial crops" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-clause (1) of clause (a), for the words "used for growing all or any of the commercial crops", the words "used for agricultural purposes" shall be substituted; (2) clause (dd) shall be relettered as clause (d2) and before the clause (d2) as so relettered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(d1) "Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer" means a person appointed to be an Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer under Section 17;"; (3) clause (e) and the Explanations thereto shall be omitted; (4) clause (r) shall be omitted; (5) after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(vi) "special crop" means grapes, mulberry, arecanut or coconut;"; (6) clause (vv) shall be omitted; (7) in clause (w), for the words, brackets, letters and figures "under clause (e) or clause (g) of Section 12", the words, brackets, letters and figures "under Section 5-A or under clause (g) of Section 12" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and- (i) in sub-section (1) as so renumbered- (a) in the proviso to clause (i), for the words "seven and half per cent" and "twelve per cent", the words "twelve per cent" and "fifteen per cent" shall respectively be substituted; (b) in clause (n), for the words, figures and brackets " Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (Central Act XI of 1922) wherever they occur, the words, figures and brackets " Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961)" shall be substituted; (c) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:- "Explanation-For the purposes of this sub-section "building" includes all structures constructed with a view to provide amenities to workers as defined in the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (Central Act 69 of 1951) employed in plantations and for the purpose of deriving the agricultural income; "relative" in relation to an individual means the husband, wife, brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant, of that individual and "written down value" means- (i) in the case of assets acquired in the previous year the actual cost to the assessee; and (ii) in the case of assets acquired before the previous year, the actual cost to the assessee less such sum as may be prescribed."; (ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2)(a) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to entitle a person deriving agricultural income, to the deduction of any expenditure laid out or expended, for the cultivation, upkeep or maintenance of immature plants (other than tea plants) from which no agricultural income has been derived during the previous year. (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a),- (i) if in any year expenditure is incurred by a person exclusively on new cultivation of land for growing areca, cardamom, coconut, coffee, orange or rubber plants and also on maintenance of immature plants of areca, cardamom, coconut, coffee, orange or rubber, ten per cent of such expenditure may be deducted from the agricultural income of such person; (ii) if in any year expenditure is incurred by a person for replanting of cardamom, coffee, orange or rubber plants in any plantation or of areca plants in any areca garden, such expenditure not exceeding the amount necessary for replanting- (a) two and half per cent of the acreage of plantation held by the person concerned in the case of coffee or rubber plants; (b) one and two-thirds per cent of the acreage of garden or plantation held by the person concerned in the case of areca or orange plants; and (c) eight and one-third per cent of the acreage of plantation held by the person concerned in the case of cardamom plants, may be deducted from the agricultural income of such person: Provided that if the replanting expenditure allowance under item (ii) is not incurred in one year, the allowance for the year or years may be carried forward for a period of three years in the case of areca, coffee, orange and rubber and one year in the case of cardamom, beyond the year of assessment; (iii) a person deriving agricultural income from land on which coffee is grown may, notwithstanding anything contained in items (i) and (ii), at his option exercised in writing, deduct from his agricultural income a sum of twelve and a half rupees for every fifty kilograms of coffee produced and delivered by him to the Coffee Board subject to a maximum of fifteen per cent of the average total agricultural income during the previous year and three years immediately preceding it, towards expenditure for new cultivation, replanting and maintenance of immatured plants and if the said expenditure is not incurred in that year the same may be carried forward for a period of five years beyond the year of assessment and any such sum which is spent for purpose other than those specified above or which remains unspent for five years shall be treated as income of the year succeeding the fifth year: Provided that the option once exercised shall be final and the said expenditure allowance shall be calculated on the same basis for purposes of future assessments".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "5-A. Exemption in respect of insurance premia-(1) From the total agricultural income of the assessee computed under Section 5, there shall be deducted, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, an amount calculated with reference to the aggregate of the sums specified in sub-section (2), at the following rates, namely:- (a) Where such aggregate does not exceed Rs. 4,000. The whole of such aggregate. (b) Where such aggregate exceeds Rs. 4,000 but does not exceed Rs. 10,000. Rs. 4,000 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which such aggregate exceeds Rs. 4,000. (c) Where such aggregate exceeds Rs. 10,000. Rs. 7,000 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which such aggregate exceeds Rs. 10,000. (2)The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:- (a) Where the assessee is an individual, any sum paid in the previous year by the assessee out of his agricultural income chargeable to tax, to effect or to keep in force an insurance or a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of the assessee or on the life of the wife or husband of the assessee; (b) Where the assessee is a Hindu Undivided Family any sum paid in the previous year by the assessee out of its agricultural income chargeable to tax, to effect or to keep in force an insurance or a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of any male member of the family or of the wife of such member: Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section shall apply only to so much of any premium or other payments made on a policy other than a contract for a deferred annuity as is not in excess of ten per cent of the actual sum assured. Explanation-In calculating any such actual sum no account shall be taken- (i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be returned, or (ii) of any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over and above the sum actually assured, which is to be or may be received under the policy by any person. (3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (1) and (2), no deduction under this section shall be allowed unless the claim is supported by proof to the effect that the assessee is not liable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961) or that similar deduction under the provisions of the said Act has not been claimed or allowed in respect of the sums on account of which the deduction is claimed".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Sections 8 and 57 of the principal Act, for the words, figures and brackets " Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (Central Act XI of 1922)" wherever they occur, the words, figures and brackets " Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961)" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the principal Act, clause (e) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka Section 13 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(d) Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officers"; (2) after sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that the Agricultural Income-tax Officers and the Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officers shall, subject to the directions issued by the State Government, exercise such powers and perform such functions and duties under the Act in respect of such classes of persons or income and in such areas as the Commissioner may, direct"; (3) after sub-section (2-A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-B)(a) The Commissioner may, by general or special order in writing, direct that the powers conferred on the Agricultural Income-tax Officer by or under this Act, shall, in respect of any specified case or classes of cases or of any specified persons or classes or persons, be exercised by the Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer. (b) Where an order under clause (a) is issued, then for the purpose of any case or person in respect of which or whom any such order applies, reference in this Act or in any rule made thereunder to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall be deemed to be reference to the Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act,- (1) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-A) (a) Before any person submits any return under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), he shall, in the prescribed manner, pay in advance the full amount of tax payable by him on the basis of such return and shall furnish along with the return satisfactory proof of the payment of such tax. After the assessment is made under Section 19 the amount of tax so paid shall be deemed to have been paid towards the tax so assessed and excess amount, if any, paid shall be refunded to such person. (b) It after the assessment under Section 19 it is found that the tax paid under clause (a) was less than the tax payable by more than twenty-five per cent, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may direct such person to pay in addition to the tax, by way of penalty, a sum calculated at ten per cent of the amount of tax so paid short: Provided that in the case of a person whose total agricultural income as determined by the Agricultural Income-tax Officer is less than ten thousand rupees the penalty imposed shall not exceed fifty rupees"; (2) in sub-section (4), at the end, the words "for the purposes of this Act" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "order shall be made", the words "power shall be exercisable" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 41 of the principal Act- (1) proviso to sub-section (1) shall be omitted; (2) in sub-section (2)- (a) for the figures and words "6 1/4per cent", the words "twelve per cent" shall be substituted; (b) the first proviso shall be omitted; and (c) in the second proviso, the word "further" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "43-A. Recovery of tax from certain other persons-(1) The Agricultural Income-tax Officer may at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing (a copy of which shall be forwarded to the assessee at his last address known to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer) require any person from whom money is due or may become due to the assessee or any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the assessee, to pay to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer, either forthwith or upon the money becoming due or being held at or within the time specified in the notice (not being before the money becomes due or is held) so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due by the assessee in respect of the arrears of tax or any other moneys or the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount. (2) The Agricultural Income-tax Officer may at any time or from time to time amend or revoke any such notice or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance of the notice. (3) Any person making any payment in compliance with a notice under this section shall be deemed to have made the payment under the authority of the assessee and the receipt of the Treasury or of the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of such person to the extent of the amount referred to in the receipt. (4) Any person discharging any liability to the assessee after receipt of the notice referred to in this section shall be personally liable to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer to the extent of the liability discharged or to the extent of the liability of the assessee for the amount due under this Act, whichever is less. (5) Where any person to whom a notice under this section is sent objects to it on the ground that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due by him to the assessee or that he does not hold any money for or on account of the assessee, then, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require such person to pay the sum demanded or any part thereof, to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer. (6) Any amount which a person is required to pay to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer or for which he is personally liable to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer under this section shall, if it remains unpaid, be a charge on the properties of the said person and may be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue. Explanation-For the purpose of this section the amount due to an assessee or money held for or on account of an assessee by any person shall be computed after taking into account such claims, if any, as may have fallen due for payment by such assessee to such person and as may be lawfully subsisting".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 53 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "53. Disclosure of information respecting assessees-(1)(a) The Commissioner may furnish or cause to be furnished to- (i) any officer, authority or body performing any functions under any other law relating to the imposition of any tax, duty, cess or fee; or (ii) such officer, authority or body performing any functions under any other law as the State Government, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do in the public interest, may, by notification, specify in this behalf, any such information relating to any assessee in respect of any assessment made under this Act as may, in the opinion of the Commissioner, be necessary for the purpose of enabling such officer, authority or body to perform his or its functions under that law. (b) Where a person makes an application to the Commissioner for any information relating to any assessee in respect of any assessment made under this Act, the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied that it is in the public interest so to do, furnish or cause to be furnished the information asked for in respect of that assessment only and his decision in this behalf shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court of law. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or any other law for the time being in force, the State Government may, having regard to the practices and usages, customary or any other relevant factors, by order notified in the official Gazette, direct that no information or document shall be furnished or produced by a public servant in respect of such matters relating to such classes of assessees or except to such authorities as may be specified in the order".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka Chapter VII-A of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 66 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "commercial crops other than plantation crops, ganja or timber shall be classified into eight classes", the words "crops other than plantation crops shall be classified" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "eighth class of land", the letter and words "J Class of land" shall be substituted; (3) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 67 of the principal Act,- (1) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Any person who derives agricultural income only from land other than land on which plantation crops are grown may apply to the prescribed officer, for permission to compound agricultural income-tax payable by him and to pay in lieu thereof a lumpsum calculated in the manner indicated in sub-section (2). (2) (a) For the purpose of determining the lumpsum payable under sub-section (1), the total extent of land of any person shall be determined in terms of J class of land in accordance with the formula in Part II of the Schedule for determining the equivalent extent of different classes. (b) In respect of total extent of J Class of land as determined under clause (a), the lumpsum payable under sub-section (1) shall be calculated at the following rates, namely:-  Extent of Land Rate (per Acre)  Rs. P. 1. On the first 160 acres of J Class land. Nil 2. On the next 140 acres of J Class land. 6-00 3. On the next 100 acres of J Class land. 7-50 4. On the next 100 acres of J Class land. 10-00 5. On the next 100 acres of J Class land. 12-50 6. On the next 100 acres of J Class land. 15-00 7. On the next 300 acres of J Class land. 17-50 8. On the next 500 acres of J Class land. 20-00 9. On the next 500 acres of J Class land. 22-50 10. On the balance of extent of land. 32-50"; (2) in sub-section (5),- (i) in clause (a), for the words "perennial crops", the words, "arecanut, coconut and grapes" shall be substituted. (ii) after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely, "(a-1) where a person claims that the whole or any part of his land though assessed to land revenue is uncultivable and no agricultural income is derived therefrom, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall refer the matter to a Committee consisting of the Assistant Commissioner of the Revenue Sub-Division, the Deputy Director of Agriculture of the district and the Superintendent of Land Records. On receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall for purposes of composition of agricultural income-tax, exclude from the holding of the assessee the extent certified by the Committee as uncultivable: Provided that no claim shall be entertained if the land in respect of which the relief is claimed forms less than ten per cent of the total holding of the person on one acre whichever is less: Provided further that the exclusion once made shall be in force for a period of five years only"; (iii) for the words "such crops and", the words "such classes of land, to such extent and" shall be substituted; (3) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(7)(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in such areas as may be notified by the State Government, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may, suo motu issue notice in the prescribed form to any person who, in the opinion of such officer, has cultivated during the previous year, land exceeding 160 acres of J class land or an extent equivalent thereto consisting of any one or more of the classes of land specified in Part II of the Schedule and has received agricultural income, calling upon him,- (i) to pay within the period specified in the notice, the lumpsum amount payable under sub-section (1); or (ii) to intimate within the period specified in the notice, that he elects to be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV. (b) If the person disputes the correctness of the extent of land held by him as mentioned in the notice under clause (a) he may apply to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer for an amendment or cancellation of the notice and such officer may, after such enquiry as he deems necessary, if satisfied that the notice requires modification, modify or cancel the notice. (c) On receipt of a notice issued under clause (a), subject to modification, if any, under clause (b), if the person pays the amount specified in the notice within the period specified therein the provisions of sub-section (6) shall apply as if he was granted permission under sub-section (4) for that year".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- "Schedule Part-I (See Section 3) Rates of Agricultural Income-tax 1. Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 8,000. Nil. 2. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 8,000 but does not exceed Rs. 15,000 12 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 8,000. 3. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 15,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000 Rs. 840 plus 15 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000. 4. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 25,000 Rs. 1,590 plus 20 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 5. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not exceed Rs. 30,000 Rs. 2,590 plus 25 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000. 6. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not exceed Rs. 35,000 Rs. 3,840 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 30,000. 7. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 35,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs. 5,340 plus 35 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 35,000. 8. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 75,000 Rs. 10,590 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000. 9. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 75,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 20,590 plus 45 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 75,000. 10. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 31,840 plus 65 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000: Provided that no agricultural income-tax shall be payable by a person who derives agricultural income from land not exceeding 160 acres of J class of land or an extent equivalent thereto consisting of any one or more of the classes of land specified in Part II: Part II (See Sections 66 and 67) A. Classification of lands:- Group I-Lands used for growing crops other than special crops. A Class Lands having facilities for assured irrigation from such Government canals and Government tanks as are notified by the State Government to be capable of supplying water for growing two crops of paddy in a year. B Class (i) Lands having facilities for assured irrigation from such Government canals and Government tanks as are notified by the State Government to be capable of supplying water for growing only one crop of paddy in a year; and (ii) Lands irrigated by such lift irrigation projects constructed and maintained by the State Government as are notified by the State Government to be capable of supplying water for growing two crops of paddy in a year. C Class (i) Lands irrigated from any Government source of irrigation including lift irrigation projects constructed and maintained by Government, other than those coming under A Class and B Class; and (ii) Lands having facilities for irrigation from a source where the system of supply of water is suitable for growing only a light irrigated crop, namely, crop other than paddy and sugarcane, shall come under this class. D Class Rainfed wet lands. E Class Lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a Government source and assessed to land revenue exceeding two rupees per acre. F Class Lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a Government source and assessed to land revenue exceeding rupee one and fifty paise per acre but not exceeding two rupees per acre. G Class Lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a Government source and assessed to land revenue exceeding one rupee per acre but not exceeding one rupee fifty paise per acre. H Class Lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a Government source and assessed to land revenue exceeding fifty paise per acre but not exceeding one rupee, per acre. J Class Lands classified as dry but not having any irrigation facilities from a Government source and assessed to land revenue of less than fifty paise per acre. Group II-Lands used for growing special crops. S Class (i) Lands used for growing grapes other than Bangalore Blue. (ii) Lands used for growing irrigated mulberry. (iii) Lands used for growing arecanut or Bangalore Blue grapes. (iv) Lands used for growing coconut. (v) Lands used for growing mulberry without irrigation. B. Formula for determining equivalent extent of lands of different classes. Group I 1 acre of A class land = 1.5 acres of B class land = 2.3 acres of C class land = 3 acres of D class land = 3.5 acres of E class land = 5.2 acres of F class land = 7 acres of G class land = 10.5 acres of H class land = 21 acres of J class land. Group II 1 acre of S(i) class land = 2.77 acres of S(ii) class land = 4 acres of S(iii) class land = 8.33 acres of S(iv) class land = 10 acres of S(v) class land = 100 acres of J class land." 
