Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing: Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of December, 1982. Received the assent of the Governor on the Third day of May, 1983
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the provisions of this Act shall apply to the assessment of agricultural income derived during any previous year ending on or after the Thirty-first day of March, 1982.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the principal Act,- (1) In clause (a), for sub-clause (1), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) any rent or revenue derived from land situated in the State of Karnataka and used for growing plantation crops"; (2) clause (j) and the proviso and explanation thereto shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the first day of April, 1975; (3) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(m1) "Joint Commissioner" means a person appointed to be the Joint Commissioner of Agricultural Income-tax under Section 17"; and (4) clause (vi) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), the words, "Part I of" shall be omitted; (2) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act, the words "from land situated" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), in the proviso to clause (k), after item (ii), the following item shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely:- "(iii) any sum paid on account of wealth tax under the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 (Central Act XXVII of 1957);"; (2) in sub-section (2), in clause (b), in item (iii),- (a) for the words, brackets and figures "notwithstanding anything contained in items (i) and (ii)", the words, brackets and figures "in lieu of the deductions referred to in items (i) and (ii)" shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the first day of April, 1975; and (b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the first day of April, 1975, namely:- "Provided further that if at any time during the said period of five years, there is a change of ownership of such land either by sale or otherwise, the amount referred to in item (iii) and remaining unspent on the date of such change of ownership shall be treated as income of the transferor for the year in which such change of ownership takes place".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) In computing the total agricultural income of any individual, there shall be included all such agricultural income as arises directly or indirectly,- (a) to the spouse of such individual,- (i) from the membership of the spouse in a firm in which such individual is a partner; (ii) from assets transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse by such individual otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with an agreement to live apart; (b) to a minor child (not being a married daughter) of such individual,- (i) from the admission of the minor to the benefits of partnership in a firm in which such individual is a partner; (ii) from assets transferred directly or indirectly to the minor child by such individual otherwise than for adequate consideration; and (c) to any person or association of persons from assets transferred directly or indirectly otherwise than for adequate consideration to the person or association of persons by such individual, to the extent to which the income from such assets is for the immediate or deferred benefits of his or her spouse or minor child (not being a married daughter) or both. Explanation:-For the purpose of clause (a), the individual, in computing whose total income the income referred to in that clause is to be included, shall be the husband or wife whose total income (excluding the income referred to in that clause) is greater, and for the purpose of clause (b), the income of the minor child of the partnership shall be included in the income of that parent whose total income (excluding the income referred to in that clause) is greater, and where any such income is once included in the total income of the either spouse or parent, any such income arising in any succeeding year shall not be included in the total income of the other spouse or parent unless the Agricultural Income-tax Officer or the Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer, as the case may be, is satisfied, after giving that spouse or parent an opportunity of being heard, that it is necessary so to do".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (g) of Section 12 of the principal Act, for the words, "is approved", the words, "subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed is approved" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "12-A Power of State Government to reduce, exempt or remit tax:-(1) The State Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, remit or reduce, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the tax payable under this Act or the lumpsum referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 67, in such areas, for such crops, during such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification. (2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is issued, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, or both Houses agree that the notification should not be made, it shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the principal Act, in the second proviso, for the word "further", the word "also" shall be substituted, and before the said proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided further that no loss, which has not been determined in pursuance of a return filed under Section 18 shall be carried forward and set off under this section".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(aa) Joint Commissioner of Agricultural Income-tax;".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the letter and words, "1st June every year", the words, "expiry of four months from the end of the previous year" shall be substituted; and (2) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that the return of agricultural income for the previous year ending on or after the 31st March, 1982, but before the date of commencement of the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983 shall be filed within four months from the date of commencement of the said Act",
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be and shall be deemed always to have been substituted, namely:- "27. Liability in case of discontinued firm or association:-(1) Where the business of a firm or association of persons is discontinued or such firm or association is dissolved, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer shall make the assessment of the agricultural income of the firm or association of persons as if no such discontinuance or dissolution has taken place and all the provisions relating to the levy of penalty or any other sum chargeable under any provisions of this Act shall apply, so far as may be, to such assessment. (2) Every person who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution, a partner of such firm or a member of such association and the legal representative of any such person who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally liable to the assessment on such agricultural income and also to pay the amount of agricultural income-tax, penalty or other sum payable and all the provisions of this Act, so far as may be shall apply to any such assessment or imposition of penalty or other sum".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "32-A. Revisional powers of the Deputy Commissioner -(1) The Deputy Commissioner may, of his own motion, call for and examine the record of any order passed or proceeding recorded under the provision of this Act by an Agricultural Income-tax Officer or an Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer or any other officer subordinate to him and against which no appeal has been preferred under Section 32, for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of such order or as to the regularity of such proceeding in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of revenue and pass such orders with respect thereto as he thinks fit. (2) In relation to an order of assessment passed under this Act, the power under sub-section (1) shall be exercisable only within a period of three years from the date on which the order was passed. (3) No order shall be passed under sub-section (1) enhancing any assessment, unless an opportunity has been given to the assessee to show cause against the proposed enhancement".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 34 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Any officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf or any assessee objecting to an order of the Agricultural Income-tax Officer or an Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer under Section 23, or an order passed by the Deputy Commissioner under Section 22 or Section 32 or Section 32-A, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within sixty days from the date on which the notice of such order was communicated to the assessee".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 35 of the principal Act, after the word "Commissioner" wherever it occurs, the words "or Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 36 of the principal Act, in the third proviso, after the figures "32", the figures and letter "32-A", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (1) in clause (b), after the word and figures "Section 32" the words figures and letter "or in revision under Section 32-A" shall be inserted; and (2) in clause (c), after the word "Commissioner", the words, "or Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 38 of the principal Act, in item (c), after the word "Commissioner", the words "Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the word and figures "Section 32", the word, figures and letter "Section 32-A", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 44 of the principal Act, after the words "the provisions of" the words, brackets and figures "clause (b) of sub-section (2-A) of Section 18," shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the word "Commissioner", the words "or the Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 47 of the principal Act for the words "Deputy Commissioner", the words "Deputy Commissioner, the Joint Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 55 of the principal Act, after the word "Commissioner" wherever it occurs, the words "or the Joint Commissioner" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 57 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), after the words "an Income-tax Practitioner", the words "or a Sales Tax Practitioner" shall be inserted; and (2) in sub-section (3), after clause (iv), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(v) "Sales Tax Practitioner" means any person enrolled in the prescribed manner as Sales Tax Practitioner under clause (c) of Section 36 of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 25 of 1957)".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 61 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that no such extension shall be granted unless the assessee undertakes to pay, in addition to the tax payable, interest at twelve per cent per annum on the tax due as per the return from the due date specified in sub-section (1) of Section 18 upto the date of actual payment of such tax".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka Sections 66 and 67 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- Schedule (See Section 3) Rates of Agricultural Income-tax 1. Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 14,000 Nil 2. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 14,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000. 25 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 14,000. 3. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 30,000. Rs. 1,500 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. 4. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 30,000 but does not exceed Rs. 40,000. Rs. 4,500 plus 35 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 30,000. 5. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 40,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000. Rs. 8,000 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 40,000. 6. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 75,000. Rs. 12,000 plus 45 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000. 7. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 75,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000. Rs. 23,250 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 75,000. 8. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. Rs. 35,750 plus 65 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the amendments made by this Act, the State Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1983 (Karnataka Ordinance 3 of 1983) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
