Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty Eighth Year of Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987.1 (2) It shall come into force on the First day of April, 1987. Received the assent of the Governor on the Second day of April, 1987
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that where by virtue of any provision of this Act, agricultural income-tax is to be charged in respect of the income of a period other than the previous year, agricultural income-tax shall be charged accordingly".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 5-A of the principal Act, for the first proviso to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that the amount deducted under this sub-section shall not exceed forty thousand rupees".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (2-A), for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that in the case of a person whose total agricultural income as determined by the Agricultural Income-tax Officer is less than twenty thousand rupees, the penalty imposed shall not exceed one hundred rupees". (2) after sub-section (2-A), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2-B) If any person who has not been served with a notice under sub-section (2) has sustained a loss in any previous year and claims that the loss or any part thereof should be carried forward under Section 15, he may furnish, within the time allowed under sub-section (1), or within such further time which on an application made in the prescribed manner, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may, in his discretion a return of loss in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and containing such other particulars as may be prescribed, and all the provisions of the Act, shall apply as if it were a return under sub-section (1)".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 19 of the principal Act, sub-sections (5) and (6) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 19 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "19-A. Assessment of registered firm:-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 19 of the principal Act and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), in the case of a registered firm, after assessing the total income of the firm- (i) the agricultural income-tax payable by the firm itself shall be determined; and (ii) the share of each partner in the income of the firm shall be included in his total income and assessed to tax accordingly. (2) If such share of any partner is a loss, it shall be set off against his other income or carried forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Section 15. (3) When any of the partners of a registered firm is a non-resident, the tax on his share in the income of the firm shall be assessed on the firm at the rate or rates which would be applicable if it were assessed on him personally, and the tax so assessed shall be paid by the firm. (4) A registered firm may retain out of the share of each partner in the income of the firm a sum not exceeding thirty-five per cent thereof until such time as the tax which may be levied on the partner in respect of that share is paid by him, and when the tax so levied cannot be recovered from the partner, where wholly or in part, the firm shall be liable to pay the tax, to the extent of the amount retained or could have been so retained. 19-B. Assessment of unregistered firm:-In the case of an unregistered firm, the Agricultural Income-tax Officer- (a) may determine the tax payable by the firm itself on the basis of the total income of the firm; or (b) if, in his opinion, the aggregate amount of the tax payable by the firm if it was assessed as a registered firm and the tax payable by the partners individually if the firm were so assessed would be greater than the aggregate amount of the tax payable by the firm under clause (a) and the tax which would be payable by the partners individually, may proceed to make the assessment under sub-section (1) of Section 19-A as if the firm were a registered firm; and where the procedure specified in this clause is applied to any registered firm, the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 19-A shall apply thereto as they apply in relation to a registered firm. 19-C. Method of computing a partners share in the income of the firm:-(1) In computing the total income of an assessee who is a partner of a firm, whether the net result of a computation of total income of the firm is a profit or a loss, his share (whether a net profit or net loss) shall be computed as follows:- (a) any interest, salary, commission or other remuneration paid to any partner in respect of the previous year, and, where the firm is a registered firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm under clause (b) of Section 19-B, the Agricultural Income-tax, if any, payable by it in respect of the total income of the previous year, shall be deducted from the total income of the firm and the balance ascertained and apportioned among the partners; (b) where the amount apportioned to the partner under clause (a) is a loss any salary, interest, commission or other remuneration paid to the partner by the firm in respect of the previous year shall be added to that amount, and the result shall be treated as the partners share in the income of the firm; (c) where the amount apportioned to the partner under clause (a) is a loss any salary, interest, commission or other remuneration paid to the partner by the firm in respect of the previous year shall be adjusted against that amount, and the result shall be treated as the partners share in the income of the firm. (2) If the share of a partner in the income of a registered firm or an unregistered firm assessed as a registered firm under clause (b) of Section 19-B, as computed under this section, is a loss, such loss may be set off, or carried forward and set off, in accordance with the provisions of the Act. 19-D. Time limit for completion of assessments and re-assessment:-(1) No assessment under Sections 19, 19-A, 19-B, and 19-C for any year shall be made after a period of three years from the date on which the return under Section 18, for that year is submitted by an assessee. (2) In computing the period of limitation for assessment under Sections 19, 19-A, 19-B and 19-C- (a) the time during which the proceedings for assessment in question have been deferred on account of any stay order granted by any Court or any other authority shall be excluded; (b) the time during which the assessment has been deferred in any case or class of cases by the Commissioner for reasons to be recorded in writing shall be excluded: Provided that nothing contained in this section limiting the time within which assessment may be made, shall apply to an assessment made on the assessee or any person in consequence of, or to give effect to any finding, direction or order made under Sections 32, 32-A, 34 and 35 or any judgment or order made by any Court: Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to any assessment proceeding which is pending prior to the commencement of the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987. (3) Where an assessment under this section is not concluded within the time specified in sub-section (1), the total and taxable income declared by an assessee in the annual return shall be deemed to have been assessed for that year on the basis of the said return and the tax so assessed shall be payable by the assessee."
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "26. Assessment in case of discontinued company, firm or association -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, where agricultural income is received by a company, firm or association of persons and the business through which such income is received is discontinued in any assessment year, the income for the period form the expiry of the previous year for that assessment year upto the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Agricultural Income-tax Officer be charged to tax in that assessment year. (2) The total income of each completed previous year or part of the previous year included in such period shall be chargeable to tax at the rate or rates in force in that assessment year, and separate assessments shall be made in respect of each such completed previous year or part of any previous year. (3) Any person discontinuing any such business shall give to the Agricultural Income-tax Officer notice of such discontinuance within thirty days thereof and where any person fails to give the notice required by this sub-section, such officer may direct that a sum shall be recovered from him by way of penalty not exceeding the amount of agricultural income-tax subsequently assessed on him in respect of any agricultural income of the company, firm or association of persons upto the date of the discontinuance of the business. (4) Where any business through which agricultural income is received is discontinued in any year, any sum received after the discontinuance shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient and charged to tax accordingly in the year of receipt, if such sum would have been included in the total income of the person who carried on the business had such sum been received before such discontinuance. (5) Where an assessment is to be made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) the Agricultural Income-tax Officer may serve on the person whose agricultural income is to be assessed or in the case of a firm on any person who was a member of such firm at the time of its discontinuance or, in the case of a company, on the principal officer thereof or, on the recipient as the case may be, a notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under sub-section (2) of Section 18 and the provisions of the Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under that sub- section".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the figures "30" the figures "30, 36, 37" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 36 of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and figures "in cases falling under sub-section (3) of Section 40, at any time within five years and in other cases at any time within three years" the words "at any time within five years" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "41-A. Payment of interest -Where any amount refundable to any person under an order made under any provisions of this Act is not refunded to him within ninety days- (a) of the date of such order, if that order is made by the refunding authority; or (b) of the date of receipt of such order by the refunding authority, if that order is made by an authority other than the refunding authority, The refunding authority shall pay such person simple interest at the rate of twelve per cent per annum on the said amount from the day immediately following the expiry of the said ninety days to the day of the refund: Provided that the interest calculable shall be on the balance of the amount remaining after adjusting out of the refundable amount any tax, penalty or other amount due under this Act, for any year by the person on the date from which such interest is calculable. Explanation I -If the delay or any part thereof in granting the refund within the aforesaid period of ninety days is attributable to the person to whom the refund is payable the period of such delay shall be excluded for the purpose of calculation of interest. Explanation II -The expression "refunding authority" means an Assistant Agricultural Income-tax Officer or Agricultural Income-tax Officer or any other Officer authorised to make any assessment or to levy penalty or both by or under this Act. Explanation III -The interest payable for a part of a month shall be proportionately determined.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words "and where the whole of such extent is used for deriving agricultural income by growing coffee either exclusively or interplanted with Banana, Coconut, Cardamom, Pepper or Orange" shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from 1st April, 1985.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- Schedule (See Section 3) Rates of Agricultural Income-tax Part I In case of a person other than a Company or a Registered Firm:- Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 20,000. Nil. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 35,000 121/2 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 35,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs. 1,875 plus 20 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 35,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 75,000 Rs. 4,875 plus 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 75,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 12,375 plus 40 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 75,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. Rs. 22,375 plus 50 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. Part II In case of a Registered Firm:- Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 20,000. Nil. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 25,000 5 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 25,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 Rs. 250 plus 7 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 1,750 plus 15 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 9,250 plus 24 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. Part III In the case of a Company:- Where the total agricultural income does not exceed Rs. 20,000. Nil. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 50,000 30 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 20,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 50,000 but does not exceed Rs. 1,00,000 Rs. 9,000 plus 45 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 50,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 5,00,000 Rs. 31,500 plus 55 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 2,51,500 plus 60 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 5,00,000. Where the total agricultural income exceeds Rs. 10,00,000. Rs. 5,51,500 plus 65 per cent of the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 10,00,000".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The provisions of Section 26 of the principal Act shall have effect, and shall be deemed always to have had effect, in relation to the period commencing on the first day of April, 1975, and ending with the date immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act as if that section also provided for the assessment of any sum received after the discontinuance of any business through which agricultural income is received, in the year of receipt, in the hands of the recipient, if such sum would have been included in the total income of the person who carried on the business had such sum been received before such discontinuance. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or Tribunal or other authority, all assessments, re-assessments, revisions of assessment and collections of tax made or purporting to have been made in pursuance of the provisions of Section 26 and or Section 27 of the principal Act, and all proceedings, acts or things taken or done for the purpose of, or in relation to, the levy or collection of tax, before the commencement of this Act, shall for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been levied taken or done as validly and effectively as if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force when such tax was levied, or proceedings or acts or things were taken or done and, accordingly,- (a) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in or before any Court or any Tribunal or other authority for the refund of any amount received or realised by way of such tax; (b) no Court, Tribunal or other authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any amount received or realised by way of such tax; (c) where any amount which had been received or realised by way of such tax had been refunded before the commencement of this Act and such refund would not have been allowed if provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force on the date on which the order for such refund was passed, the amount so refunded may be recovered as an arrear of tax under the principal Act; and (d) any proceeding, act or thing which could have been validly taken, continued or done for the levy of such tax at any time before the commencement of this Act if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force but which had not been taken, continued or done, may after such commencement be taken, continued or done. (3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall be construed as preventing any person,- (a) from questioning the levy or collection of tax or any proceeding, act or thing in connection therewith; or (b) from claiming any refund, In accordance with the provisions of the principal Act read with sub-section (1). 
