Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirteenth year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of April, 1962 Received the assent of the Governor on twenty-eighth day of September, 1962
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Mysore Agricultural Income-tax Act, 1957 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act);- (1) in clause (b), for the words "under this Act", the words and figures "under Section 3" shall be substituted; (2) after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(vv) "Super-tax" means a tax payable under Section 53- A;"
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:- "Chapter VIIA Super Tax 53-A. Charge of super-tax -In addition to the agricultural income-tax charged for any year, there shall be charged, levied and paid for that year in respect of the total agricultural income of the previous year of any person an additional tax, referred to as super-tax, at the rate of rates laid down in Part I-A of the Schedule: Provided that when the profits and gains of an unregistered firm or other association of persons not being a company have been assessed to super-tax, such tax shall not again be payable by a partner of the firm or a member of the association, as the case may be, in respect of the amount of such profits and gains which is proportionate to his share. 53-B. Total agricultural income for purposes of super-tax -The total agricultural income of any person for the purposes of the levy of super-tax shall be the total agricultural income determined and assessed to agricultural income tax under Section 3, and where an assessment of total agricultural income has become final and conclusive for the purposes of agricultural income-tax for any year, the assessment shall also be final and conclusive for the purpose of super tax for the same year. 53-C. Application of Act to super-tax -All the provisions of this Act relating to the charge, assessment, collection and recovery of agricultural income-tax, except those contained in sub-section (1) of Section 3, shall apply so far as may be, to the charge, assessment collection and recovery of super-tax".
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 67 of the principal Act after the words "agricultural income-tax" the words "and super-tax" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After part I of the Schedule to the principal Act, the following part shall be inserted, namely:- "Part I-A (See Section 53-A) Rates of Super-tax (1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of the total agricultural income. Nil (2) On the next Rs. 25,000 of the total agricultural income. Nine naye paise in the rupee. (3) On the next Rs. 25,000 of the total agricultural income. Twelve naye paise in the rupee. (4) On the next Rs. 25,000 of the total agricultural income. Fifteen naye paise in the rupee. (5) On the balance of the total agricultural income. Twenty naye paise in the rupee"
Karnataka Agricultural Income-tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the amendments made by the Act in the principal Act, the State Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
