Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1966) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980.1 (2) Section 19 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of May, 1975, Sections 2(1), 2(4), 3, 4, 5(1)(a), (b), (d), 5(2), 5(3)(a), 6(1)(a), (b), (d), 7, 8, 16, 17(2), 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 40, 41 and 42 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of June, 1979, Sections 32 and 33 shall come into force at once and other provisions shall be deemed to have come into force on the Third day of November, 1979. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-ninth day of April, 1980
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as the " Principal Act")- (1) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely- "(1) "agricultural produce" means the produce or goods specified in the Schedule;" (2) in clause (16), the words "a Taluk Development Board or a local authority" shall be omitted; (3) clause (17) shall be omitted; (4) after clause (38), the following clause shall be inserted, namely- "(38-A) "Schedule" means the Schedule to this Act;".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8 of the principal Act, in the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (1), after the words "agricultural produce", the words "other than cattle, sheep and goats" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For sub-section (3) of Section 9 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every market committee shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be a local authorit."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1)- (a) in clause (i), for the words "seven agriculturists" the words "nine agriculturists of whom one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (ii), for the words "two traders", the words "one trader" shall be substituted; (c) clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) shall be omitted; (d) after clause (viii) the following clause shall be inserted, namely- "(ix) two shall be persons nominated by the State Government of whom one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes"; (e) in the first proviso, for the words, brackets and figures "clauses (ii) to (vii)", the words, brackets and figures "clauses (ii) to (iv)" shall be substituted. (2) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely- "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an Administrator, an officer or any other person is appointed under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959), to exercise the powers of the Taluk Marketing Society which is represented on the market committee, such Administrator, officer or person, shall, if not disqualified under Section 16, be nominated as member of the market committee." (3) in sub-section (4)- (a) in clause (a), after the words "Save as otherwise provided in this Act", the words "but subject to the pleasure of the State Government" shall be inserted; (b) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely- "(b) A person who is nominated as a member under clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall hold office so long only as he continues to be the member of the Taluk Marketing Society."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 11 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1)- (a) in clause (i), for the words "seven members shall be persons", the words "nine members shall be persons of whom one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (ii), for the words "two members shall be persons", the words "one member shall be a person" shall be substituted; (c) clause (v) and the provisos below it, clause (vi) and clause (vii) shall be omitted; (d) after clause (viii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely- "(ix) two members shall be persons nominated by the State Government of whom one shall be a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes who shall hold office at the pleasure of the State Government". (e) in the first proviso to sub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figures "clauses (ii) to (vii)" the words, brackets and figures "clauses (ii) to (iv)" shall be substituted; (f) after the second proviso to sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- "Provided also that where there is more than one Taluk Marketing Society of the class specified in clause (iv) a representative of such societies who is not disqualified under Section 16, elected by the members of the committees of management of such societies, shall be a member of the market committee." (g) the explanation shall be omitted; (2) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an Administrator, an officer or any other person is appointed under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) to exercise the powers of a Taluk Marketing Society which is represented in the Market Committee, such Administrator, officer or person shall, if not disqualified under Section 16, ex officio be a member of the Market Committee."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 14 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1)- (a) in clause (i), for the word "seven" the word "nine" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (ii), for the words "two representatives", the words "one representative" shall be substituted. (2) in sub-section (2), for the words "seven agriculturists constituencies", the words "nine agriculturists constituencies and shall reserve one such constituency for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the principal Act, at the end of clause (i), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- "Provided that to be qualified to be elected by the agriculturists constituency reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, he shall also be a member of such castes or tribes".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the principal Act, in clause (2)- (a) after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall be inserted namely- "(ba) if he has been convicted for an offence punishable under Section 114 of this Act, such conviction not having been subsequently set aside; or" (b) in sub-clause (c), for the words, brackets and figures "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act 5 of 1898)", the words, brackets and figures "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974)" shall be substituted; (c) in clause (i) of the proviso, for the words, brackets and letter "sub-clause (b)", the words, brackets and letters "sub-clauses (b) and (ba)" and after the words "such sentence", the words "or such conviction, as the case may be" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)- (a) for clause (iii), the following clause shall be substituted namely- "(iii) if the candidate does not make the choice referred to in clause (i) before the expiration of the period prescribed thereunder, his seat in all the constituencies shall become vacant."; (b) in the Explanation, for the words, figures and brackets "any of the institutions referred to in clauses (vi) to (vii)", the words, brackets and figures "the institution referred to in clause (iv)" shall be substituted
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 42 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following proviso and sub-section shall be inserted, namely- "Provided that the Chief Marketing Officer may, at any time thereafter appoint any other officer to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the market committee and its Chairman. (3) The Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint an Advisory Committee consisting of not more than fifteen persons to advise and assist the Tahsildar or the officer appointed by the Chief Marketing Officer, as the case may be, in the exercise of the powers and the performance and discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him under this Act. The members of the Advisory Committee shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government and shall be entitled to such honorarium and travelling and other allowances as may be prescribed".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 43 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following shall be inserted, namely- "Provided that the Chief Marketing Officer may at any time thereafter appoint any other officer to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Chairman."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two-thirds of the total number of the members of the market committee" the words "two-thirds of all the then members of the market committee" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 55 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely- "(6) The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (5) shall apply also to contracts relating to execution of any works proposed to be carried out at the expense of the market committee: Provided that if such works are undertaken with the assistance by way of grant by the State Government or the Central Government or by way of loan from any financing agency the repayment of which has been guaranteed by the State Government, the contract shall be entered into by an officer of the State Government authorised by it and the work shall be executed under the supervision of such officer".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 56 of the principal Act, after the words "the Secretary shall be the Chief Executive Officer", the words "and the custodian of all the records and properties" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 59 of the principal Act- (1) in the heading, the word "certain" shall be omitted; (2) in sub-section (1), the words and figures "on the Twenty-fourth day of February, 1966 and continuing to hold such posts" shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted; (3) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely- "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, officers and servants of market committees holding such classes of posts on such dates as may be specified by the State Government shall, with effect from such date become officers and servants of the State Government and they shall draw their salary and allowances from the Consolidated Fund of the State."; (4) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (1)", the words, brackets, letter and figure "or sub-section (1-A)" shall be inserted; (5) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (1)", the words, brackets, letter and figure "or sub-section (1-A)" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 61 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1)- (a) for the words and figures "the market committee may employ such officers and servants other than those specified under Section 58", the words and figures "and with the previous approval of the Chief Marketing Officer, the market committee may appoint by promotion or otherwise such officers and servants other than those specified under Sections 58 and 59" shall be substituted; (b) for the words "and may pay", the words "and may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and with the previous approval of the Chief Marketing Officer pay" shall be substituted. (2) in sub-section (3)- (a) for the words "four months", the words "three months" shall be substituted; (b) for the words "one hundred and twenty rupees", the words "one hundred and fifty rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 62 of the principal Act- (1) in the heading, at the end, the letters "etc." shall be inserted; (2) at the end, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- "Provided that the State Government may, by notification constitute the officers and servants holding the classes of posts specified by the State Government under sub-section (1-A) of Section 59 into a separate service for the State to be designated as the "Kamataka State Market Committee Service".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 63 of the principal Act- (1) in clause (ii) of sub-section (1), for the word "Marketing", the words "transport and marketing" shall be substituted. (2) in sub-section (2)- (a) in clause (a)- (i) after item (i), the following shall be inserted, namely- (ia) provide either independently or along with some other authority necessary facilities for the transport of notified agricultural produce in and to the yard;" (ii) in item (ii), for the word "marketing" the words "transport and marketing" shall be substituted. (b) in clause (b), after item (vii), the following item shall be inserted, namely- "(viii) grant loans to the State Agricultural Marketing Board or other market committees".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 65 of the princial Act- (1) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from 19th day of May, 1975, namely- "(1) In respect of the agricultural produce sold in a market area, there shall be levied and collected by the market committee thereof, from every seller, market fees at the rate of one per cent of the sale proceeds of the produce so sold"; (2) sub-section (1) as so substituted shall be and shall be deemed to have been omitted with effect from the 28th day of September, 1978; (3) in sub-section (2), for the words "one rupee", the words "two rupees" shall be substituted; (4) sub-section (3) shall be and shall be deemed always to have been omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 66 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words and figures, "Sections 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974)" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 67 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words and figures "Sections 523, 524 and 525 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "Sections 457, 458 and 459 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974)" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 74 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely- "(d) of the Chief Marketing Officer under Sections 9 and 61, may, within sixty days from the date on which the order is communicated to him, appeal to the Government."; (2) in sub-section (2) for the words "or the Co-operative Appellate Tribunal", the words "the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal or the Government" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 78 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "one and a half per cent", the words "two per cent" shall be substituted; (2) after sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely- "Provided that in the case of fruits, vegetables and flowers, commission may be charged upto four per cent."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 84 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely- "84-A. Sections 75, 76, 77 and 84 not to apply to certain sales -Nothing in Sections 75, 76, 77 and 84 shall apply to a sale by one licensed trader to another licensed trader and to disputes arising from such sales".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 91 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (1), in clause (i), after the words and figures "under Section 58", the words and figures "or Section 59" shall be inserted; (2) in sub-section (2), the words "uniform" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 93 of the principal Act, in clause (v), after the figures "84", the following words and figures shall be inserted namely- "and the members of the Advisory Committee appointed under Section 42".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka Section 108 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (2) thereof and in the sub-section (2) as so renumbered, for the words "the provisions" the words "Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions" shall be substituted and before sub-section (2) as so renumbered and amended, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely- "(1) The Board shall meet for the transaction of its business at least once in every three months at such place and at such time as the Chairman may determine."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 110 of the principal Act, after the words "receipt of the Board", a comma and the words "including loans raised" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 111 of the principal Act- (1) in item (iii), after the words "financially weak", the words "or needy" shall be inserted; (2) after item (ix), the following item shall be inserted, namely- "(ixa) general improvement of the facilities for the transport of notified agricultural produce to the market yard, market sub-yard or sub-market yard, and the marketing thereof".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 112 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely- "(2) It shall be the duty of the Board to advise on any matter referred to it by the State Government".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 114 of the principal Act- (1) for the words "Any person who fraudulently", the word "Whoever" shall be substituted; (2) for the words "which may extend to five hundred rupees", the words "which shall be a sum equal to the amount of fee or other amount due or three thousand rupees whichever is less" shall be substituted; (3) for the words "one hundred", the words "two hundred" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 117 of the principal Act- (1) after the words "without a valid licence", the words, brackets and figures "or whoever in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 8 uses any place for purchase or sale of notified agricultural produce" shall be inserted; (2) for the words "or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both", the words "and with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (3) for the words "fifty rupees per day", the words "two hundred rupees per day" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 118 of the principal Act, for the words "three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees", the words "six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 121 of the principal Act, for the words "three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both", the words "one year and with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 36--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 126 of the principal Act- (1) for the words "any market committee", the words "any officer subordinate to it or any market committee" shall be substituted; (2) for the words "by the market committee", the words "by the officer or the market committee, as the case may be", shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 37--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 140 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the figures 60, shall be omitted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 38--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 146 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of sub-section (2), after the words "into constituencies", a comma and the words "reservation of one agriculturists" constituency for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 39--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 152 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely- "152-A. Power to amend the Schedule-The State Government may, by notification, add to, amend or delete any of the items of agricultural produce specified in the Schedule and thereupon the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended accordingly".
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 40--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 153 of the principal Act, after the words and figures "Section 133", the words and figures "or Section 152-A" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 41--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 157 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be inserted namely- "Schedule I. Animal Husbandry 1. Butter 6. Poultry 2. Cattle 7. Pigs 3. Eggs 8. Sheep 4. Ghee 9. Skins and Hides 5. Goats 10. Wool II. Fibres 1. Cotton (ginned and unginned) 2. Mesta 3. Sunnhemp III. Flowers 1. All flowers IV. Food Crops 1. Bajra 7. Paddy 2. Jan 8. Ragi 3. Jowar 9. Rice 4. Kambu 10. Save 5. Maize 11. Wheat 6. Navane V. Forest Produce 1. Antwala 7. Neem seeds 2. Bamboo 8. Ree-thaa 3. Canes 9. Reeds 4. Hippe seeds 10. Soapnut 5. Honge seeds 11. Tamarind 6. Myrobalans 12. Tamarind seeds VI. Fruits 1. Apple 11. Kharbuja 2. Banana 12. Mango 3. Borehannu 13. Mosumbi 4. Citrus fruits 14. Marsebu 5. Chakotraihannu 15. Pineapple 6. Guava 16. Papaya 7. Grapes 17. Pomegranate 8. Jack 18. Sapota 9. Jamun 19. Siddote 10. Lemon VII. Oil Seeds 1. Groundnut 6. Nigerseeds (shelled and unshelled) 7. Rape seeds 2. Castor seeds 8. Safflower 3. Cotton seeds 9. Sesamum 4. Linseed 10. Sunflower seeds 5. Mustard VIII. Plantation Crops and Spices 1. Arecanut 7. Coriander 2. Cardamom 8. Garlic 3. Cashewnut 9. Ginger 4. Chillies (dry) 10. Methi 5. Coconut 11. Pepper 6. Copra 12. Turmeric IX. Pulses 1. Alasande (Cowpea) (whole and split) 7. Horsegram 8. Lakh (whole and split) 2. Avare (whole and split) 9. Matki (whole and split) 3. Bengalgram (whole and split) 10. Masoor (whole and split) 4. Blackgram (whole and split) 11. Moath (whole and split) 5. Bullar (whole and split) 12. Peas 6. Greengram (whole and split) 13. Tur (whole and split) X. Vegetables 1. All vegetables (including leaf) 5. Potato 2. Gourds 6. Suvarnagedde 3. Green chillies 7. Sweet potato 4. Onions 8. Tomato XI. Wood 1. Beete (Rose) 11. Jamba 2. Bilwala 12. Kalan 3. Firewood 13. Kindal 4. Ganjan 14. Mango 5. Hadga 15. Mathi 6. Haldi 16. Nandi 7. Hanimattal 17. Rampatre 8. Honne 18. Teak 9. Iyani 19. White cedar 10. Jack tree XII. Other Products 1. Amboda seeds 6. Prawns 2. Betel leaves 7. Seegu 3. Crabs 8. Sugarcane 4. Fish 9. Tobacco". 5. Jaggery 
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 1980_Section 42--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any decree, order or judgment of any Court, or other authority any levy or collection of market fee made or purported to have been made, any action taken or thing done in relation to such levy or collection under the provisions of the principal Act before the commencement of this section shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such levy or collection or action or thing had been made, taken or done under the principal Act as amended by this Act and accordingly- (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or action taken by any market committee in connection with the levy and collection of such market fee shall for all purposes be deemed to be or to have always been made, done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any Court or before any authority for the refund of any such market fee; and (c) no Court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such fee. (2) (a) The Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1979 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 16 of 1979) is hereby repealed. (b) Notwithstanding such repeal, any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued or deemed to have been taken, made or issued under the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1979 shall be deemed to have been taken, made or issued under this Act as if this Act were in force at all relevant times and any reference therein to the said Ordinance shall be deemed to be a reference to this Act and they shall continue in force accordingly unless and until superseded by any action taken or any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form or bye-law made or issued under this Act or any other law. (3) Notwithstanding the amendments made to the principal Act by Sections 5 and 6 of this Act, the members of a market committee representing the traders as on the 30th day of June, 1979 shall continue to be members thereof till the expiry of their term of office or till the committee is reconstituted, whichever is earlier. 
