Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 27 of 1966) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty Second year of the Republic of India, as follows:
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act' may be called the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from twenty fourth day of January 2001.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act 1966 (Karnataka Act, 27 of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, in sub-section (4), in clause (a), in the proviso, for the words "one year" the words "two years" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 44 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, for the words "one year" the words "six months" shall be substituted. (2) for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted namely,- "(2) If the motion against the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman or both is carried by a majority of the total number of members present and voting at a meeting specially convened for the purpose, the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman shall forthwith vacate the office of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman as the case may be."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (a) after item (xii) the following shall be inserted namely,- "(xiii) contribute to the Floor Price Scheme and Raita Sanjeevini Accidental Insurance Scheme at such rate as may be determined by the Director of Agricultural Marketing."
Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 1 of 2001) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
