Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund Act, 1983. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund Act, 1983 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1985) for the purpose hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-seventh day of March, 1996
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund Act, 1983 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1985) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1)- (a) for the words "rupees one hundred" in the two places where they occur, the words "rupees one thousand" shall be substituted; (b) after the proviso, the following shall be inserted, namely- "Provided further that the Advocates, who have already become members, shall pay the balance amount of rupees eight hundred towards admission fee within six months from the date of coming into force of the Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996." (c) after sub-section (1), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(1-A) If any Advocate fails to pay the admission fee within the time stipulated under sub-section (1), such fee may be paid together with late fee of rupees ten per month or part of a month subject to a maximum of rupees one hundred."
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), after the words "permanent disability", the words "or in the event of death of a member, to his nominee or where there is no nominee, to his legal heirs, as the case may be" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "two rupees", the words, "five rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "member of the fund", the word "Advocate" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 23 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely- "23-A. Contribution by Senior Advocate -(1) Every designated Senior Advocate shall contribute rupees two thousand five hundred per year to the Fund. (2) if any designated Senior Advocate fails to pay the contribution under sub-section (1), before the last day of the month next to the month in which the contribution becomes due, such contribution may be paid together with late fee of rupees twenty-five per month or part of a month subject to a maximum of rupees five hundred."
Karnataka Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 26-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely- "(aa) contribution made by the State Government." 
