Arsikere Town Municipality (Extension of Limits) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for the extension of the limits of the Arsikere Town Municipality and to provide for certain other matters connected therewith. Whereas, it is expedient to provide for the extension of the limits of the Arsikere Town Municipality and to provide for certain other matters connected therewith; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Arsikere Town Municipality (Extension of Limits) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Arsikere Town Municipality (Extension of Limits) Act, 1982.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of March, 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the Nineteenth day of February, 1983
Arsikere Town Municipality (Extension of Limits) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 22 of 1964) or in any other law, decree, order, or judgment of any Court or other authority, with effect from the date of commencement of this Act - (a) the area (hereinafter referred to as the local area) the boundaries of which are specified in Schedule A to this Act which is known as railway colony, Arsikere shall be included in and form part of the Arsikere Town Municipality and the boundaries of the said Town Municipality after such inclusion shall be as specified in Schedule B to this Act; and (b) all appointments, notifications, rules, bye-laws, orders, resolutions, directions and powers (including any tax levied), issued, made or exercised under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 or any other law applicable to the Arsikere Town Municipality shall apply to the said local area. (2) Elections held during 1979 to the Arsikere Town Municipality including the local area shall be deemed to be valid as if the local area had been within the limits of the Arsikere Town Municipality at all relevant times. Schedule A The boundaries of the Railway Colony, Arsikere, to be included within the limits of the Arsikere Town Municipality. Railway boundary starts from land mortgage building (Municipal Office), then runs towards South of Arsikere-Hassan Road, right side houses from Khata No. 40 to 29, then continues at Arsikere-Hassan Road behind houses No. 29 to house No. bearing 38,29 and upto septic tank and Church Road. Further turns to West along the Church Road upto in front of church and garden then straight line leads upto Malleshwara Bettada Road. Towards North it runs along Malleshwara Bettada Road by the side of Kalana Koppalu Village School and front of Narasimhaiahs house upto Railway track. Beyond Railway track it turns to East and runs in front of Dathatraya Ashrama by the side of Edigara colony, Laxmipura in front of B.P. Siddaramappas house and by side of Sweepers Colony upto R.M.S. Quarters. Again turns to North upto Vani building compound and towards East behind Ratna Talkies. Then turns to South via. Forest Range Office compounds and to East along the same compound and straight runs by the side of Hotel Raghavendra and behind Kasim sait lane houses and Kodimutt buildings. Schedule B The boundaries of the limits of the Town Municipality Arsikere after inclusion of the Railway colony. The boundary line starts from the North-Eastern corner bond stone of survey number 274 (T.B.), runs along the Northern boundary line of survey number 274. Crosses the Southern Railway line and turns to the South along Arsikere Channarayapatna Road and skirts along the Western boundary line of survey numbers 275, 276, 277, 311, 312 and 315, crosses the road at the junction of Hassan-Arsikere Road and follows the Eastern boundary of survey number 485 and Western boundary of survey number 488 and Arsikere-Channarayapatna road and Eastern boundary of Southern Railway station yard limits. Then it turns North along the boundary of station yard upto the west boundary mark of survey number 418. Then it takes a turn towards North-East passing along the Northern boundary line of survey numbers 418, 432 and 430 till it reaches Bangalore-Honnavara Road, then it turns along Bangalore-Honnavar Road and crosses the road to reach the North-West corner of survey number 425, and runs along the Northern boundary line of survey number 425, Southern boundary of survey number 467 and survey number 1, Eastern boundary of survey number 1, Western boundary of survey number 2 and Northern boundary survey number 2 and Southern boundary of survey numbers 4 and 36. Then it runs southwards along Eastern boundary of survey number 37 and crosses Arsikere-Huliyar Road. It skirts along the Eastern and Southern boundary line of survey number 259 and Northern boundary of survey number 261. It then follows the Western boundary line of survey numbers 261, 262, 263, 269 and 270. At the North-West corner of survey number 271, it crosses the Bangalore-Honnavar Road and joins North-East corner boundary mark of survey number 274. 
