Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 9 of 1962) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-third year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-third day of April, 1992
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961 (Karnataka Act 9 of 1962) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (a) in the long title, for the words "Ayurvedic and Unani" the words "Ayurvedic, Naturopathy, Siddha, Unani and Yoga" shall be substituted; (b) in the preamble, for the words "Ayurvedic and Unani", wherever they occur, the words "Ayurvedic Naturopathy, Siddha, Unani and Yoga" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 1 of the principal Act, for the words "Ayurvedic, Naturopathy, Siddha, Unani and Yoga" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the principal Act - (a) clause "(a)" shall be relettered, as "(aa)" and before clause (aa) as so relettered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(a) "Amendment Act", means the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992". (b) in the explanation to clause (e) - (i) for the word "four" the word "five" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "Siddha, Naturopathy and Unani the words "Naturopathy, Siddha, Unani and Yoga" shall be substituted. (c) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(pp) "Siddha system" of medicine or Siddha system means the Siddha system of medicine whether supplemented or not by such modern advances as the Board may from time to time determine." (d) in clause (q) for the words "or the Unani system of medicine", the words "Naturopathy system of treatment, Siddha system of medicine, Unani system of medicine, Yoga system of treatment" shall be substituted. (e) after clause (r), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(s) Yoga system of treatment or Yoga system" means Yoga system of treatment whether supplemented or not by such modern advances, as the board may from time to time determine".
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In the heading to Chapter II of the principal Act, the words "Ayurvedic and Unani" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act - (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "four" word "six" shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (3) - (i) for the word "thirteen", the words "nineteen", shall be substituted; (ii) for clause (a), the following shall be substituted, namely - "(a) ten members nominated by the State Government, of whom one shall be the Director, Indian System of Medicine"; (iii) in clause (b), for the word "seven", the word "nine" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, in the proviso to sub-section (1), after the words "after this chapter comes into force" the words "and the members elected for the first time and nominated under sub-section (3) of Section 3", shall be inserted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 15 of the principal Act, for the word "three", the word "six" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After sub-section (2) of Section 16 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), but subject to the proviso to sub-section (2), every person who within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, produces such proof, as may be prescribed to prove to the satisfaction of the Registrar that he has been in the regular practice in the State of Karnataka, as a Practitioner of Naturopathy System of treatment, Siddha System of Medicine and Yoga System of Treatment for a period of not less than ten years preceding the date on which the amendment Act comes into force and that he has completed thirty-five years of age on the said date for being registered as a practitioner under this Chapter, shall be entitled to have his name entered in the Register on payment of fee specified in sub-section (1)".
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 18 of the principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1), for the words, bracket and figure "sub-section (2) a list of persons entitled to have their names entered under the said sub-section", the words brackets and figures "sub-sections (2) and (2-A) a list of persons entitled to have their names entered under the said sub-section", shall be substituted. (ii) after sub-section (2), the following shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) Subject to the provision to sub-section (2) and the provisions of sub-section (3), every person not being qualified for registration under this Act, within a period of one year from the date of commencement of the Amendment Act proves to the satisfaction of the Registrar that he has been in regular practice in the State of Karnataka for at least five years prior to the commencement of the Amendment Act in the Naturopathy System of Treatment, Siddha System of Medicine or Yoga System of Treatment or any of their branches, and that he has completed thirty years of age on the date of commencement of the Amendment Act, shall be entitled to have his name entered in the aforesaid list, on payment of one hundred rupees". (iii) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and figures "sub-section (2)", the words, brackets and figures "sub-sections (2) and (2-A)" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and save as otherwise provided in Section 16 and subject to the provisions of Sections 23 and 25, after the expiry of one year from the commencement of the Amendment Act, the name of any person shall not be entered in the register as a Registered Practitioner in Naturopathic System of Treatment or Siddha System of Medicine or Yoga System of Treatment, unless he has passed a qualifying examination, as specified in the Schedule to this Act".
Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka In the Schedule to the principal Act - (a) after the sub-heading Ayurveda and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-heading and the entries shall be inserted namely - "Naturopathy Andhra Pradesh 1. Gandhi Nature Cure College, Hyderabad Diploma in Naturopathy 4 years duration. Uttar Pradesh 2. National College of Naturopathy and Research, Lucknow. Diploma in Nature Cure 4 years duration Karnataka 3. Board of studies in Indian Medicine, Karnataka, Bangalore Diploma in Naturopathy and Yoga. Siddha System Tamil Nadu 1. University of Madras, Madras Bachelor of Indian Medicine (Siddha) B.I.M. (Siddha) From 1965 to 1970. 2 Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai. Bachelor of Indian Medicine (Siddha) B.I.M. (Siddha) From 1971 onwards  Doctor of Medicine (Siddha) M.D. (Siddha) From 1975 onwards  Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and Surgery B.S. and M.S. From 1982 onwards". (b) after the sub-heading Unani and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-heading and the entries shall be inserted, namely - "Yoga Karnataka 1. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Karnataka, Bangalore. Diploma in Naturopathy and Yoga" 
