Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for the constitution of village defence parties for the maintenance of peace and order in the villages in the [State of Karnataka.] WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the constitution of village defence parties, their powers and duties, the maintenance of peace and order in villages and for certain other matters hereinafter appearing; BE it enacted by the [Karnataka State]1 Legislature in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows: Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order, 1973 w.e.f. 01.11.1973.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the [Karnataka] Village Defence Parties Act, 1964. (2) It extends to the whole of the [State of Karnataka.]1 (3) It shall come into force on such [date]2 and in such area as the Government may by notification specify and different dates may be specified for different areas. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order, 1973 w.e.f. 01.11.1973. Act came into force in the whole State w.e.f. 01.11.1965 by notification.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Government" means the State Government; (b) "Member of a Village Defence Party" means a person appointed under section 8; (c) "notification" means a notification published in the official Gazette; (d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act; (e) "Superintendent" means, for an area for which a Commissioner of Police has been appointed, the Commissioner, and elsewhere the Superintendent of Police.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka The Government may by notification direct any Superintendent to constitute for such villages within his jurisdiction as he may consider necessary volunteer bodies called Village Defence Parties, the members of which shall discharge such functions and duties in relation to the defence of villages, the protection of persons, the security of property and the preservation of public order, in such villages as may be assigned to them in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka The superintendence of the Village Defence Parties throughout the State vests in and is exercisable by Government and any control, direction or supervision exercisable by any officer over any member of a Village Defence Party shall be exercisable subject to such superintendence.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Inspector-General of Police shall be the Head of all the Village Defence Parties in the State and shall exercise general control over them. (2) The Superintendent shall be the Head of Village Defence Parties in the area for which he is appointed as Superintendent. (3) The administration of Village Defence Parties in any area shall, subject to the general control and direction of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police having jurisdiction over the village be vested in the Superintendent.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka On the issue of a notification under section 3, the Superintendent shall constitute for such village or villages as he considers necessary, Village Defence Parties consisting of such number of persons as he deems fit.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka Every person between the ages of twenty and fifty and residing in a village and who, having regard to the nature of duties and functions to be performed under this Act is fit and capable, shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Village Defence Party constituted for the village.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Superintendent may by a written order in the prescribed form appoint any person eligible under section 7 as a member of the Village Defence Party. (2) Every member of a Village Defence Party shall, on appointment, receive from the Superintendent a certificate of appointment which shall be in such form as may be prescribed and thereupon he shall have the powers, privileges and protection conferred and discharge the duties imposed on a member of the Village Defence Party by or under this Act.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka For every Village Defence Party, the Superintendent shall appoint one of its members as Dalapathi whose powers and duties shall be such as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka (1) For the direction and supervision of Village Defence Parties within the local limits of a Police Station, the Superintendent may appoint a Police Officer not below the rank of a Head Constable to be a Station Village Defence Officer. (2) For the direction and supervision of Village Defence Parties in a district, the Superintendent may appoint a Police Officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector to be a District Village Defence Officer.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Members of the Village Defence Parties and the officers appointed under sections 9 and 10 shall be under the direction and control of the Superintendent and shall receive such training and discharge such duties and be subject to such terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka The Inspector-General of Police, the Deputy Inspector-General of Police, the Superintendent or any Police Officer authorised by him in this behalf may call out any member of a Village Defence Party for training or to discharge any of the functions or duties assigned to them in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rule made thereunder.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every member of the Village Defence Party shall, when called out for duty have the same powers, liabilities, privileges and protection as police officer appointed under the [Karnataka Police Act, 1964]1 . (2) No prosecution shall be instituted against a member of the Village Defence Party in respect of anything done or purporting to be done in the exercise of his power or the discharge of his functions or duties as such member, except with the previous sanction of the Superintendent. Substituted by Act 22 of 2000 w.e.f. 29.11.2000
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every person who for any reason ceases to be a member of a Village Defence Party or resigns his membership shall forthwith deliver to the Superintendent or to such person and at such place as the Superintendent may direct, his certificate of appointment or of office and the arms and other articles which may have been issued to him as such member. (2) Where a member of a Village Defence Party dies, any person in custody of the certificate of appointment, the arms and the articles referred to in sub-section (1) which may have been issued to the said member shall forthwith deliver to the Superintendent or to such person and at such place as the Superintendent may direct, the said certificate of appointment, arms and articles. (3) Any magistrate and the Superintendent, may issue a warrant to search for and seize wherever they may be found any certificate, arms or other articles not delivered as required by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2). Every warrant so issued shall be executed in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, by a Police Officer or if the magistrate or the Superintendent issuing the warrant so directs, by any other person.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If any member of the Village Defence Party on being called out under sub-section (1) of section 13, without reasonable excuse neglects or refuses to obey such order or to discharge his functions as a member of the Village Defence Party, or to obey any lawful order or direction given to him for the performance of his duties, he shall, on conviction, be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees or with both. (2) If any member of the Village Defence Party wilfully neglects or refuses to deliver up his certificate of appointment or of office and the arms or any other articles in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 14, he shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to fifteen days or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or with both. (3) If any person wilfully neglects or refuses to deliver the certificate of appointment and the arms or any other article in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 14, he shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. (4) No proceeding shall be instituted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) without the previous sanction of the Superintendent. (5) A Police Officer may arrest without warrant any person who commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) of this section.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka The members of the Village Defence Parties acting under this Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any other law for the time being in force, a member of a Village Defence Party shall not be disqualified from being chosen as and for being a member of any local authority merely by reason of the fact that he is a member of a Village Defence Party or that he holds an office of profit under the Government by virtue of his being a member of a Village Defence Party. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, "local authority" includes a Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Borough Municipality, Sanitary Board, a Notified Area Committee, Taluk Development Board and Village Panchayats.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka In section 3 of the [Karnataka]1 Legislature (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1956, after clause (bb), the following clause shall be inserted namely:- "[(bbb)]3 the office of a member of a Village Defence Party constituted under the [Karnataka]4 Village Defence Parties Act, 1964." Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order, 1973 w.e.f. 01.11.1973. Substituted by Act 22 of 2000 w.e.f. 01.11.1965. Substituted by Act 22 of 2000 w.e.f. 01.11.1965. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order, 1973 w.e.f. 01.11.1973.
Karnataka Village Defence Parties Act, 1964_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for or regulate the following matters, namely:- (a) the exercise of functions and duties by the members of Village Defence Parties under section 3; (b) the constitution of Village Defence Parties under section 6; (c) the form of certificate of appointment under sub-section (2) of section 8; (d) the organisation, appointment, conditions of service, functions, discipline, arms of the members of the Village Defence Parties and the manner in which they may be called out for service; (e) power and duties and training of the Kotwal, Station and District Village Defence Officers under sections 10 and 12; (f) generally for giving effect to the provisions of this Act. (3) All rules made under this Act shall subject to any modification made under sub-section (4), have effect as if enacted in this Act. (4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything done under that rule. 
