Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958 . Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1959) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-ninth day of October, 1976. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-seventh day of November, 1976
Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 30 of the Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1958 Karnataka Act 2 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely - "30-A. Burden of proof in certain cases - In prosecutions under Sections 29 and 30, it shall be presumed without further evidence, until the contrary is proved that the person in possession of the false weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument - (a) knew that it was a false weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument; (b) fraudulently used it as such; and (c) intended to fradulently use it".
Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "37-A. Compounding of Offences - (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the Controller or such other officer as may be authorised in writing in this behalf by the Controller may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, permit any person charged with any offence punishable under Sections 23, 24, 25, 27, 28 or 34 or the rules made under this Act to compound the offence on payment of such sum, not exceeding the maximum amount of fine which may be imposed for such offence, as the Controller or the other officer may specify. (2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), no further proceedings shall be taken against the offender and the offender, if he is in custody, shall be discharged forthwith; but any false weight or measure in respect of which he is or is proposed to be charged shall not be returned to him and shall be destroyed".
Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Weights and Measures (Enforcement) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 33 of 1976) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
