Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Seventeenth day of April, 1984
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(bb) "civic amenity" means a market, a post office, a bank, a fair price shop, a milk booth, a school, a dispensary, a maternity home, a child care centre, a library, a gymnasium, a recreation centre run by the Government or the Corporation, a police station, an area office or a service station of the corporation or the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board or the Karnataka Electricity Board and such other amenity as the Government may by notification, specify."
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 16 of the principal Act - (1) in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following shall be inserted, namely:- "(d) the reservation of not less than fifteen per cent of the total area of the layout for public parks and playgrounds and an additional area of not less than ten per cent of the total area of the layout for civic amenities."; (2) in sub-section (2), clause (d) shall be omitted.
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely:- "38-A. Prohibition of the use of area reserved for parks, playgrounds and civic amenities for other purposes -The Authority shall not sell or otherwise dispose of any area reserved for public parks and playgrounds and civic amenities, for any other purpose and any disposition so made shall be null and void."
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 47 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted namely:- "47. Accounts and audit -(1) The Commissioner shall cause to be maintained such books of accounts and other registers as may be prescribed and shall prepare in the prescribed manner an annual statement of accounts. (2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by an auditor appointed by the Government. (3) The auditor shall for the purpose of the audit have access to all the accounts and other records of the authority. (4) The authority shall pay from its funds such charges for the audit as may be prescribed. (5) As soon as the accounts of the authority have been audited, the Commissioner shall send a copy of the audited accounts together with a copy of the report of the auditor to the State Government. The audited accounts and the report of the auditor shall be published by the Authority in the prescribed manner. The audited accounts and the report shall be laid before each house of the State Legislature, as soon as may be, after it is received by the Government. (6) The Authority and the Commissioner shall comply with such directions as the State Government may, after perusal of the report of the auditor, thinks fit to issue. 47-A. Reports - The Authority shall before such date and in such form and at such intervals as may be prescribed submit to the State Government a report on such matters as may be prescribed. Every such report shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature, as soon as may be, after it is received by the Government."
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the principal Act, for the words "one hundred and fifty rupees" the words "one thousand and five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
