Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to make provision for water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal in Bangalore Metropolitan area and for matters connected therewith. WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal in Bangalore Metropolitan area and for matters connected therewith; BE it enacted by the 1 [Karnataka State] Legislature in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Adopted by the Karnataka Adaptation of laws order 1973 w.e.f. 1.11.1973.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1964. (2) Chapters I, II, III and VI of this Act shall come into force at once, and Chapter IV and Chapter V of this Act shall respectively come into force on such 1 [dates] as the State Government may by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. Chapter 4 came into force w.e.f. 1.12.1964 and Chapter 5 w.e.f. 2.12.1964.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) 'Bangalore Metropolitan Area' means the area of the Bangalore District urban and includes such other areas adjacent thereto as the State Government may by notification from time to time specify; (2) 'Board' means the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board constituted under this Act; (3) 'building' means a house, out-house, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut or any other structure whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other material but does not include any portable shelter; 1 [(3A) "bye-laws" means bye-laws made by the Board under this Act;] (4) 'Chief Engineer' means the officer appointed or authorised by the Board to perform the functions of the Chief Engineer under this Act and includes an officer placed in additional charge of the duties of the Chief Engineer; (5) 'City of Bangalore' means the City of Bangalore as defined in the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949 (Mysore Act 69 of 1949); (6) 'communication pipe' means,- (a) where the premises supplied with water abut on the part of the street in which the main is laid, and the service pipe enters those premises otherwise than through the outer wall of a building on the street and has a stopcock placed in those premises and as near to the boundary of that street as is reasonably practicable, so much of the service pipe as lies between the main and that stopcock; (b) in any other case, so much of the service pipe as lies between the main and the boundary of the street in which the main is laid, and includes the ferrule at the junction of the service pipe with the main, and also,- (i) where the communication pipe ends at a stopcock, that stopcock; and (ii) any stopcock fitted on the communication pipe between the end thereof and the main; (7) 'Corporation' means the Municipal Corporation of the City of Bangalore; (8) 'drain' includes sewer, tunnel, a culvert, a ditch, a channel and any other device for carrying off sewage, offensive matter, polluted water, waste water, rain water or subsoil water; (9) 'land' includes benefits to arise out of land, things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth and rights created by law over any street; (10) 'licensed plumber' means a person licensed under the provisions of this Act as a plumber; 'main' means a pipe laid 2 [x x x] for the purpose of giving a general supply of water as distinct from a supply to individual consumers and includes any apparatus used in connection with such a pipe; (11) 'notification' means a notification published in the official Gazette; (12) 'occupier' includes,- (a) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable; (b) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or building; (c) a rent-free tenant of any land or building; (d) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and (e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and occupation of any land or building; (14) 'owner' includes a person who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to receive, the rent of any land or building whether on his own account or on account of himself and others or as an agent, trustee, guardian or receiver for any other person or who should so receive the rent or be entitled to receive it if the land or building or part thereof were let to a tenant; (15) 'premises' means any land or building or part of a building and includes,- (a) the garden, ground and out-houses, if any, appertaining to a building or part of a building; and (b) any fittings affixed to a building or part of a building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof; (16) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules or regulations as the case may be made under this Act; (17) 'prescribed officer' means the officer prescribed by regulations made under this Act; (18) 'regulations' means regulations made by the Board under this Act; (19) 'rules' means rules made by the State Government under this Act; (20) 'Sanitary Engineer' means the officer appointed by the Board to be the Sanitary Engineer and includes any officer placed in additional charge of the duties of the Sanitary Engineer; (21) 'service pipe' means so much of any pipe for supplying water from a main to any premises as is subject to water pressure from that main, or would be so subject but for the closing of some tap; (22) 'sewage' means night soil and other contents of latrines, urinals, cesspools or drains, and polluted water from sinks, bathrooms, stables, cattle sheds and other like places, and includes trade effluents and discharges from manufactories of all kinds; (23) 'sewer' means a closed conduit for carrying off sewage, offensive matter, polluted water, waste water or sub-soil water; (24) 'shed' means a slight or temporary structure for shade or shelter; (25) 'street' includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, gully, passage, whether a throughfare or not and whether built upon or not, over which the public have a right of way and also the roadway or footway over any bridge or causeway; (26) 'supply pipe' means so much of any service pipe as is not a communication pipe; (27) 'trade effluent' means any liquid either with or without particles of matter in suspension therein, which is wholly or in part produced in the course of any trade or industry carried on at trade premises, and in relation to any trade premises means any such liquid as aforesaid which is so produced in the course of any trade industry carried on at those premises, but does not include domestic sewage; (28) 'trade premises' means any premises used or intended to be used for carrying on any trade or industry; (29) 'trade refuse' means the refuse of any trade or industry; (30) 'trunk main' means a main constructed for the purpose of conveying water from a source of supply to a filter or reservoir or from one filter or reservoir to another filter or reservoir, or for the purpose of conveying water in bulk from one part of the limits of supply to another part of those limits, or for the purpose of giving or taking a supply of water in bulk; (31) 'vehicle' includes a carriage, cart, van, dray, truck, hand-cart, bicycle, cycle- rikshaw, auto-rikshaw, motor vehicle and every wheeled conveyance which is used or is capable of being used on a street; (32) 'water course' includes any river, stream or channel whether natural or artificial; (33) 'water fittings' includes pipes (other than mains), taps, cocks, valves, ferrules, meters, cisterns, baths and other similar apparatus used in connection with the supply and use of water; (34) 'Water-Supply Engineer' means the officer appointed by the Board to be the Water-Supply Engineer, and includes any officer placed in additional charge of the duties of the Water Supply Engineer; (35) 'water works' includes all lakes, tanks, streams, cisterns, springs, pumps, wells, reservoirs, aqueducts, water trucks, sluices, mains, pipes, culverts, hydrants, stand pipes and conduits and all lands, buildings, machinery, bridges and things used for, or intended for the purpose of, supplying water. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall as soon as may be after the commencement of this Chapter, constitute by notification in the official Gazette a Board by the name of "The Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board". (2) The Board shall consist of not less than three and not more than seven members appointed by the State Government. (3) Of the members,- (a) one shall be a person who has experience of, and has shown capacity in commercial matters and administration; (b) one shall be 1 [a person with wide experience of civil engineering works preferably in the field of public health engineering with reference to water supply, sewerage and sewage disposal and industrial wastes]; and (c) one shall be a person who has experience of accounting and financial matters in a public utility undertaking, preferably a water supply or sewage disposal undertaking. (4) One of the members possessing any of the qualifications specified in sub-section (3) shall be appointed by the State Government to be the Chairman of the Board. (5) A person shall be disqualified from being appointed or being a member of the Board if he is, or within the twelve months last preceding was, a member of Parliament or of any State Legislature or any local authority. (6) No act done by the Board shall be called in question on the ground only of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka The Chairman and other members of the Board shall hold office for such period, and shall be eligible for re-appointment under such conditions, as may be prescribed by the rules.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka [(1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member of the Board, and for being a member thereof, if, save as hereinafter provided, he has directly or indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in any work done by order of the Board or in any contract or employment with, or under, or by, or on behalf of, the Board.] (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall prevent a member from acquiring or holding any share or interest in any firm or company 2 [x x x]: Provided that if the Board has entered into, or is about to enter into any contract or agreement with any such firm or company in which a member holds any share or interest, he shall disclose the fact and nature of such interest and he shall not be entitled to vote on any decision of the Board relating to such contract or agreement. (3) A disclosure referred to in the proviso to sub-section (2) shall forthwith be recorded in the minutes of the Board and communicated to the State Government and the State Government may thereupon give such directions as it may deem proper. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may suspend from office for such period as it thinks fit or remove from office any member of the Board who,- (a) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or (b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 1 [(c) becomes subject to any disqualification specified in sub-section (1) of section 5.] (d) becomes or seeks to become a member of Parliament or any State Legislature or any local authority; or (e) in the opinion of the State Government,- (i) has refused to act; or (ii) has become incapable of acting; or (iii) has so abused his position as a member as to render his continuance on the Board detrimental to the interests of the general public; or (iv) is otherwise unfit to continue as a member; or (f) is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude. (2) The State Government may suspend any member pending an inquiry against him. (3) No order or removal shall be made under this section unless the member concerned has been given an opportunity to submit his explanation to the State Government and when such order is passed, the seat of the member removed shall become vacant and another member may be appointed under section 3 to fill up the vacancy. (4) A member who has been removed shall not be eligible for re-appointment as member or in any other capacity to the Board. (5) If the Board fails to carry out its functions, or refuses or fails to follow 1[the directions issued by the State Government under section 89], the State Government may remove the Chairman and the members of the Board and appoint a Chairman and members in their places. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may declare void any transaction in connection with which a member has been removed under 1 [x x x] clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 6 after considering the report on the facts of the case made to it by a District Judge nominated by it in this behalf. (2) A District Judge nominated under sub-section (1) shall, before making his report under that sub-section to the State Government in relation to any transaction, give all parties interested in the transaction a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) Where a transaction is declared void under this section it shall not be enforceable by any party to the transaction but the provisions of section 65 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, shall, so far as may be, apply to such transaction as they apply to an agreement which is discovered to be void or a contract which becomes void. (4) The decision of the State Government declaring any transaction void under this section shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka If the Chairman or any other member of the Board is by infirmity or otherwise rendered temporarily incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise in circumstances not involving the vacation of his appointment, the State Government may appoint another person to officiate for him and carry out his functions under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to acquire and hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (2) For the purposes of this Act and the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the Board shall be deemed to be a local authority.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by the Board in this behalf and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be authenticated by the signature of such member or officer of the Board as may in like manner be authorised in this behalf.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall hold ordinary meetings at such intervals as may be provided in the regulations; and a meeting may be convened by the Chairman at any other time for the transaction of urgent business. (2) The number of members necessary to constitute a quorum at a meeting shall be such as may be provided in the regulations.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may appoint a Secretary, a Chief Engineer, a Sanitary Engineer, a Water Supply Engineer and such other officers and servants as may be required to enable the Board to carry out its functions under this Act: Provided that the appointment of the Secretary, the Chief Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer and the Water Supply Engineer shall be 1[made after consultation with] the State Government.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by '[regulations], from time to time, appoint qualified persons to be '[consultants] to the Board and pay them such remuneration as it thinks proper. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall constitute a Consultative Committee consisting of members of the Board and such other persons being not less than three and not more than nine as the State Government may appoint after consultation with such representatives or bodies representative of the following interests as the State Government thinks fit, that is to say, the Municipal Corporation of the City of Bangalore, the Bangalore City Improvement Trust Board and consumers of water. (2) The Chairman of the Board shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Consultative Committee. (3) The Consultative Committee shall meet at least once in every three months. (4) The functions of the Consultative Committee shall be as follows:- (i) to advise the Board on major questions of policy and major schemes; (ii) to review the progress and the work of the Board from time to time; (iii) to consider such other matters as the Board may place before it; and (iv) to consider such matters as the State Government may by rules prescribe. (5) The Board shall place before the Consultative Committee the annual financial statement and supplementary statement, if any, before submitting such statement to the State Government under section 17 together with copies of the report and proceedings.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall be charged with the general duty of providing a supply and improving the existing supply of water in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and of making adequate provision for the sewerage and the disposal of the sewage in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area and for the efficient discharge of such duty the Board shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as are conferred or imposed by or under this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the Board to take steps from time to time,- (a) for ascertaining the sufficiency and wholesomeness of water supplies within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area; (b) for preparing and carrying out schemes 1 [x x x] for the supply of wholesome water for domestic purposes within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area; (c) for preparing and carrying out schemes 2 [x x x], for the proper sewerage of, and the disposal of the sewage of, the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. 3 [Provided that no scheme under clause (b) or (c) estimated to cost more than a crore of rupees shall be carried out by the Board except with the approval of the State Government.] (3) A scheme under clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall inter alia make provision,- (a) for a supply of wholesome water in pipes to every part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area in which there are houses, for the domestic purposes of the occupants thereof, and for taking the pipes affording that supply to such point or points as will enable the houses to be connected thereto at a reasonable cost, so however, that this clause shall not require the Board to do anything which is not practicable at a reasonable cost or to provide such a supply to any part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area where such a supply is already available at such point or points aforesaid; (b) for a supply, as far as possible, of wholesome water otherwise than in pipes in every part of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area in which there are houses, for the domestic purposes of the occupants thereof, and to which it is not practicable to provide a supply in pipes at a reasonable cost, and in which danger to health arises from the insufficiency or unwholesomeness of the existing supply and a public supply is required and can be provided at a reasonable cost, and for securing that such supply is available within a reasonable distance of every house in that part. (4) If any question arises under clause (a) of sub-section (3) as to whether anything is or is not practicable at a reasonable cost or as to the point or points to which pipes must be taken in order to enable houses to be connected to them at reasonable cost, or under clause (b) of the said sub-section, as to whether a public supply can be provided at a reasonable cost, the State Government shall determine that question and thereupon the Board shall give effect to that determination. (5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the Board shall, for the purposes of securing, as far as is reasonably practicable, that every house has a sufficient supply of wholesome water for domestic purposes, exercise its powers under this Act of requiring the owners of houses to provide a supply of water thereto. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka (1) For carrying on its operations under this Act, the Board shall levy rates, fees, rentals and other charges, and shall vary such rates, fees, rentals and other charges from time to time in order to provide sufficient revenue,- (a) to cover operating expenses, taxes and interest payments and to provide for adequate maintenance and depreciation; (b) to meet repayments of loans and other borrowings; (c) to finance normal year to year improvements; and (d) to provide for such other purposes beneficial be the promotion of water supply and disposal of sewage in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area as the Board may determine. (2) No part of the revenues of the Board, after meeting the expenses referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be used to augment the reserves of the Board other than the reserves referred to in sections 24 and 24-A or for the general purposes of the Board including expenses in connection with capital works, other than improvement works.] Subsection 1 and 2 Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 10.9.1964.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In February of each year the Board shall submit to the State Government a statement in the form prescribed by 1[regulations] of the estimated capital and revenue receipts and expenditure for the ensuing year. (2) The said statement shall include a statement of the salaries of members, officers and servants of the Board and of such other particulars as may be prescribed by rules. (3) The State Government shall as soon as may be after receipt of the said statement cause it to be laid on the table of both Houses of the State Legislature; and the said statement shall be open to discussion therein, but shall not be subject to vote. (4) The Board shall take into consideration any comments made on the said statement in the State Legislature. (5) The Board may at any time during the year in respect of which a statement under sub-section (1) has been submitted, submit to the State Government a supplementary statement, and all the provisions of this section shall apply to such statement as they apply to the statement under the said sub-section.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Save where in the opinion of the Board circumstances of extreme urgency have arisen, no sum exceeding 1 [one lakh of rupees] on account of recurring expenditure or exceeding 1[five lakhs of rupees] on account of non-recurring expenditure shall be expended by the Board in any year of account unless such sum has been included in a statement submitted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (5) of section 17. (2) Where any such sum is expended under circumstances of extreme urgency, a report thereon indicating the source from which it is proposed to meet the expenditure shall be made so soon as practicable to the State Government. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may, with the approval of the State Legislature from time to time make subventions to the Board for the purposes of this Act on such terms and conditions as the State Government may determine.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may, from time to time, advance loans to the Board on such terms and conditions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as the State Government may determine.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may from time to time, with the previous sanction of the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and to such conditions as may be prescribed by rules in this behalf, borrow any sum required for the purposes of this Act. (2) Rules made by the State Government for the purposes of this section may empower the Board to borrow by the issue of bonds or stocks or otherwise and to make arrangements with bankers. (3) The maximum amount which the Board may at any time have on loan under sub-section (1) shall be ten crores of rupees, unless the State Government by notification fixes a higher maximum amount. (4) Stock issued by the Board under this section shall be issued, transferred, dealt with and redeemed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit the payment of the principal and interest of any loan proposed to be raised by the Board or of either the principal or the interest: Provided that the State Government shall, so long as any such guarantees are in force, lay before both Houses of the State Legislature in every year during the budget session a statement of the guarantees, if any, given during the current financial year of the State, and an up-to-date account of the total sums, if any, which have been paid out of State revenues by reason of any such guarantees or paid into State revenue towards repayment of any money so paid out. 23. 1 [x x x] Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall create a depreciation reserve and, 1 [x x x] shall, at the end of every year, credit to such reserve from its revenue, such amount as would if made annually throughout the preserved period of assets specified in the Table appended to the Schedule to this Act and accumulated at compound interest at the rate of three per cent per annum produce by the end of the prescribed period an amount equal to ninety per cent of the original cost of the assets after taking into account the sums already written off and set aside in the books of the Board. (2) The amount to be credited every year to the depreciation reserve under subsection (1) shall consist of the incremental deposit plus interest on the accumulated balance in the reserve: Provided that the contribution in respect of any asset to the depreciation reserve under this section shall cease at the end of such period as may be prescribed by 2 [regulations] or when the asset ceases to be used by the Board, whichever is earlier: Provisos 3 [x x x] Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 24A--> State(s): Karnataka The Board shall create a reserve for improvement works and shall, at the end of every year, credit to such reserve from its revenue such percentage of the balance remaining after meeting its operating, maintenance and management expenses and after adequate provision is made for depreciation, taxes, interest and amortization payments on loans and other borrowings as the Board may determine, taking into consideration the improvement works which the Board will have to execute in order to provide adequate water supply and sewage disposal services in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area. Section 24A and 24B inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 10.9.1964.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 24B--> State(s): Karnataka In respect of assets of the Government which vest in the Board by virtue of the provisions of this Act, the Board shall pay interest on the cost of such assets at such rate as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Government in consultation with the Board and such interest shall be deemed to be a part of the expenditure of the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall cause proper accounts and other records in relation thereto to be kept, including the proper system of internal check and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the income and expenditure account and the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed by 1 [regulations] 2 [x x x]. (2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by 3 [such auditors as may be appointed by the Government] and any expenditure incurred 4 [x x x] in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board 5 [x x x]. (3) The 6 [auditor appointed by the Government] shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and in particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Board. (4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the 7 [auditor] together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the State Government and the State Government may issue such instructions to the Board in respect thereof as it deems fit and the Board shall comply with such instructions. (5) The State Government shall,- (a) cause the accounts of the Board together with the audit report thereon forwarded to it under sub-section (4) to be laid annually before the State Legislature; and (b) cause the accounts of the Board to be published in the manner prescribed by 8 [regulations] and make available copies thereof on sale at a reasonable price. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Substituted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Omitted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Omitted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Substituted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Substituted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 21.4.1984. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka On and from the date of coming into force of this Chapter, all public reservoirs, tanks, cisterns, fountains, wells, pumps, pipes, taps, conduits and other works connected with the supply of water to the 1 [Bangalore Metropolitan Area] including the headworks and reservoirs at Tippagondanhalli and Hesarghatta and the rising mains whether made at the cost of the Government, the Corporation or otherwise and all bridges, buildings, machinery, works, materials and other things connected therewith and all land (not being private property) adjacent and appertaining to the same shall vest in the Board and be subject to its control. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may construct, lay, or erect filtration plants, reservoirs, machinery conduits, pipes or other works in any place in the State for supplying the Bangalore Metropolitan Area with water, and may provide tanks, reservoirs, machinery, mains, fountains and other conveniences within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area for the use of the inhabitants. (2) The Board may cause existing water works to be maintained and supplied with water or it may close any such works and substitute other such works and may cause them to be maintained and supplied with water.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall except with permission duly obtained from the Board or the Water Supply Engineer enter on land vested in the Board along which a conduit or pipe runs or on any premises connected with the water supply.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Without the permission of the Board or the Water Supply Engineer, no building, wall or other structure shall be newly erected and no street shall be constructed over any Board water main. (2) If any building, wall or other structure be so erected or any street be so constructed, the Water Supply Engineer may cause the same to be removed or otherwise dealt with as the Water Supply Engineer deems fit and the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the persons contravening the provisions of sub-section (1).
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka All house connections, whether within or without the premises to which they belong, with the water-supply mains shall be under the control of the Board, but shall be altered, repaired and kept in proper order, at the expense of the owner of the premises to which they belong, or for the use of which they were constructed, and in conformity with the regulations made in that behalf.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in section 127 or any law, contract or other instrument, for all water supplied under this Act, payment shall be made at such rates, at such times and under such conditions as may be specified by regulations, and different rates may be prescribed for supply of water for different purposes. 1 [Provided that where an arrangement has been entered into with the corporation under section 149-A of the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, water shall be supplied by the Board in accordance with such arrangement to the inhabitants of the City.] Inserted by Act 10 of 1966 w.e.f. 31.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Water Supply Engineer may, on application by the owner or occupier of any building, arrange, in accordance with the regulations, to supply water thereto for domestic consumption and use. (2) It shall not be lawful for the owner of any dwelling house which may be constructed or re-constructed after the commencement of this Act to occupy it or cause or permit it to be occupied until he has obtained a certificate from the Board that there is provided within, or within a reasonable distance of the house such supply of wholesome water as appears to the Board to be sufficient for the domestic consumption and use of the inmates of the house. (3) Where on any land there are two or more super-structures, and the owner of the land is not the owner of all the super-structures, the Board may, if it appears to it that the super-structures are without a proper supply of water for domestic consumption and use and that such supply can be furnished from the main not more than thirty-five meters distant from any part of any such super-structure by notice require the owner of the land to obtain such supply.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka The supply of water for domestic purposes under this Act shall not be deemed to include any supply,- (a) for any trade, manufacture or business; (b) for gardens or for purposes of irrigation; (c) for building purposes; (d) for fountains, swimming baths, public baths or tanks or for any ornamental or mechanical purpose; (e) for animals, where they are kept for sale or hire or for the sale of their produce or any preparation therefrom; (f) for the consumption and use by the inmates of hotels, boarding houses and residential clubs; (g) for the consumption and use by the persons resorting to theatres and cinemas; (h) for constructing or for watering streets; or (i) for washing vehicles where they are kept for sale or hire; 1 [x x x] Omitted by Act 18 of 1984 w.e.f. 1.12.1964.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall, without the written permission of the Board, use or allow to be used for other than domestic purposes water supplied for domestic purposes.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Chief Engineer may, with the sanction of the Board, supply water for any purpose other than a domestic purpose on such terms and conditions consistent with this Act and the regulations made thereunder on receiving a written application specifying the purpose for which such supply is required and the quantity likely to be consumed. (2) When an application under sub-section (1) is received, the Chief Engineer may, subject to such charges and rates as may be fixed by the regulations, lay or allow to be laid the necessary pipes and water fittings of such dimensions and description as may be prescribed by the regulation and may arrange for the supply of water through such pipes and fittings.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 36--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may supply water to the Government, Corporation or any other local authority on such terms as to payment and as to the period and the conditions of supply as shall be determined by the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 37--> State(s): Karnataka Water may be used for extinguishing fire without payment.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 38--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may, subject to the payment by the Corporation of such charges as the Board may determine, provide gratuitous supply of wholesome water to the public within the City of Bangalore and may, for that purpose, erect public hydrants or other conveniences. (2) The Water-Supply Engineer may, in consultation with the Commissioner of the Corporation, close a public hydrant or other convenience when it is no longer required for the supply of wholesome water to the public.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 39--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, or any other law for the time being in force, the Board may lay a main whether within or without the local limits of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area,- (a) in any street or any land vested in the Government, the Corporation or any other local authority or any corporation owned or controlled by the Government; (b) with the consent of every owner and occupier of any land not forming part of a street, in, over or on that land, and may, from time to time, inspect, repair, alter or renew or may at any time remove any main so laid whether by virtue of this section or otherwise: Provided that where a consent required for the purpose of this sub-section is withheld, the Board may, after giving the owner or occupier of the land a written notice of its intention so to do, lay the main in, over or on that land even without such consent. (2) Where the Board, in exercise of the powers under this section, lays a main in, over or on any land not forming part of a street or land referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), or inspect, repair, alter, renew or remove a main so laid down in, over or on any such land, it shall pay compensation to every person interested in that land for any damage done to, or injurious affection of that land by reason of the inspection, laying, repair, alteration, renewal or removal of the main.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 40--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may, in any street or any land referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 39, whether within or without the local limits of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area, lay such service pipes with such stopcocks and other water fittings as it may deem necessary for supplying water to premises and may, from time to time, inspect, repair, alter or renew and may, at any time, remove any service pipe laid in such street or land whether by virtue of this section or otherwise. (2) Where a service pipe has been lawfully laid in, over, or on the land not forming part of a street or land referred to in sub-section (1), such officers as the Board may authorise may from time to time enter upon that land and inspect, repair, alter, renew or remove the pipe or lay a new pipe in substitution thereof but shall pay compensation for any damage done in the course of such action.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 41--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Water-Supply Engineer shall fix hydrants on water mains (other than trunk mains) at such places as may be most convenient for affording a supply of water for extinguishing any fire which may break out and shall keep in good order and from time to time renew every such hydrant. (2) To denote the situation of every hydrant placed under this section, letters, marks or figures shall be displayed prominently on some wall, building or other structure near such hydrant. (3) As soon as any such hydrant is completed, the Water-Supply Engineer shall deposit a key thereof at each place where a public fire engine is kept and in such other places as he deems necessary. (4) The Board may, at the request and expense of the owner or occupier of any factory, workshop, trade premises or place of business situated in or near a street in which a pipe is laid (and not being a trunk main and being of sufficient dimensions to carry a hydrant), fix on the pipe and keep in good order and from time to time renew one or more fire hydrants, to be used only for extinguishing fires as near as conveniently may be to that factory, workshop, trade premises or place of business. (5) The Board shall allow all persons to take water for extinguishing fires from any pipe on which a hydrant is fixed without any payment.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 42--> State(s): Karnataka The owner of every premises connected with the Board water works shall, when so required by the Board, provide a sump and set up electric pumps or other contrivances whereby water may be caused to reach to the top of the top-most storey of such premises.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 43--> State(s): Karnataka The Water-Supply Engineer may permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any premises to connect the premises by means of supply pipes for conveying to the premises a supply of water for his domestic purposes from the Board water works subject to the requirements specified in section 44 and the conditions, if any, laid down in the rules made in this behalf.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 44--> State(s): Karnataka (1) An owner, lessee or occupier of any premises, who desires to have a supply of water for his domestic purposes from the Board water works, shall comply with the following requirements, namely:- (a) he shall give to the Board fourteen days' notice of his intention to lay the necessary supply pipe; and (b) he shall lay the supply pipe at his own expense, having first obtained, as respects any land not forming part of a street, the consent of the owners or occupiers thereof: Provided that where any part of the supply pipe is to be laid in a street, he shall not himself break open the street or lay that part of the pipe. (2) Upon the receipt of such a notice as is referred to in sub-section (1), the Board shall 1 [if in its opinion there is no objection] lay the necessary communication pipe and any part of the supply pipe which is to be laid in a street and shall connect the communication pipe with the supply pipe. (3) The expenses, reasonably incurred by the Board in executing the work which it is required or authorised by this section to execute, shall be repaid to it by the person by whom the notice was given and may be recovered from such person as an arrear of water rate under this Act: Provided that if 2 [the Board considers it necessary to lay] a main in lieu of a supply pipe, the additional cost incurred in laying the main instead of a supply pipe shall be borne by him. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the Board may, within a reasonable time after the service of the notice upon him, require the person giving the notice either to pay to it in advance, the cost of the work as estimated by the Board or to give security for payment thereof to its satisfaction. (5) If any payment made to the Board under sub-section (4) exceeds the expenses which it would be entitled to recover from the person giving the notice, the excess shall be repaid by it and if and so far as those expenses are not covered by the payment, the Board may recover the balance from such person as an arrear of water rate under this Act. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 45--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may require the provision of a separate service pipe for each of the premises supplied or to be supplied by it with water. (2) If, in the case of any premises already supplied with water but not having a separate service pipe, the Board gives notice to the owner of the premises requiring the provision of such a pipe, the owner shall, within three months, lay so much of the required pipe as will constitute a supply pipe and is not required to be laid in a street, and the Board shall, within fourteen days after the owner has done so, lay so much of the required pipe as will constitute a communication pipe or a supply pipe to be laid in a street and make all necessary communications. (3) If an owner upon whom a notice has been served under sub-section (2) fails to comply therewith the Board may itself execute the work which the owner was required to execute and recover the expenses reasonably incurred by it in executing the work as an arrear of water rate under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 46--> State(s): Karnataka (1) On every service pipe laid after the date of coming into force of this Chapter, the Board shall, and on every service pipe laid before such date the Board may fit a stopcock enclosed in a cover box or a pit of such size as may be reasonably necessary. (2) Every stopcock fitted on a service pipe after the date of coming into force of this Chapter shall be placed in such position as the Board deems most convenient: Provided that,- (a) a stopcock in private premises shall be placed as near as is reasonably practicable to the street from which the service pipe enters those premises; and (b) a stopcock in a street shall be placed as near to the boundary thereof as is reasonably practicable.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 47--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may provide a water-meter and attach the same to the service pipe in premises connected with Board water works. 1 [(2) The cost of meters, the expense of their installation, and the rent payable for use of meters, shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations, and shall be paid by the owner of the premises.] 2 [(3) The use, maintenance and testing of meters shall be regulated by bye-laws made in this behalf.] Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 48--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever water is supplied under this Act through a meter, it shall be presumed that the quantity indicated by the meter has been consumed until the contrary is proved.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 49--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person shall wilfully or negligently cause or suffer any water fitting which he is liable to maintain,- (a) to be or remain so out of order or so in need of repair, or (b) to be or remain so constructed or adapted or to be so used, - that the water supplied to him by the Board is or is likely to be wasted, misused or unduly consumed, or contaminated before use, or that foul air or any impure matter is likely to return into any pipe belonging to, or connected with, a pipe belonging to the Board. (2) If any water fitting which any person is liable to maintain is in such a condition, or so constructed or adapted as aforesaid, the Board, without prejudice to any action against the person under any other provision of this Act, may require that person to carry out any necessary repairs or alterations and if he fails to do so within forty-eight hours, may itself carry out the work and recover from him the expenses reasonably incurred by it in so doing, as an arrear of water-rates payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 50--> State(s): Karnataka The Water- Supply Engineer or any officer authorised by the Board may, between sunrise and sunset, enter any premises supplied with water by the Board in order to examine if there be any waste or misuse of such water and the Water-Supply Engineer or such officer shall not be refused admittance to the premises nor shall he be obstructed by any person in making his examination.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 51--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may test any water fitting used in connection with water supplied by the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 52--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No water pipes shall be laid in a drain or on the surface of an open channel or house gully or within six meters of a cesspool or in any position where the pipe is likely to be injured or the water therein polluted; and except with the approval of the Board no cistern shall be constructed within six meters of a latrine, or cesspool. (2) No latrine, or cesspool shall be constructed or made within six meters of any water pipe or cistern or in any position where the pipe or cistern is likely to be injured or the water therein polluted.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 53--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may cut off the supply of water from any premises,- (a) if the premises are unoccupied; (b) if the owner or occupier neglects to comply with any lawful order or requisition regarding water supply issued by the Board within the period specified therein; (c) if any charges or any other sum due for water or for the cost of making a connection or the hire of a meter or the cost of carrying out any work or test connected with the water supply which is chargeable to any person by or under this Act is not paid within fifteen days after a bill for such charges or sums has been presented or served; (d) if after receipt of a notice from the Board requiring him to refrain from so doing, the owner or occupier continues to use the water or to permit it to be used in contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rule made there-under; (e) if the owner or occupier wilfully or negligently damages his meter or any pipe or tap conveying water; (f) if the owner or occupier refuses to admit the Board or any person authorised by it in this behalf into the premises which it or he proposes to enter for the purpose of executing any work or of placing or removing any apparatus or of making any examination or inquiry in connection with the water supply or prevents the Water Supply Engineer or any person authorised by the Board doing such work, from placing or removing such apparatus or making such examination or inquiry; (g) if any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the water supply are found on examination by the Board or any person authorised by it to be out of repair to such an extent as to cause waste or contamination of water; (h) if the owner or occupier causes pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the Board water supply to be placed, removed, repaired or otherwise interfered with in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules or regulations made thereunder: Provided that the Board shall not cut off the supply of water unless notice of not less than three days has been given to the owner or occupier of the premises. (2) (a) The owner and the occupier of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of all the sums referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1). (b) The sums referred to in clause (a) shall be a charge on the premises. (3) The expenses of cutting off the supply shall be payable by the owner and occupier of the premises jointly and severally. (4) In case under clause (c) of sub-section (1) as soon as any money for nonpayment of which water has been cut off, together with the expenses of cutting off the supply, has been paid by the owner or occupier, the Board shall cause water to be supplied as before on payment of the cost of re-connecting the premises with the water works. (5) Action taken under this section against any person shall be without prejudice to any penalties to which he may otherwise be liable.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 54--> State(s): Karnataka If any offence relating to water supply is committed under this Act on any premises connected with the Board water works, the owner, the person primarily liable for the payment of the charges for water, and the occupiers of the said premises shall be jointly and severally liable for such offence.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 55--> State(s): Karnataka The Board shall not be liable to any penalty or damages for cutting off the supply of water or for not supplying water in the case of unusual drought, other unavoidable cause or accident, or the necessity for relaying or repairing pipes.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 56--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may place and maintain conduits and lines of mains or pipes over, under, along or across any immovable property whether within or without the local limits of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area without acquiring the same, and may at any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any conduits or lines of mains or pipes, enter on any property over, under, along or across which the conduits or lines of mains or pipes have been placed: Provided that the Board shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any conduit or line of mains or pipes is placed. (2) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this section, the Board shall cause as little damage and inconvenience as may be possible, and shall make full compensation for any damage or inconvenience caused by it.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 57--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If it appears to the Board that the only or most convenient means of water supply to any premises is by placing or carrying any pipe over, under, along or across the immovable property of another person, it may, by order in writing, authorise the owner of the premises to place or carry such pipe, over, under, along or across such immovable property: Provided that before making any such order the Board shall give to the owner of the immovable property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within such time as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf as to why the order should not be made: Provided further that the owner of the premises shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any such pipe is placed or carried. (2) Upon the making of an order under sub-section (1), the owner of the premises may, after giving reasonable notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the immovable property with assistants and workmen at any time between sunrise and sunset for the purpose of placing a pipe over, under, along or across such immovable property or for the purpose of repairing the same. (3) In placing or carrying a pipe under this section, as little damage as possible shall be done to the immovable property and the owner of the premises shall,- (a) cause the pipe to be placed or carried with the least practicable delay; (b) fill in, re-instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable delay, and land opened, broken up or removed for the purpose of placing or carrying such pipe; and (c) pay compensation to the owner of the immovable property and to any other person who sustains damage by reason of the placing or carrying of such pipe. (4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a pipe has been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property was not built upon, desires to erect any building on such property, the Board shall, by notice in writing, require the owner of the premises to close, remove or divert the pipe in such manner as shall be approved by him and to fill in, re-instate and make good the immovable property as if the pipe had not been placed or carried over, under, along or across the same: Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the opinion of the Board it is necessary or expedient for the construction of the proposed building or the safe enjoyment thereof that the pipe should be closed, removed or diverted.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 58--> State(s): Karnataka (1) When under the provisions of this Chapter any person may be required or is liable to execute any work, the Board may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any rule or regulation made in this behalf, cause such work to be executed after giving such person an opportunity of executing the same within such time as may be specified by it for this purpose. (2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the Board in the execution of any such work shall be payable by the said person and the expenses incurred by the Board in connection with the maintenance of such work shall be payable by the person or persons enjoying the amenities and conveniences rendered possible by such work. (3) The expenses referred to in sub-section (2) shall be recoverable from the person or persons liable therefor as an arrear of charges payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 59--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person other than a licensed plumber shall execute any work described in this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed except by a licensed plumber: Provided that if, in the opinion of the Water Supply Engineer, the work is of a trivial nature, he may grant permission in writing for the execution of such work by a person other than a licensed plumber. (2) Every person who employs a licensed plumber to execute any work shall, when so required, furnish to the Water Supply Engineer the name of such plumber. (3) When any work is executed except in accordance with the provisions of subsection (1), such work shall be liable to be dismantled at the discretion of the Board without prejudice to the right of the Board to prosecute under this Act the person at whose instance such work has been executed. (4) The Board may make regulations for the guidance of licensed plumbers and a copy of all such regulations shall be attached to every licence granted to a plumber by the Board. (5) The Board may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be paid to licensed plumbers for any work done by them under or for any of the purposes of this Chapter. (6) No licensed plumber shall, for any work referred to in sub-section (5), demand or receive more than the charges prescribed therefor under that sub-section. (7) The Board shall make regulations providing for,- the exercise of adequate control on all licensed plumbers; the inspection of all works carried out by them; and the hearing and disposal of complaints made by the owners or occupiers of premises with regard to the quality of work done, material used, delay in execution of work, and the charges made, by a licensed plumber. (8) No licensed plumber shall contravene any of the regulations made under this section or execute carelessly or negligently any work under this Act or make use of bad materials, appliances or fittings. (9) If any licensed plumber contravenes sub-section (8), his licence may be suspended or cancelled whether he is prosecuted under this Act or not.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 60--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person shall,- wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authority of the Board in setting out the lines of any works or pull up or remove any pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground for the purpose of setting out the lines of such work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same purpose; or wilfully or negligently break, injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise interfere with any lock, cock, valve, pipe, meter or other work or apparatus belonging to the Board; or unlawfully obstruct the flow of, or flush, draw off, or divert, or take water from any water work belonging to the Board or any water course by which any such water is supplied; or obstruct any officer or other employee of the Board in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter or refuse or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means necessary for the making of any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder in relation to any water work; or bathe in, at or upon any water work or wash or throw or cause to enter therein any animal, or throw any rubbish, dirt or filth into any water work or wash or clean therein any cloth, wool or leather or the skin of any animal, or cause water of any sink, or drain or any steam engine or boiler or any polluted water to turn or be brought into any water work, or do any other act whereby the water in any water work is fouled or likely to be fouled. (2) Nothing in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall apply to a consumer closing the stopcock fixed on the service pipe supplying water to his premises so long as he has obtained the consent of any other consumer whose supply will be affected thereby.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 61--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make regulations to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, such regulations may provide for,- (a) the power of the Board,- (i) to stop the supply of water, whether for domestic purpose, or not, or for gratuitous use; and (ii) to prohibit the sale and use of water for the purpose of business; (b) the power of the Board to take charge of private connections; (c) the prohibition of fraudulent and unauthorised use of water and the prohibition of tampering with meters; (d) the licensing of plumbers and fitters, and for the compulsory employment of licensed plumbers and fitters. (3) In making any regulation under this section, the Board may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees and in case of continuing breach with an additional fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the breach continues after the receipt of a notice from the Board to discontinue such breach. Section 61 and 61A Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 61A--> State(s): Karnataka Subject to the provisions of the rules and the regulations, the Board may after previous publication, make bye-laws to provide for,- (a) the connection of water supply pipes for conveying to any premises a supply of water from Board Water Works; (b) the making and renewing connections with Board Water Works; (c) the power of the Board to alter the position of connections; (d) the equitable distribution of water supplied to occupiers; (e) the size, material, quality, description and position of the pipes and fittings to be used for the purpose of any connection with or any communication from any Board Water Works and the stamping of pipes and fittings and fees for such stamping; (f) the size, material, quality and description of pipes, cisterns, and fittings which are found on an examination under the provisions of the Act to be so defective that they cannot be effectively repaired; (g) the provision and maintenance of meters when water is supplied by measurement; (h) the maintenance of pipes, cisterns and other water works.]
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 62--> State(s): Karnataka Whoever,- (a) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act mentioned in the first column of the following Table; or (b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully made upon him under any of the said provisions, shall be punishable,- (i) with fine which may extend to the amount specified in that behalf in the third column of the said Table; and (ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an additional fine which may extend to the amount specified in the fourth column of that Table for every day during which such contravention or failure continues after conviction for the first such contravention or failure. TABLE Provisions of the Act Subject Maximum fine which may be imposed Daily fine which may be imposed 1 2 3 4  Rs. Rs. Section 28 Trespassing on premises connected with water supply. 50 Section 30 Failure to maintain house connections in conformity with regulations. 50 Section 32, Occupying or allowing occupation  sub-section (2). of house without proper water supply. 50 Section 32, Failure to comply with requisition  sub-section (3) to make house connection. 50 5 Section 34 Use for non-domestic purposes of water supplied for domestic purposes. 100 5 Section 49 Waste or misuse of water. 50 Section 50 Refusal of admittance, etc. 100 Section 52, Laying of water pipes, etc., in a position where the same may be injured or water therein polluted. 100 5 sub-section (1)  Section 52, sub-section (2). Construction of latrines, etc., in a position where pipes may be injured or water therein polluted. 100 Section 59, sub-section (1). Execution of work by a person other than a licensed plumber. 200 Section 59, sub-section (2). Failure to furnish when required name of licensed plumber employed. 100 Section 59, sub-section (6). Licensed plumbers not to demand more than the charges prescribed. 100 Section 59, sub-section (8). Licensed plumbers not to contravene regulations or execute work carelessly or negligently, etc. 100 Section 60, Prohibition of wilful or neglectful acts relating to water works. 100 
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 63--> State(s): Karnataka (1) On and from the date of coming into force of this Chapter, all public sewers, all sewers in, alongside or under any public street within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area, and all sewage disposal works whether constructed out of the municipal fund of the Corporation of the City of Bangalore or otherwise, and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto, shall vest in the Board. (2) All public and other sewers which are vested in the Board are hereafter in this Act referred to as Board sewers. (3) For the purposes of enlarging, deepening or otherwise repairing or maintaining any such sewer or sewage disposal work so much of the sub-soil appertaining thereto as may be necessary for the said purpose shall be deemed also to vest in the Board. (4) All sewers and ventilation-shafts, pipes and all appliances and fittings connected with the sewerage works constructed, erected or set up out of the municipal fund of the Corporation in or upon premises not belonging to the Corporation whether,- (a) before or after the commencement of this Act, and (b) for the use of the owner or occupier of such premises or not, shall, unless the Corporation has otherwise determined, or does at any time otherwise determine, vest in the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 64--> State(s): Karnataka (1) All Government sewers, all sewage disposal works and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto shall be under the control of the Board. (2) The Board shall maintain and keep in repair all Board sewers and sewage disposal works and shall construct as many new drains and sewage disposal works as may from time to time be necessary for effectual sewerage and sewage disposal of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 65--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person shall throw, empty, or turn into any Board sewer or into any drain or sewer communicating with a Board sewer,- (a) any matter likely to injure the sewer or to interfere with the free flow of its contents, or to affect prejudicially the treatment and disposal of its contents; or (b) any chemical, refuse or waste steam, or any liquid of 1 [such temperature as may be specified by notification by the Board], being refuse or steam which, or a liquid which when so heated, is, either alone or in combination with the contents of the sewer, dangerous, or the cause of a nuisance, or prejudicial to health; or (c) any dangerous petroleum. (2) In this section, the expression "dangerous petroleum" has the same meaning as in the Petroleum Act, 1934 (Central Act 30 of 1934). Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 66--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf, the owner or occupier of any premises having a private drain, or the owner of any private drain within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area may apply to the Board to have his drain made to communicate with the Board sewers and thereby to discharge foul water and surface water from those premises or that private drain: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall entitle any person to discharge directly or indirectly into any Board sewer,- (i) any trade effluent from any trade premises except in accordance with the regulations made in this behalf; or (ii) any liquid or other matter the discharge of which into Board sewers is prohibited by or under this Act or any other law. (2) Any person desirous of availing himself of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall give to the Board notice of his proposals, and at any time within one month after receipt thereof, the Board may by notice to him refuse to permit the communication to be made, if it appears to it that the mode of construction or condition of the drain is such that the making of the communication would be prejudicial to the sewerage system, and for the purpose of examining the mode of construction and condition of the drain it may, if necessary, require it to be laid open for inspection. (3) The Board may, if it thinks fit, construct such part of the work necessary for connecting a private drain with a Board sewer as is in or under a public street and in such a case, the expenses incurred by the Board shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the premises, or as the case may be, the owner of the private drain and shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrear of charges payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 67--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Where any premises are in the opinion of the Board without sufficient means of effectual drainage and a Government sewer or some place approved by the Board for the discharge of filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter is situated at a distance of not exceeding thirty-five metre from any part of the said premises, it may, by written notice, require the owner of the said premises,- (a) to make a drain emptying into such Government sewer or place; (b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and fittings as may appear to the Board necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving the filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from and conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually flushing such drain and every fixture connected therewith; (c) to remove any existing drain or other appliance or thing used or intended to be used for drainage which is injurious to health; (d) to provide a closed drain in substitution of an open drain or to provide such other appliance or thing either newly or in substitution of any existing appliance or thing or to provide both a closed drain and such other appliance or thing in substitution of the existing open drain and other appliance or thing, which is or is likely to be injurious to health; (e) to provide and set up all such appliances and fittings as may appear to the Board to be necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving the waste water from floors and galleries of buildings when they are washed, and conveying the same through spouts, by down-take pipes so as to prevent such waste water from discharging directly on streets or inside any lower portion of the premises; (f) to carry out any work to improve or re-model an existing drain which is inadequate, insufficient or faulty. (2) Where in any case not provided for in sub-section (1) any premises are, in the opinion of the Board without sufficient means of effectual drainage, it may, by written notice, require the owner of the premises,- (a) to construct a drain up to a point to be prescribed in such notice but not at a distance of more than thirty-five metres from any part of the premises; or (b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and drain or drains emptying into such cesspool or soakage pit. (3) Any requisition for the construction of any drain under sub-section (2) may contain any of the details specified in sub-section (1).
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 68--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In areas in which Board sewers are provided it shall not be lawful to erect or to re-erect any premises or to occupy any such premises unless,- (a) a drain be constructed of such size, materials and descriptions, at such level and with such fall as shall appear to the Board to be necessary for the effectual drainage of such premises; (b) there have been provided and set up on such premises such appliances and fittings as may appear to the Board to be necessary for the purposes of gathering or receiving the filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter from, and conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually flushing the drain of the said premises and every fixture connected therewith. (2) The drain so constructed shall empty into a Board sewer. (3) The provisions of this section shall be applicable to premises any part of which is situated within a distance of thirty-five metres from a Board sewer.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 69--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If it appears to the Board that any group or block of premises may be drained more economically or advantageously in combination than separately, and a Board sewer of sufficient size already exists or is about to be constructed within thirty-five metres of any part of that group or block of premises, the Board may cause that group or block of premises to be drained by a combined operation. (2) The expenses incurred in carrying out any work under sub-section (1) in respect of any group or block of premises shall be paid by the owners of such premises in such proportion as the Board may determine and shall be recoverable from them as an arrear of charges payable under this Act. (3) Not less than fifteen days before any such work is commenced, the Board shall give to each such owner,- written notice of the nature of the proposed work, and an estimate of the expenses to be incurred in respect thereof and of the proportion of such expenses payable by him. (4) The Board may require the owners of such group or block of premises to maintain the work executed under this section.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 70--> State(s): Karnataka Where a drain connecting any premises with a Board sewer is sufficient for the effectual drainage of such premises and is otherwise unobjectionable but is not, in the opinion of the Board adapted to the general system of sewerage in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area, it may, by written notice addressed to the owner of the premises, direct,- (a) that such drain be closed, discontinued or destroyed and that any work necessary for that purpose be done; or (b) that such drain shall, from such date as may be specified in the notice in this behalf, be used for filth and polluted water only or for rain water and unpolluted sub-soil water only: Provided that,- (i) no drain may be closed, discontinued or destroyed by the Board under clause (a) except on condition of its providing another drain equally effectual for the drainage of the premises and communicating with any Board sewer which it thinks fit; and (ii) the expenses of the construction of any drain so provided by the Board and of any work done under clause (a) shall be borne by the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 71--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Where the Board either on receipt of an application from the owner of any premises or otherwise is of the opinion that the only, or the most convenient means of effectual drainage of the premises into a Board sewer is through a drain belonging to another person, the Board may by notice in writing require the owner of such drain to show cause within a period specified in the notice as to why an order under this section should not be made. (2) Where no cause is shown within the specified period or the cause shown appears to the Board invalid or insufficient, the Board may by order in writing either authorise the owner of the premises to use the drain or declare him to be a joint owner thereof. (3) An order made under sub-section (2) may contain directions as to,- (a) the payment of rent or compensation by the owner of the premises; (b) the construction of a drain for the premises for the purpose of connecting it with the aforesaid drain; (c) the entry upon the land in which the aforesaid drain is situate with assistants and workmen at all reasonable hours; (d) the respective responsibilities of the parties for maintaining, repairing, flushing, cleaning and emptying the aforesaid drain.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 72--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever it is provided in this Chapter that steps shall or may be taken for the effectual drainage of any premises, it shall be competent to the Board to require that there shall be one drain for filth and polluted water and an entirely distinct drain for rain water and unpolluted sub-soil water or both rain water and unpolluted sub-soil water, each emptying into separate Board sewer or Corporation drain or other suitable places.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 72A--> State(s): Karnataka Within nine months from the date of commencement of the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2009, every owner or occupier of a building having a sital area of 2400 square feet and above or every owner who propose to construct a building on a sital area of 1200 square feet and above, shall provide for rain water harvesting structure in such manner, with such conditions as may be provided in the regulations, failing which the Board may cause such rain water harvesting structure and recover the cost from the owner or occupier, as the case may be, as arrears of land revenue].1 Inserted by Act 19 of 2009 w.e.f. 27.8.2009.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 73--> State(s): Karnataka For the purpose of efficient drainage of any premises, the Board may, by notice in writing,- (a) require any courtyard, alley or passage between two or more buildings to be paved by the owner or owners of such buildings with such materials and in such manner as may be approved by the Board, and (b) require such paving to be kept in proper repair.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 74--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may cause any or all of the Board sewers to empty into, and all sewage to be disposed of at, such place or places as it considers suitable: Provided that no place which has not been before the commencement of this Chapter used for any of the purposes specified in this section shall, after such commencement be used therefor without the approval of the Board: Provided further that on and after such date as may be appointed by the Board in this behalf no sewage shall be discharged into any water-course until it has been 1 [treated in such manner as may be prescribed in the bye-laws made in this behalf.] Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 75--> State(s): Karnataka Without the written permission of the Board, no person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, at any time make or cause to be made any connection or communication with any sewer referred to in section 63 constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 76--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Without the written permission of the Board no private street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence or other structure shall be erected on any Board sewer constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the Board. (2) If any private street be constructed or any building, wall, fence or structure erected on any sewer as aforesaid without the written permission of the Board, the Board may remove or otherwise deal with the same as it thinks fit. (3) The expenses incurred by the Board in so doing shall be paid by the owner of the private street or of the building, fence, wall or other structure or, as the case may be, by the person offending and shall be recoverable as an arrear of charges payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 77--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may place and maintain sewers over, under, along or across any immovable property whether within or without the local limits of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area, without acquiring the same, and may at any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any sewers enter on any property over, under, along or across which the sewers have been laid: Provided that the Board shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any sewer is laid. (2) In the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this section, the Board shall cause as little damage as may be possible, and shall make full compensation for any damage caused by it.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 78--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If it appears to the Board that the only or most convenient means of sewerage of any premises is by laying any sewer over, under, along or across the immovable property of another person, the Board may, by order in writing, authorise the owner of the premises to lay or carry such sewer over, under, along or across such immovable property: Provided that before making any such order the Board shall give to the owner of the immovable property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within such time as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf as to why the order should not be made: Provided further that the owner of the premises shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the property over, under, along or across which any such sewer is laid. (2) Upon the making of an order under sub-section (1), the owner of the premises may, after giving reasonable notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the immovable property with assistants and workmen at any time between sunrise and sunset for the purpose of laying a sewer over, under, along or across such immovable property or for the purpose of repairing the same. (3) In laying a sewer under this section, as little damage as possible shall be done to the immovable property and the owner of the premises shall,- (a) cause the sewer to be laid with the least practicable delay; (b) fill in, reinstate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable delay, any land opened, broken up or removed for the purpose of laying such sewer; and (c) pay compensation to the owner of the immovable property and to any other person who sustains damage by reason of the laying of such sewer. (4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a sewer has been laid under this section whilst such immovable property was not built upon, desires to erect any building on such property, the Board shall, by notice in writing, require the owner of the premises to close, remove or divert the sewer in such manner as shall be approved by it and to fill in, reinstate and make good the immovable property as if the sewer had not been laid over, along or across the same: Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the opinion of the Board it is necessary or expedient for the construction of the proposed building or the safe enjoyment thereof that the sewer should be closed, removed or diverted.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 79--> State(s): Karnataka (1) When under the provisions of this chapter any person may be required or is liable to execute any work, the Board may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any regulations made in this behalf, cause such work to be executed after giving such person an opportunity of executing the same within such time as may be specified by it for this purpose. (2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the Board in the execution of any such work shall be payable by the said person and the expenses incurred by the Board in connection with the maintenance of such work shall be payable by the person or persons enjoying such amenities and conveniences rendered possible by such work. (3) The expenses referred to in sub-section (2) shall be recoverable from the person or persons liable therefor as an arrear of charges payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 80--> State(s): Karnataka For the purpose of ventilating any sewer or cesspool, whether vested in the Board or not, the Board may, in accordance with regulations made in this behalf, erect upon any premises or affix to the outside of any building or to any tree any such shaft or pipe as may appear to it to be necessary.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 81--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Where it appears to the Board that there are reasonable grounds for believing that a private sewer or cesspool is in such condition as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance or that a private sewer communicating directly or indirectly with a Board sewer is so defective as to admit sub-soil water, it may examine its condition and for that purpose may apply any test, other than a test by water under pressure, and if it deems it necessary, open the ground. (2) If on examination the sewer or cesspool is found to be in proper condition, the Board shall, as soon as possible, reinstate any ground which has been opened by it and make good the damage done by it.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 82--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person other than a licensed plumber shall execute any work described in this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed except by a licensed plumber: Provided that if, in the opinion of the Sanitary Engineer, the work is of a trivial nature, he may grant permission in writing for the execution of such work by a person other than a licensed plumber. (2) The provisions of section 59 shall be applicable in respect of any work connected with any drain as they are applicable in respect of any work connected with water supply.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 83--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall,- (a) wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authority of the Board in setting out the lines of any works or pull up or remove any pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground for the purpose of setting out lines of such work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same purpose; or (b) wilfully or negligently break, injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise interfere with any lock, cock, valve, pipe, or other work or apparatus belonging to the Board; or (c) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, divert or take sewage from any sewage work belonging to the Board; or (d) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Board in the discharge of his duties under this Chapter or refuse or wilfully neglect to furnish him with the means necessary for the making of any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder in relation to any sewage work.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 84--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may with the previous approval of the State Government may, make regulations to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 1 [(2) In particulars and without prejudice to the foregoing provision, such regulations may provide for the charges to be paid to the Board by occupiers of trade premises for the reception of trade effluent into Board sewers and disposal thereof.] (3) In making any regulation under this section, the Board may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees and in case of continuing breach with an additional fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the breach continues after receipt of a notice from the Board to discontinue such breach. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 84A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to the provisions of rules and regulations, the Board may after previous publication make bye-laws to provide for,- (a) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge or deposit of offensive or obstructive matter polluted water or other polluted and obnoxious matter into sewers; (b) the regulation in any manner not specifically provided for in this Act, of the construction, alteration, maintenance, preservation, cleaning and repairs of sewers, ventilation shafts, pipes, latrines, urinals, cesspools and other sewerage works; (c) the cleansing of sewers; (d) the prohibition of erection of buildings over sewers without the permission of the Board; (e) the connection of private drains with Board sewers; (f) the location and construction of cesspools; (g) the covering and ventilation of cesspools; (h) the period or periods of the day during which trade effluent may be discharged from any trade premises into Board sewers; (i) the exclusion from trade effluent of all condensing matter; (j) the elimination from trade effluent, before it enters a Board sewer, of any constituent which in the opinion of the Board would, either alone or in combination with any matter with which it is likely to come into contact while passing through Board sewers, injure or obstruct those sewers or make specially difficult or expensive the treatment or disposal of the sewage from those sewers; (k) the maximum quantity of trade effluent which may, without any consent or permission, be discharged from any trade premises into Board sewers on any one day and the highest rate at which trade effluent may, without such consent or permission, be discharged from any trade premises into Board sewers; (/) the regulation of the temperature of trade effluent at the time of its discharge into Board sewers and the securing of the neutrality of trade effluent (that is to say, that it is neither acidic not alkaline) at the time of such discharge; (m)the provision and maintenance of such an inspection chamber or manhole as will enable a person readily to take at any time samples of what is passing into Board sewers from trade premises; (n) the provision and maintenance of such meters as may be required to measure the volume of any trade effluent being discharged from any trade premises into Board sewers, and the testing of such meters.] Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 85--> State(s): Karnataka Whoever,- (a) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act mentioned in the first column of the following Table; or (b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully made upon him under any of the said provisions, shall be punishable,- (i) with fine which may extend to the amount specified in that behalf in the third column of the said Table; and (ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an additional fine which may extend to the amount specified in the fourth column of that Table for every day during which such contravention or failure continues after conviction for the first such contravention or failure. Provisions of the Act Subject Fine which may be imposed Daily fine which may be imposed 1 2 3 4  Rs. Rs. Section 65 Injury to, or interference with free flow of contents of Board sewers or drains or sewers communicating with Board sewers. 1 00 50 Section 66, sub-section (2). Private drain not to be connected with Board sewers without notice. 50 5 Section 67 Non-compliance with requisition for drainage of undrained premises. 100 25 Section 68 Erection of new premises without drains. 1,000 Section 69 Non-compliance with requisition for maintenance of drainage works for any group or block of premises. 100 Section 70 Non-compliance with direction to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases. 50 Section 71 Non-compliance with Sanitary Engineer's orders regarding the use of a drain by a persons other than the owner thereof. 50 Section 72 Non-compliance with requisition for keep ing sewage and rain water drains distinct. 50 Section 73 Non-compliance with requisition for the pavement of court yard etc. 50 Section 75 Connection with Board sewers without written permission. 200 50 Section 78, sub-section (4). Non-compliance with requisition to close, remove or divert a pipe or drain. 50 5 Section 82, sub-section (1 ). Execution of work by a person other than a licensed plumber. 200 Section 82, sub-section (2) read with section 59(2). Failure to furnish when required name of licensed plumber employed. 100 Section 82, sub-section (6) read with section 59(2). Licensed plumbers not to demand more than the charges prescribed. 100 Section 82, sub-section (8) read with section 59(2). Licensed plumbers not to contravene regulations or execute work carelessly or negligently, etc. 100 Section 83 Prohibition of wilful or neglectful acts relating to sewage works. 100 
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 86--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall, before such date and in such form as may be prescribed by rules, submit to the State Government an annual report upon such matters as may be prescribed by rules, and the State Government shall cause such report to be published in the official Gazette. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall as soon as may be after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the State Government in such form as may be prescribed by 1 [regulations] a report giving an account of its activities during the previous financial year and the report shall also give an account of the activities, if any, which are likely to be undertaken by the Board in the next financial year; and the State Government shall cause every such report to be laid before the State Legislature as soon as may be after it is received by the State Government. (3) The Board shall furnish to the State Government at such times and in such form and manner 2 [x x x] as the State Government may direct, such statistics and returns, and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing scheme, as the State Government may from time to time require. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Omitted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 87--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, after previous publication, by notification make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for,- (a) the powers of the Chairman and the term of office of the Chairman and other members of the Board, the conditions under which they shall be eligible for reappointment and their remuneration, allowances and other conditions of service; (b) the terms and conditions of appointment of members of the Consultative Committee, the convening of meetings of such Committee and the conduct of business thereat; (c) the form in which the annual financial statement and supplementary statements under section 17 shall be prepared by the Board, and the particulars to be included therein; (d) the conditions subject to which the Board may borrow under section 21; (e) the manner in which stock issued by the Board shall be issued, transferred, dealt with and redeemed; (f) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be published under section 25; (g) the form in which and the date by which the annual report of the Board shall be submitted under section 86 and the form and manner of furnishing statistics and returns by the Board under that section.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 88--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may with the previous approval of the State Government make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the administration of the funds and other property of the Board and the maintenance of its accounts; (b) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Board and the times and places at which such meetings shall be held, and the conduct of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum; (c) the duties of officers and servants of the Board, and their salaries, allowances and other conditions of service; 1 [(d) the fine which may be imposed for the breach of any bye-law, which may extend to one hundred rupees, and in case of continuing breach the additional fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day, during which the breach continues after receipt of a notice from the Board to discontinue the breach.] (e) the procedure to be followed by the Board in inviting, considering and accepting tenders; (f) any other matter arising out of the Board's functions under this Act in which it is necessary or expedient to make regulations. (2) The power to make regulations under this Act is subject to the condition of previous publication. Substituted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 89--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided by such directions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the State Government. 1 [Provided that such direction shall be given after consultation with the Board.] (2) In case of any difference of opinion as to what is a question of policy the decision thereon of the State Government shall be final. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 90--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whenever it is provided in this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder that a licence or a written permission may be granted for any purpose, such licence or written permission shall be signed by the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer, as the case may be, or by the officer empowered to grant the same under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder and shall specify in addition to any other matter required to be specified under any other provision of this Act or any provision of any rule made thereunder,- (a) the date of the grant thereof; (b) the purpose and the period (if any) for which it is granted; (c) restrictions or conditions, if any, subject to which it is granted; (d) the name and address of the person to whom it is granted; and (e) the fee, if any, paid for the licence or written permission. (2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, for every such licence or written permission, a fee may be charged at such rate as may from time to time be fixed by the Board and such fee shall be payable by the person to whom the licence or written permission is granted. (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder any licence or written permission granted under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder may at any time be suspended or revoked by the Board or by the officer by whom it was granted, if it or he is satisfied that it has been secured by the grantee through misrepresentation or fraud or if any of its restrictions or conditions has been infringed or evaded by the grantee, or if the grantee has been convicted for the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder relating to any matter for which the licence or permission has been granted: Provided that,- (a) before making any order of suspension or revocation reasonable opportunity shall be afforded to the grantee of the licence or the written permission to show cause why it should not be suspended or revoked; (b) every such order shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the suspension or revocation of the licence or the written permission. (4) When any such licence or written permission is suspended or revoked, or when the period for which the same was granted has expired, the grantee shall, for all purposes of this Act or any rule made thereunder, be deemed to be without a licence or written permission until such time as the order suspending or revoking the licence or written permission is rescinded or until the licence or written permission is renewed. (5) Every grantee of any licence or written permission granted under this Act shall at all reasonable times, while such licence or written permission remains in force, if so required by the Board or the authority by whom it was granted, produce such licence or written permission.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 91--> State(s): Karnataka The Chief Engineer, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer, or any officer authorised by the Board in this behalf or empowered in this behalf by or under the provisions of this Act, may enter into or upon any land or building with or without assistants and workmen,- (a) for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is or has been on or in connection with the land or building any contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder; (b) for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not circumstances exist which would authorise or require the Board or any officer authorised or empowered in this behalf to take action or execute any work under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder; (c) for the purpose of taking any action or executing any work authorised or required by this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder; (d) to make any inquiry, inspection, examination, measurement, valuation or survey authorised or required by or under this Act, or necessary for the proper administration of this Act; (e) generally for the purpose of efficient discharge of the functions by any officer of the Board under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 92--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Chief Engineer, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Board or empowered in this behalf by or under any provision of this Act, may enter on any land within fifty metres of any work authorised by or under this Act with or without assistants and workmen for the purpose of depositing thereon any soil, gravel, stone or other materials or for obtaining access to such work or for any other purposes connected with the execution of the same. The person so authorised shall, before entering on any such land, state the purpose thereof, and shall, if so required by the owner or occupier thereof, fence off so much of the land as may be required for such purpose. The person so authorised shall, in exercising any power conferred by this section, do as little damage as may be, and compensation shall be payable by the Board in accordance with regulations made in this behalf to the owner or occupier of such land or to both for any such damage, whether permanent or temporary.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 93--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It shall be lawful for the Chief Engineer, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer, or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Board or empowered in this behalf by, or under any provision of this Act, to make any entry into any place, and to open or cause to be opened any door, gate or other barrier,- (a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary for the purpose of such entry; and (b) if the owner or occupier is absent or being present refuses to open such door, gate or barrier. (2) Before making any entry into any such place or opening or causing to be opened any such door, gate or other barrier, the Chief Engineer, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer or the person authorised or empowered in this behalf, shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the place to be entered into is situate, to witness the entry or opening and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do. (3) A report shall be made to the Board as soon as may be after any entry has been made into any place or any door, gate or other barrier has been opened under this section.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 94--> State(s): Karnataka Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any regulation made thereunder, no entry authorised by or under this Act shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 95--> State(s): Karnataka Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any regulation made thereunder, no entry upon or into any land or building shall be made without the consent of the occupier, or if there is no occupier, of the owner thereof and no such entry shall be made without giving the said owner or occupier, as the case may be, not less than twenty-four hours' written notice of the intention to make such entry.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 96--> State(s): Karnataka When any place used as a human dwelling is entered under this Act, due regard shall be paid to the social and religious customs and usages of the occupants of the place entered, and no apartment in the actual occupancy of a female shall be entered or broken open until she has been informed that she is at liberty to withdraw and every reasonable facility has been afforded to her for withdrawing.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 97--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall obstruct or molest any person authorised or empowered by or under this Act in the execution of his duty or of anything which he is authorised or empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 98--> State(s): Karnataka Where any notice, bill, order or requisition issued or made under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder requires anything to be done for the doing of which no time is fixed in this Act or the rule or the regulation made thereunder, the notice, bill, order or requisition shall specify a reasonable time for doing the same.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 99--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every licence, written permission, notice, bill, summons or other document which is required by this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder to bear the signature of the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer or of any officer authorised or empowered to do so shall be deemed to be properly signed if it bears a facsimile of the signature of any such officer stamped thereupon. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to apply to a cheque.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 100--> State(s): Karnataka All notices, bills, summons and other documents required by this Act or any rule or any regulation made thereunder to be served upon, or issued to, any person, shall be served or issued by such persons as may be authorised by the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 101--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every notice, bill, summons, order, requisition or other document required or authorised by this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder to be served or issued on any person shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act or such rule or regulation, be deemed to be duly served,- (a) where the person to be served is a company, if the document is addressed to the secretary of the company at its registered office or at its principal office or place of business and is either,- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal office or place of business of the company; (b) where the person to be served is a partnership, if the document is addressed to the partnership at its principal place of business, identifying it by the name or style under which its business is carried on, and is either,- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at the said place of business; (c) where the person to be served is a public body, or a corporation, society or other body, if the document is addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, corporation or society at its principal office, and is either,- (i) sent by registered post, or (ii) delivered at that office; (d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the person to be served and,- (i) is given or tendered to him, or (ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some conspicuous part of his last known place of residence or business, if within the 1 [State of Karnataka], or is given or tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or building, if any, to which it relates, or (iii) is sent by registered post to that person. (2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or occupier of any land or building may be addressed "the owner" or "the occupier", as the case may be, of that land or building (naming that land or building) without further name or description, and shall be deemed to be duly served,- (a) if the document so addressed is sent or delivered in accordance with clause (d) of sub-section (1); or (b) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is delivered to some person on the land or building or, where there is no person on the land or building to whom it can be delivered, is affixed to some conspicuous part of the land or building. (3) Where a document is served on a partnership in accordance with this section, the document shall be deemed to be served on each partner. (4) For the purpose of enabling any document to be served on the owner of any premises the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer or any other officer authorised or empowered to do so may by notice in writing require the occupier of the premises to state the name and address of the owner thereof. (5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a minor, the service upon his guardian or any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be service upon the minor. (6) Nothing in sections 99 and 100 and in this section shall apply to any summons issued under this Act by a court. (7) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section. Adopted by the Karnataka adaptation of laws order 1973 w.e.f. 1.11.1973.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 102--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 100 and 101 a bill for any charges or a notice of demand may be served by sending it by ordinary post with a prepaid letter under a certificate of posting addressed to the appropriate person specified in section 101 at his last known place of residence or business and in proving the service of every bill or notice so sent it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter was properly addressed and posted under a certificate of posting.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 103--> State(s): Karnataka In the event of non- compliance with the terms of any notice, order or requisition issued to any person under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, requiring such person to execute any work or to do any act it shall be lawful for the authority or officer at whose instance the notice, order or requisition has been issued, whether or not the person in default is liable to punishment for such default or has been prosecuted or sentenced to any punishment therefor, after giving notice in writing to such person, to take such action or such steps as may be necessary for the completion of the act or the work required to be done or executed by such person and all the expenses incurred on such account shall be payable to the Board on demand and if not paid within ten days after such demand, shall be recoverable as an arrear of charges payable under this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 104--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If any notice, order or requisition has been issued to any person in respect of property of which he is the owner, the authority or officer at whose instance such notice, order or requisition has been issued, may require the occupier of such property or of any part thereof to pay to him, instead of to the owner, any rent payable by him in respect of such property, as it falls due up to the amount recoverable from the owner under section 103: Provided that if the occupier refuses to disclose the correct amount of the rent payable by him or the name or address of the person to whom it is payable, the authority or officer may recover from the occupier the whole amount recoverable under section 103 as an arrear of charges payable under this Act. (2) Any amount recovered from an occupier instead of from an owner under sub-section (1), shall in the absence of any contract between the owner and the occupier to the contrary, be deemed to have been paid to the owner.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 105--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever the owner of any land or building fails to execute any work which he is required to execute under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, the occupier, if any, of such land or building may, with the approval of the Board, execute the said work and he shall, subject to any contract between the owner and occupier to the contrary, be entitled to recover from the owner the reasonable expenses incurred by him in the execution of the work and may deduct the amount thereof from the rent payable by him to the owner.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 106--> State(s): Karnataka Where any person, by reason of his receiving rent of immovable property as a receiver, agent or trustee, or of his being as a receiver, agent or trustee the person who would receive the rent if the property were let to a tenant, would under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, be bound to discharge any obligation imposed on the owner of the property for the discharge of which money is required, he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has, or but for his own improper act or default might have had funds in his hands belonging to the owner sufficient for the purpose. (2) The burden of proving any fact entitling a receiver, agent or trustee to relief under sub-section (1) shall lie upon him. (3) Where any receiver, agent or trustee has claimed and established his right to relief under this section, the Board may by notice in writing require him, to apply to the discharge of his obligation as aforesaid the first moneys which may come to his hands on behalf, or for the use, of the owner, and on failure to comply with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally liable to discharge the obligation.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 107--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any person who has been convicted of an offence against this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder shall, notwithstanding any punishment to which he may have been sentenced for the said offence, be liable to pay such compensation for any damage to the property of the Board resulting from the said offence as the Board may consider reasonable. (2) In the event of a dispute regarding the amount of compensation payable under sub-section (1) such amount shall, on application made to him, be determined by the magistrate before whom the said person was convicted of the said offence; and on non-payment of the amount of compensation so determined the same shall be recovered under a warrant from the said magistrate as if it were a fine imposed by him on the person liable therefor.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 108--> State(s): Karnataka Any sum due to the Board on account of any charge, costs, expenses, fees, rates or rent or on any other account under this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be recovered from any person from whom such sum is due,- (a) as if it were an arrear of land revenue; or (b) on application to any judicial magistrate, by such magistrate as if it were a fine imposed by him.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 109--> State(s): Karnataka Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision of this Act or any rule or regulation 1 [or bye-law] or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation 2 [or bye-law], shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and in the case of a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention continues after conviction for the first such failure or contravention. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966. Inserted by Act 6 of 1966 w.e.f. 17.3.1966.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 110--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be- deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,- (a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 111--> State(s): Karnataka Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court shall proceed with the trial of any offence made punishable by or under this Act or any rule or regulation except on the complaint of, or upon information received from, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer or any officer authorised by the Board by a general or special order in this behalf.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 112--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board or any officer of the Board authorised by it by general or special order in this behalf, may, either before or after the institution of the proceedings, compound any offence made punishable by or under this Act: Provided that no offence shall be compounded which is committed by failure to comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Board unless and until the same has been complied with so far as such compliance is possible. (2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of the offence so compounded.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 113--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Chief Engineer, the Water Supply Engineer, the Sanitary Engineer, any officer authorised in this behalf by the Board or any police officer may arrest any person who commits in his view any offence against this Act or against any rule or regulation made thereunder, if,- (a) the name and address of such person be unknown to him, and (b) such person on demand declines to give his name and address or gives a name and address which such officer has reason to believe to be false. (2) No person so arrested shall be detained in custody after his true name and address are ascertained or, without the order of the nearest magistrate, for a period longer than twenty-four hours from the time of arrest exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of such magistrate.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 114--> State(s): Karnataka It shall be the duty of all police officers and employees of the Corporation to give immediate information to the Board or officers of the Board authorised in this behalf, of the commission of, or the attempt to commit, any offence against this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder and to assist all such officers in the exercise of their lawful authority.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 115--> State(s): Karnataka No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission in writing or any other document issued under this Act or any rule or regulation shall be invalid merely by reason of defect of form.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 116--> State(s): Karnataka A copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order or other document or of any entry in a register in the possession of the Board shall, if duly certified by the legal keeper thereof or other person authorised by the Board in this behalf, be admissible in evidence of the existence of the document or entry, and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and to the same extent to which, the original document or entry would, if produced, have been admissible to prove such matters and transactions.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 117--> State(s): Karnataka No officer or servant of the Board shall in any legal proceedings to which the Board is not a party, be required to produce any register or document the contents of which can be proved under section 116 by a certified copy, or to appear as a witness to prove any matter or transaction recorded therein save by order of the court made for special cause.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 118--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may by notification direct that any power conferred or any duty imposed on the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer by or under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised or performed also by any other officer or servant of the Board specified in the notification.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 119--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall be the Chief Controlling authority in respect of all matters relating to the administration of this Act and for that purpose may exercise all powers necessary in that behalf. (2) The Chief Engineer or any other officer or officers notified by the Board in this behalf may also exercise any power or perform any function which the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer may exercise or perform under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 120--> State(s): Karnataka Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Water Supply Engineer or the Sanitary Engineer or other officer under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder may within a period of sixty days from the date of such decision or order appeal to the authority prescribed by the regulations and subject to revision by the Board, the orders of the appellate authority on such appeal shall be final.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 121--> State(s): Karnataka The Board may call for the records of any proceedings of any officer subordinate to it for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any order or proceeding and may pass such order with respect thereto as it thinks fit.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 122--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every rule or regulation made under this Act and every order made under section 129 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the said period, either House of the State Legislature makes any modification in any rule or regulation or order or directs that any rule or regulation or order shall not have effect, and if the modification or direction is agreed to by the other House, such rule or regulation or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. (2) A rule or regulation under this Act may be made with retrospective effect and when such a rule or regulation is made the reasons for making the rule or regulation shall be specified in a statement laid before both Houses of the State Legislature. Subject to any modification made under sub-section (1), every rule or regulation made under this Act shall have effect as if enacted in this Act.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 123--> State(s): Karnataka (1) With effect from the date on which Chapter IV or Chapter V as the case may be, comes into force, every officer and other employee of the Corporation employed in connection with the Water Supply Undertaking of the Corporation or the Sewage Undertaking of the Corporation, as the case may be, shall stand transferred to and become an officer or other employee of the Board with such designations as the State Government may determine and shall hold office by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of service as he would have held the same if he had continued to be an officer or employee of the Corporation and shall continue to do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the Board: Provided that any service rendered by such officer or employee under the Corporation before such transfer shall be deemed to be service rendered under the Board. (2) The Board may employ any officer or other employee transferred under subsection (1) in the discharge of such functions under this Act as it may think proper and every such officer or other employee shall discharge those functions accordingly.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 124--> State(s): Karnataka (1) All members, officers and servants of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45 of 1860) and the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (Central Act 2 of 1947) for the time being in force. (2) The words "State Government" and "Government" in section 161 of the Indian Penal Code shall for the purposes of sub-section (1) be deemed to include the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 125--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No suit or prosecution shall be entertained in any court against the Board or against any officer or servant of the Board or against any person acting under the order or direction of the Board or any officer or servant of the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder. (2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer or servant of the Board for any act done or purporting to be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder without the previous sanction of the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 126--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No suit shall be instituted against the Board or against any officer or servant of the Board or against any person acting under the order or direction of the Board or any officer or other servant, in respect of any act done, or purporting to have been done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been left at the office of the Board and, in the case of such officer, servant or person, unless notice in writing has also been delivered to him or left at his office or place of residence, and unless such notice states explicitly the cause of action, the nature of the relief sought, the amount of compensation claimed and the name and place of residence of the intending plaintiff and unless the plaint contains a statement that such notice has been so left or delivered. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an injunction of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the postponement of institution of the suit.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 127--> State(s): Karnataka (1) With effect from the date on which Chapter IV comes into force,- (a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, bye-law, form or notice made or issued, and any licence or permission granted under the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, in so far as it relates to the water supply undertaking, shall continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued or granted under the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is superseded by any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, regulation, form or notice made or issued or any licence or permission granted under the provisions of this Act; (b) all obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into, all matters and things engaged to be done by, with, or for the Corporation in connection with the water supply undertaking shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done by, with, or for the Board; (c) all property, movable and immovable, and all interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein vested in the Corporation in so far as they relate to the water supply undertaking shall, with all rights of whatsoever description used, enjoyed or possessed by the Corporation in respect of the water supply undertaking, vest in the Board; (d) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the Corporation in connection with the water supply undertaking shall be deemed to be due to the Board; (e) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been instituted by or against the Corporation, so far as they relate to the water supply undertaking may be continued or be instituted by or against the Board. (2) With effect from the date on which Chapter V comes into force,- (a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, bye-law, form or notice made or issued, and any licence or permission granted under the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, in so far as it relates to the sewerage undertaking, shall continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued or granted under the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is superseded by any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, regulation, form or notice made or issued or any licence or permission granted under the provisions of this Act; (b) all obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into, all matters and things engaged to be done by, with, or for the Corporation in connection with the sewerage undertaking, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done, by, with, or for the Board; (c) all property, movable and immovable, and all interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein vested in the Corporation in so far as they relate to the sewerage undertaking shall, with all rights of whatsoever description used, enjoyed or possessed by the Corporation in respect of the sewerage undertaking, vest in the Board; (d) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the Corporation in connection with the sewerage undertaking shall be deemed to be due to the Board; (e) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been instituted by or against the Corporation, so far as it relates to the sewerage undertaking may be continued or be instituted by or against the Board.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 128--> State(s): Karnataka (1) With effect from the date on which Chapter IV comes into force, the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, shall have effect subject to the following amendments, namely:- (1) sections 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179, 180, 181 and 182 shall be omitted; (ii) in section 367,- (a) in clause (5), for sub-clause (a), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) for the use of public tanks, wells, conduits or other works for the use of water therefrom;" and sub-clauses (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i) shall be omitted: (b) in clause (7), in sub-clause (e), the words "closed cesspools and" shall be omitted and in sub-clause (f), the words "pipes or" shall be omitted. (2) With effect from the date on which Chapter V comes into force, the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, shall have effect subject to the following amendments, namely:- (i) in section 184, for the words 'public drains, pipes and drainage works', the words "public surface drains and drainage works connected therewith" shall be substituted; (ii) in section 187,- (a) in sub-sections (1) and (2), for the words "public drain", the words "public surface drain" shall be substituted; (b) sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be omitted; (iii) in sections 188 and 189, for the words "public drain", the words "public surface drain" shall be substituted; (iv) in section 199, the word "water-supply" shall be omitted; (v) in section 368, the words "and supply of water to" and "and water closets, earth closets, privies, ash pits and cess pool in connection with buildings and the keeping of water closets supplied with sufficient water for flushing" shall be omitted. (3) Notwithstanding the amendments to the provisions of the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the property tax payable to the Corporation as water tax or sanitary cess shall continue to be payable to the Corporation in respect of the year for which such tax or cess would have been payable before the coming into force of Chapter V of this Act. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the City of Bangalore Municipal Corporation Act, 1949, after the coming into force of Chapter IV of this Act, the Corporation shall pay to the Board such percentage of the property tax collected as water tax during such years as the State Government may by order specify.
Bangalore Water Supply And Sewerage Act, 1964_Section 129--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, the State Government may, by order published in the official Gazette, make such provisions as appear to it to be necessary or expedient,- (a) for bringing the provisions of this Act into effective operation; (b) for making omissions from, additions to and adaptations and modifications of the rules, bye-laws, notifications and orders referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 127 or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 127 for purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act; (c) for removing difficulties arising in connection with the transition to the provisions of this Act including difficulties in the construing of references to the Corporation or other authorities in any law; (d) for authorising the continued carrying on for the time being by the Board of services and activities carried on by the Corporation; and (e) so far as it appears necessary or expedient in connection with any of the matters aforesaid, for varying the powers or jurisdiction of any authority and empowering other authorities to exercise such jurisdiction as may be specified in such order. (2) The provisions made by any order under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of section 122, have effect as if enacted in this Act, and any such order may be made so as to be retrospective to any date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Chapter: Provided that no person shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence by reason of so much of any such order as makes any provisions thereof retrospective to any date before the making thereof. SCHEDULE (See section 24) TABLE Description of asset A. Land owned under full title Number of Years or period Infinite B. Land held under lease, (a) for investment in the land The period of the lease or the period remaining unexpired on the assignment of the lease. (b) for cost of clearing site The period of the lease remaining unexpired at the date of clearing the site. C. Assets purchased new, (a) Buildings and civil engineering works of a permanent character, not mentioned above, (i) offices. Fifty (ii) temporary erections such as wooden structures. Five. (iii) roads other than Kutcha roads. One hundred. (iv) others. Fifty (b) Self-propelled vehicles. Seven (c) (i) Office furniture and fittings. Twenty. (ii) Office equipment. Ten. D. Assets purchased second-hand and assets not otherwise provided for in this Table. Such reasonable period as the State Government determines in each case having regard to the nature, age and condition of the asset at the time of its acquisition by the owner. 
