Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to provide for establishment of the Karnataka Border Area Development Authority for the development of border areas of Karnataka and for monitering and evaluating the implementation of projects and programmes related to the development of the border areas of Karnataka. Whereas, it is expedient to provide for the establishment of the Karnataka Border Area Development Authority for the development of border areas of Karnataka and for monitering and evaluating the implementation of projects and programmes relating to the development of the Border Areas of Karnataka. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (a) "Authority" means, the Karnataka Border Area Development Authority constituted under Section 3; (b) "Border area" means, the Taluks and other areas situated in the border areas of Karnataka enumerated in the Schedule; (c) "Chairman" means, the Chairman of the Authority; (d) "Department" means, all departments of the State Government, including any body or corporation established by the State Government by or under any law or any institution or body of organisations receiving financial aid from the State Government; (e) "Member" means, a member of the Authority; (f) "Projects and programmes" means, the annual projects and programmes in various departments prepared by the Authority for the development of the border areas of Karnataka; (g) "Secretary" means, the Secretary of the Authority; (h) "Regulations" means, the regulations made under this Act.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) As soon as may be, after the commencement of this Act there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, an Authority for development of the border areas of Karnataka to be called the Karnataka Border Area Development Authority with its headquarters at Bangalore. (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:- (a) A person who has worked for the development of border areas of Karnataka nominated by the State Government to be the Chairman of the Authority (b) Seven persons nominated by the State Government having special knowledge or practical experience in the field of Literature, Administration, Education or Law who are aware of the problems of the border areas. Members (c) The Secretary to Government, Department of Kannada, Culture and Information Ex officio Member (d) The Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation Ex officio Member (e) The Secretary to Government, Department of Rural Development and Panchayath Raj Ex officio Member (f) The Principal Secretary to Government, Revenue Department Ex officio Member (g) The Director, Directorate of Kannada and Culture Ex officio Member (h) The President, Kannada Sahitya Parishath Ex officio Member (i) The Chairman, Karnataka Sahitya Academy Ex officio Member (j) The Chairman, Kannada Development Authority Ex officio Member (k) The Secretary of the Authority Member-Secretary
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to the pleasure of the State Government, the Chairman and other members nominated by the State Government shall hold office for a period of three years. This shall not apply in case of an ex officio member. (2) The Chairman or a member other than an ex officio member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the State Government but shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted. (3) A casual vacancy in the office of a Chairman or a member shall be filled by the State Government by nominating another person as Chairman or member as the case may be and the person so nominated shall hold office for the unexpired portion of the term of the office of his predecessor. (4) The Chairman and other members shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed. (5) The allowances payable to the Chairman and other members shall be defrayed out of the Fund of the Authority. (6) No act or proceedings of the Authority shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Authority.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as and for being a member, if he:- (a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the opinion of the State Government involves moral turpitude; or (b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; or (c) is an undischarged insolvent; or (d) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Central Government or a State Government or a body or Corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government; or (e) has directly or indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in any work done by the order of the Authority or in any contract or employment with or under or by or on behalf of the Authority; (f) is employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf of the Authority or accepts employment of legal practitioner against the Authority. (2) A person shall not be disqualified under clause (e) of sub-section (1) or be deemed to have any share or interest in any contract or employment within the meaning of the said clause by reason only of his having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisements relating to the affairs of the Authority is inserted.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government shall remove the Chairman or other member if:- (a) he becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in Section 5: Provided that no Chairman or member shall be removed on the ground that he has become subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of that section, unless he has been given an opportunity of making his representation against the proposal; or (b) he refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or (c) he without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority absents from three consecutive meetings of the Authority; or (d) in the opinion of the State Government he has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest: Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been given an opportunity of making his representation against the proposal.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of Group A officer to be the Secretary of the Authority. The Secretary shall receive such salary and other allowances as the State Government may determine from time to time. (2) The State Government may grant from time to time leave of absence to the Secretary. (3) The Secretary shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority and shall:- (a) be responsible for implementing the projects and programmes approved by the Authority; (b) operate the fund of the Authority; (c) cause to be maintained accounts of the Authority; (d) discharge such other functions which are conferred on him by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force; and (e) be responsible for presentation of records of the office during inspection of Chairman.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the State Government or such other officer as the State Government may authorise, may appoint or depute such officers and employees of the authority as it may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions. (2) The recruitment and terms and conditions of service of the officers and servants specified above shall be such as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The meetings of the Authority shall be convened by the Chairman or by the Secretary with the prior approval of the Chairman and shall be held at any place within the jurisdiction of the Authority. (2) The Authority shall meet at least once in every two months. (3) The Chairman or the Secretary with the prior approval of the Chairman shall convene a special meeting if the Chairman feels it necessary. (4) The Authority shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meeting as may be provided by regulations. (5) Every meeting shall be presided over by the Chairman and if for any reason, the Chairman is unable to attend any meeting any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. (6) Nine members shall form the quorum.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka No disqualification of or defect in the appointment of any person acting as Chairman or member shall be deemed to vitiate any act or proceeding of the Authority if such act or proceeding is otherwise in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority may for any specific purpose constitute a sub-committee consisting of such members not exceeding six members from amongst its members, the Chairman of the Authority shall also be the Chairman of the Sub-Committee.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Sub-Committee shall exercise such of the powers and perform such duties of the Authority which are delegated to it by the Authority. (2) The Sub-Committee shall meet at least once in a month. (3) The Sub-Committee shall take decisions on urgent matters to review the prompt implementation of the decision of the Authority and suggest on urgent matter for action by the State Government. (4) The Sub-Committee shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by regulations.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In order to carry out the purposes of the Act, the Authority if necessary, may obtain the services or assistance of the experts in such manner as it may deems fit. (2) Honorarium and allowances payable to such experts for the services or assistance so rendered shall be of such an amount as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority shall every year prepare projects and programmes for the development of border areas and forward it to the State Government for approval. The State Government may approve the project and programmes with or without modification.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority shall:- (1) implement, supervise and evaluate the development works in the border areas and also improve the educational, social and cultural conditions of Kannada speaking people in the border areas of the neighbouring States. (2) provide assistance for opening required number of Kannada medium schools in the areas outside the border of the State. Open Kannada medium schools to impart education in Kannada medium in those villages wherein Kannada schools have been closed by the neighbouring States and construct school buildings. (3) assist in the appointment of required number of teachers in the border areas to teach in Kannada medium. Provide Kannada medium text books from time to time to the students studying in Kannada medium. (4) open libraries in the border area to provide them access to Kannada daily, monthlies and weeklies to facilitate Kannadigas of those areas to learn about the day-to-day developments in Kannada Language. (5) grant annual aid to registered Kannada organisations for conducting pro-Kannada activities to facilitate development of Kannada language. (6) arrange extension lecture programmes in order to motivate pro- Kannada organisations to work actively towards the development of Kannada as well as to form many Kannada Associations in the border area. Help them to organise series of extension lectures about Kannada Language. (7) fulfill the cultural requirements of Kannadigas in the border area by organising cultural activities at border areas. (8) provide suitable forum to exhibit art forms such as Kannada literature cinema, drama, folk, dance, Yakshagana, lavani, bayalata togalu bombeyata, harikathe, music etc. Construct cultural auditoria for the exhibition of these art forms in the taluk headquarters, villages and for Kannadigas of other States. (9) conduct Gadinadu and Horanadu festivals. Construct Kannada Bhavanas. Conduct several development programmes to improve the living conditions of the people in the border areas and to fulfill their cultural, social, financial, educational aspirations. (10) conduct study regarding the facilities to be provided to the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes of the border area for security of their life and help them through the concerned departments. (11) take steps to promote handicrafts, cottage industries and other village industries in the border area. (12) supervise the facilities required for drinking water, health, agriculture, irrigation, road and for other development works to the villages in the border area to be provided through the concerned departments.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority shall implement the objectives of the Act through the Deputy Commissioner at District level, the Assistant Commissioner at the Sub-divisional level and the Tahsildar at the Taluk level.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority may for the purpose of this Act seek and obtain information relating to implementation of the Border Area Development of Karnataka from any officer of the State Government and such officer shall be bound to furnish the information sought by the Authority.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority, in order to carry out the purposes of this Act, shall advise the State Government regarding implementation of its projects and programmes.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority in order to carry out the purposes of the Act, shall record, any violation by the officers and officials of the State Government and local bodies of any order, issued by the Government from time to time or of any order, which is already in force as dereliction of duty and shall advise to the appointing authority for necessary action.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka (1) There shall be a fund called the Border area development Authority Fund. (2) The following shall form part of, or be paid into the Border area development Authority Fund, namely:- (i) all grants, subversions, donations and gifts made by the Central Government, State Government, any local authority, any body whether in-corporated or not or any persons; and (ii) all other sums received by or on behalf of the Authority from any source whatsoever. (3) Except as otherwise directed by the State Government all money credited to the Fund shall be invested in any Scheduled bank. (4) The administrative expenses to the Authority including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Authority shall be defrayed out of the Fund of the Authority.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall every year make a grant to the Authority of a sum equivalent to the administrative expenses of the Authority. (2) The State Government may keeping in view the project and programmes of the Authority, make financial allocations to the Authority in the annual Budget of the State.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Accounts of the income and expenditure of the Authority Fund shall be kept in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (2) The Authority shall prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed. (3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by such auditor as the State Government may appoint. (4) The auditor shall for the purposes of the audit, have access to all the accounts and other records of the Authority. (5) The Authority shall pay from its fund such charges for the audit as may be prescribed. (6) As soon as may be after the receipt of the report of the auditor, the Authority shall send a copy of the annual statement of accounts, together with a copy of the report of the auditor to the State Government and shall cause to be published the annual statement of accounts in such manner as may be prescribed. (7) The State Government may after perusal of the report of the auditor give such directions as it thinks fit to the Authority and the Authority shall comply with such directions.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority shall before such dates, in such form and at such interval as may be prescribed submit the prescribed report to the State Government.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority shall prepare every year before such date and in such form as may be prescribed a budget estimate of its income and expenditure for the financial year to commence on the first day of April next following and shall forward it to the State Government.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, after previous publication by notification make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or decide that any rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka The Authority may subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made under Section 26 and with the previous sanction of the State Government, by notification, make regulations to carry-out the purposes of this Act.
Karnataka Border Area Development Authority Act, 2010_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Karnataka [See clause (b) of Section 2] Sl. No. Name of Taluks and other areas (1) (2) 1. Anekal 2. Hoskote 3. Kanakapur 4. Challakere 5. Hiriyur 6. Molakalmur 7. Bagepalli 8. Bangarpet 9. Chintamani 10. Gowribidanur 11. Gudibande 12. Malur 13. Mulbagil 14. Srinivasapur 15. Madhugiri 16. Pavagada 17. Sira 18. Bantwal 19. Mangalore 20. Puttur 21. Sullia 22. Madikeri 23. Virajpet 24. Chamarajnagar 25. Gundlupet 26. Heggadadevanakote 27. Kollegal 28. Bijapur 29. Indi 30. Bellary 31. Sandur 32. Siriguppe 33. Afsalpur 34. Aland 35. Chincholi 36. Sedam 37. Shahapur 38. Yadgir 39. Manvi 40. Raichur 41. Athani 42. Belgaum 43. Hukkeri 44. Chikkodi 45. Khanapur 46. Karwar 47. Joida 48. Aurad 49. Basavakalyan 50. Bhalki 51. Bidar 52. Humnabad 
