Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Thirtieth day of December 1980. Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixth day of April, 1981
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted namely:- "(hh) Commissioner means the Commissioner appointed under Section 12."
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3) at the end, the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(m) the Commissioner, ex officio."
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10, 23, 29, 32, 33, 39, 42, 46, 50 and 62 of the principal Act, for word "Chairman" wherever it occurs, the word "Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Sections 12 and 13 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, namely. "12. Appointment of Commissioner -(1) The State Government shall appoint an Officer, not below the rank of Divisional Commissioner, to be the Commissioner for the authority. (2) The Commissioner shall receive such monthly salary and other allowance as the State Government may, from time to time determine. (3) The State Government may, from time to time, grant leave of absence for such period as thinks fit-to the Commissioner. A copy of every order granting such leave shall be communicated to the Chairman. 13.Powers and duties of the Commissioner -(1) The Commissioner shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the authority. (2) The Commissioner shall in addition to performing such functions as are conferred on him by or under this Act or under any law for the time being in force. (a) Carry into effect the resolutions of the authority; (b) Keep and conduct the authoritys correspondence; (c) Carry out and execute such schemes and works as the State Government may direct and incur necessary expenditure therefor; (d) Be responsible for implementing the schemes of the authority; (e) Operate the accounts of the authority and be responsible for the maintenance of the accounts of the authority; (f) Exercise supervision and control over the accounts and proceedings of all Officers and servants of the authority in matters executive administration and in the matters concerning the accounts of and records of the authority and to the extent specified in sub- section (1) of Section 50 dispose of all questions relating to the service of such Officers and servants and their pay, privileges and allowances; and (g) Furnish to the Government a copy of the minutes of the authoritys proceedings and any return or other information which the Government may, from time to time, call for; (h) Authenticate by his signature all permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the authority and the orders of the Chairman. (3) The Commissioner shall have all the powers of a major Head of the Department of the State Government under the Karnataka State Civil Services Rules for the time being in force as respects the Officers and servants of the authority".
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka Section 57 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Bangalore Development Authority (Amendment) Ordinance 1980 (Karnataka Ordinance 18 of 1980) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
