Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 16 of 1958) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 19761 . (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixth day of December, 1976 (First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Seventh day of December, 1976)
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka To Section 48 of the Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 16 of 1958) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following Explanation shall be and shall always be deemed to have been added at the end, namely - Explanation - For the purpose of this section the expressions of amount awarded and amount claimed include any other additional sum payable in accordance with the law providing for acquisition in consideration of the compulsory nature of the acquisition.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 56 of the principal Act, for the words from the date of the exhibition of the inventory, the words from the date on which the Deputy Commissioner is informed by the Court of the exhibition of the inventory shall be substituted.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Schedule II to the principal Act - (1) for Article 10, the following article shall be substituted, namely - 10. (a) Application or petition presented to any officer of the Excise or Prohibition Department or to any Magistrate by any person having dealings with the Government and when the subject matter of such application relates exclusively to those dealings. Fifty paise (b) Application or petition presented to any officer of land revenue by any person holding temporarily settled land under direct engagement with Government, and when the subject-matter of the application or petition relates exclusively to such engagement. Fifty paise (c) Application or petition presented to any Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Sanitary Board, Notified Area Committee, Town Area Committee, the Commissioner, Executive Officer, Chief Officer, Secretary, President or Chairman under any Act for the time being in force for the conservancy or improvement of any place, if the application or petition relates solely to such conservancy or improvement. Fifty paise (d) Application or petition presented to any officer of land revenue relating to the grant of land on darkhast. Fifty paise (e) Application to a Deputy Commissioner for lease of land for agricultural or non- agricultural purposes. One rupee and fifty paise (f) Application to a Forest Officer by a forest contractor for extension of the period of lease -  (i) if the value of the subject-matter of the lease is Rs. 5,000 or less; Ten rupees (ii) if such value exceeds Rs. 5,000 for every Rs. 1,000 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 5,000 Two rupees (g) Application for attestation of private documents intended to be used outside India Two rupees (h) Application for lapsed deposit presented after six months after the date on which the amount lapsed to the Government -  (i) when the amount of deposit does not exceed Rs. 50; One rupee (ii) when the amount of deposit exceed Rs. 50 but does not exceed Rs. 1,000; Two rupees (iii) when it exceeds Rs. 1,000. Four rupees (i) Application or petition presented to the Government and not otherwise provided for -  (i) which involves the exercise or non-exercise of power conferred by law or rule having the force of law; Four rupees (ii) in other cases. Two rupees and fifty paise (j) Application or petition presented to the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal or Divisional Commissioner or Chief Executive Authority and not otherwise provided for-  (i) which involves the exercise or non- exercise of power conferred by law or rule having the force of law; Four rupees (ii) in other cases. Two rupees and fifty paise (k) Application for permission for use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes Four rupees (1) Application or petition not falling under clauses (i) or (j) and presented to a public officer or in a public office and not otherwise provided for-  (i) which involves the exercise or non-exercise of power conferred by law or rule having the force of law; One rupee (ii) in other cases. Fifty paise (2) in Article 11, for items (2) and (3) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (1), following items shall be substituted, namely - (2) If the value exceeds Rs. 2,000 but does not exceed of Rs. 10,000 Six rupees and twenty-five paise (3) If the amount or value exceeds ten thousand rupees:  Provided that if a caveat is entered and the application is registered as a suit, one half the scale of fee prescribed in Article I of Schedule I on the market value of the estate less the fee already paid on the application shall be levied Twelve rupees and fifty paise.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 18 of 1976) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
