Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 26th day of February, 2000. Received the assent of the Governor on the 27th day of April, 2000
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 28-A of the Karnataka Cooperative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (6), for the words "elected members", the word "members" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 29-F of the principal Act, in sub-sections (4) and (6), for the words "elected members", wherever they occur the word "members" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "30-B. Powers to give direction in public interest - (1) Where the State Government is satisfied that in public interest and for the purpose of securing proper implementation of Co-operative and other development programmes approved or undertaken by the State Government or for specially safeguarding the interest of the members belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes and ensuring reservation to persons belonging to such Castes, Tribes or Classes in the services under the Co-operative Societies, it is necessary to issue directions to any class of Co-operative Societies generally or to any Co-operative Society or Co-operative Societies in particular, it may issue directions from time to time and all such Co-operative Societies or the Co-operative Society concerned shall be bound to comply with such directions. (2) The State Government may modify or cancel any directions issued under sub-section (1) and in modifying or cancelling such directions may impose such conditions as it may deem fit. (3) The State Government may by notification, delegate its power under this section to the Registrar subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification".
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 53 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "53-A. Nomination of members of committee by State Government in certain cases - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 29, where the State Government has subscribed to the share capital of a Co-operative Society to the extent of not less that - (i) fifty per cent of the total share capital; or (ii) five lakhs of rupees, the State Government shall have the right to nominate as its representatives one-third of the total number of members of the committee of the Co-operative Society. (2) A person nominated as a member of a committee of a Co-operative Society under sub-section (1) (hereinafter in this section referred to as nominated member) shall hold office as such member during the pleasure of the State Government. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a nominated member shall hold office as such member for such period as the State Government may, by order specify. (4) Where an officer of the State Government is nominated as member of a committee under sub-section (1), such officer may be nominated by virtue of his office, and when any such nomination is made, such officer may if unable to be present himself at any meeting of the committee depute a subordinate officer to the meeting as his representative and such subordinate officer shall be deemed to be the person nominated as a representative of the State Government for purposes of such meeting. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person so nominated under this section shall not have right to vote in any meeting of a co-operative Society convened for the purpose of election of office bearers under Section 29-F nor he shall have right to become an office bearer of the society".
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000 (Karnataka Ordinance 1 of 2000) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
