Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act No. 11 of 1959) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. Received the assent of the President on the Eighteenth day of March, 2000
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 26 of the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be inserted, namely - "26-A. Partnership of Co-operative Societies -(1) Any two or more co-operative societies may, by resolution, passed by three-fourth majority of the members present and after voting at a general meeting of each of such co-operative societies, may enter into partnership to carry out any one or more specific business. In case of an assisted society prior permission of the Registrar, to enter into such partnership, is necessary. A written notice of the date of general meeting shall be given to each member before ten clear days of such meeting. (2) Nothing in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (Central Act 9 of 1932) shall apply to such partnership. 26-B. Collaboration by Co-operative Societies -(1) Any co-operative society or co-operative societies may, enter into collaboration with any Government undertaking or any other undertaking approved by the State Government to carry out any one or more specified business provided in the bye-laws of such society or societies including industrial investment, financial aid or marketing and management expertise. An assisted society may enter into such collaboration with the prior approval of the Registrar. (2) Before approving such schemes of collaboration under sub-section (1), the Registrar shall have due regard to the following matters, namely - (a) the scheme is economically viable; (b) it can be implemented without, in any way, altering the co-operative character of the co-operative society or the co-operative societies; (c) the scheme is in the interests of the members of the co-operative society or co-operative societies, or is in the public interest or in the interest of the co-operative movement, in general."
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 70 of the principal Act - (i) in sub-section (1), in clause (d), for the words "no Court", the words "no Civil or Labour or Revenue Court or Industrial Tribunal" shall be substituted. (ii) in sub-section (2), in clause (d), the following shall be inserted, at the end, namely - "notwithstanding anything contrary contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947)."
Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 118 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) - (i) for the words "Civil or Revenue Court", the words "Civil, Labour or Revenue Court or Industrial Tribunal", shall be substituted. (ii) in clause (b), after the word "committee", the words "or member thereof" shall be inserted. 
