Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1986. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1986 (Karnataka Act 29 of 1986) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fifty fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the Thirtieth day of June, 1986.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In section 2 of the Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) Act, 1986 (Karnataka Act 29 of 1986), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in clause (e), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "and the land belonging to the owner of land specified in the annexure appended to this Act, which is held on lease for the purpose of the Mills." (2) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(gg) "owner of land" means a person to whom the land specified in the annexure appended to this Act belonged and which is held on lease for the purpose of the Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills and includes any person who claims title to such land as his heir or legal representative."
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 4 of the principal Act, after the words "lessor and lessee" the words "and owner of land" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 5 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), after the words "lessor or lessee" the words "or owner of land" shall be inserted. (2) In sub-section (3), after the words "mortgagee of any property" the words "and every owner of land having interest in, or in relation to, the property" shall be inserted. (3) In sub-section (4),- (a) after the words "mortgagee of any property" the words "and every owner of land having interest in, or in relation to, the property" shall be inserted. (b) For the words "or other dues" the words "amount or other dues" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words "or such other persons" the words "or owner of land or such other persons" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "or such other persons" the words "or owner of land or such other persons" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (4) for the words "and other interested persons" the words "owner of land and other interested persons" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "22A. Disbursement of amount of the lessor etc.,- (1) If out of the amount paid to him in relation to the Mills, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities specified in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the lessor, lessee and owner of land. (2) Before making any payment to the lessor, lessee or owner of land in proportion to his interest in the Mills, the Commissioner shall satisfy himself as to the right of such lessor, lessee or owner of land to receive the whole or any part of such amount and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of such lessor, lessee or owner of land to receive the whole or any part of the amount referred to in section 9 and 10 including apportionment of the amount among them, the Commissioner shall refer the matter to the Court and make disbursement in accordance with the decision of the Court. (3) The court shall decide the apportionment of amount among the lessor, lessee or owner of land in relation to the Mills having due regard to the value on the appointed day of the property forming part of the Mills. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act evidence shall be admissible to establish before the court right title and interest of the lessor, lessee or owner of land in relation to the Mills. Explanation:- In this section 'Court' in relation to the Mills means the principal court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the Mills is situated."
Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills (Acquisition and Transfer) (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Annexure shall be inserted, namely:- ANNEXURE Note: This Annexure does not include the properties sold by The Karnataka Co-operative Textile Mills Ltd., and the Properties acquired by various Government Authorities before, 1986. T.N. Chaturvedi Governor of Karnataka By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, G. Dakshina Moorthy Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
