Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka Whereas, it is expedient to prohibit or restrict the import and export of coffee husk to and from 1 [the State of Karnataka except Bellary District] and to provide for the control of the transport and sale of coffee husk within 2 [the State of Karnataka except Bellary District]; It is hereby enacted as follows- Karnataka Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953 Karnataka Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 19401 . (2) It extends to the 2 [whole of the State of Karnataka except Bellary District.] (3) It shall come into force from such date as the Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. Received the assent of His Highness the Maharaja, on the 30th day of January, 1940 Karnataka Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka No coffee husk shall be imported into or exported from 1 [the State of Karnataka except Bellary District] except with the permission of the Government. Karnataka Adaptation of Laws Order, 1953
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka The Government may from time to time, by notification, prohibit the transport of coffee husk from one local area to any other local area.
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka No coffee husk shall be sold or otherwise disposed of, except with the permission of the Government and subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose.
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whoever, in contravention of this Act or of any rules or order made under this Act or of any licence or permit obtained under this Act, imports, exports, transports or sells or otherwise disposes of any coffee husk shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished for each such offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the second schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1904, an offence under this Act shall be a cognisable offence as defined under the Code.
Karnataka Coffee Husk Control Act, 1940_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be punished in the Official Gazette and on such publication shall have effect as if enacted in this Act. 
