Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories Act, 1925. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories Act, 1925. (Central Act XII of 1925) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-second year of the Republic of India as follows -
Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 19811 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Eleventh day of November, 1980. (3) It shall remain in force up to and inclusive of 31st March, 1984 and upon its expiry the provisions which were in force prior to the commencement of this Act, shall stand revived but it shall not affect the previous operation of the amendments made by this Act in respect of action taken in accordance with the principal Act as amended by this Act during the period this Act remained in force. Received the assent of the Governor on the Seventh day of April, 1981 (First published in the Karnataka Gazette, Extraordinary, on the Eighth day of April, 1981)
Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2-B of the Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories, Act, 1925 (Central Act XII of 1925) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words elected in such manner as may be prescribed, the words nominated by the Deputy Commissioner of the district; shall be substituted. (2) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- (4) If the representatives of the owners of the cotton ginning and cotton pressing factories in any local area referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) are not selected within such time as may be prescribed, the Deputy Commissioner of the district shall nominate such representatives from amongst the owners of cotton ginning and cotton pressing factories in that local area.
Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act, for clause (ba), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- (ba) providing for and regulating the selection of the representatives referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 2-B, the manner of selection, the term of office of the members of the committee, the filling of any casual vacancy and all matters connected with such selection.
Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Cotton Ginning and Pressing Factories (Karnataka Amendment) Ordinance, 1980 (Karnataka Ordinance 14 of 1980) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the said Act as amended by this Act. 
