Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Court-Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Court-Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 16 of 1958). Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Court-Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 19631 . First published in the Karnataka Gazette on the Fifth day of March, 1964)(Received the assent of the Governor, on the Eighteenth day of February 1964
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the Karnataka Court-Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 16 of 1958) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - (ia) Chief Controlling Revenue Authority means the Officer appointed by the State Government to be the Commissioner of Stamps for Mysore.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following further proviso shall be added, namely - Provided further that no fee shall be payable in respect of any document filed, exhibited or recorded by or no behalf of the State Government or any Officer of the State Government in his official capacity, or acted on at the instance of or furnished to the State Government or any Officer of the State Government in his official capacity.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka To sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely - Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of Section 7, the value of land specified in clause (a), (b) or (c) of the said sub-section shall, for purposes of determining the jurisdiction of Courts, be the market value of such land.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 63 of the principal Act, for the word presentation, the word re-presentation shall be substituted.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka For sub-section (1) of Section 70 of the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely - (1) The State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, reduce or remit, in the whole or any part of the State of Karnataka, if in the opinion of the State Government it is necessary in public interest so to do, the fee payable in respect of any particular class of documents or any of the documents belonging to such class, or any documents when filed, exhibited or recorded by or acted, on at the instance of or furnished to, any particular class of persons or any members of such class; and may in like manner cancel or vary such notification.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 75 of the principal Act, for the words six naye paise, the words ten naye paise shall be substituted.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 77 of the principal Act, the words in its appellate jurisdiction shall be omitted.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Schedule I to the principal Act - (1) in Article 5 - (a) in column (2), after the word judgment, the words if presented before the ninetieth day from the date of the decree shall added. (b) in column (3), the words comprising the relief sought in the application for review shall be omitted. (2) after Article 5, the following Article shall be inserted, namely - 5-A. Application for review of judgment, if presented on or after the ninetieth day from the date of the decree The fee leviable on the plaint or memorandum of appeal.
Karnataka Court Fees and Suits Valuation (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In Schedule II to the principal Act - (1) in column (2) of Article 9 - (i) after the word report, the word order shall be inserted; and (ii) for the words office of any public officer, the words public office shall be substituted. (2) in Article 10 - (i) in clause (a), after the word Excise, the words or Prohibition shall be inserted. (ii) in clause (c), for the words Municipal Council, Executive Officer or Commissioners, the words Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, Sanitary Board, Notified Area Committee, Town Area Committee, the Commissioner, Executive Officer, Chief Officer, Secretary, President or Chairman shall be substituted. (iii) in clause (j), for the words Karnataka Board of Revenue, the words Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal shall be substituted. (3) in Article 11 - (i) in clause (b) - (a) for the words Board or Executive Officer, the words Board, Statutory Authority or Public Officer shall be substituted. (b) after the word Board in the second and third places where it occurs, the words statutor authority shall be inserted. (ii) in clause (e), after the words Deputy Commissioner, the words or other revenue officer shall be inserted. (iii) in clause (f), for the words sixty-two naye paise, the words seventy-five naye paise shall be substituted. (iv) clause (p) shall be omitted. (v) in clause (v) - (a) in item (i), for the words member of panchayat, the words member of a Taluk Board or Panchayat shall be substituted. (b) in item (ii), for the words President of a Panchayat, the words President or Vice-President of a Taluk Board or Chairman or Vice-Chairman of a Panchayat shall be substituted. (c) in item (iii), the words or District shall be omitted. (d) in item (iv), after the word Bangalore, the words or of Hubli-Dhar-war shall be inserted and the words or a District Board shall be omitted. (e) in item (u), after the word Bangalore, the words or Hubli-Dhar-war shall be inserted, and the words or President of a District Board shall be omitted. (4) in Article 16, in item (a), the words or to any Magistrate shall be omitted; and for the words other Executive Officer, the words any statutory or other authority or any officer shall be substituted. 
