Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1998_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 in its application to the State of Karnataka. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (Central Act 9 of 1910) and Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (Central Act 54 of 1948) in its application to the State of Karnataka, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-ninth year of Republic of India as follows -
Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1998.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1998. Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-first day of October, 1998
Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (Central Act 54 of 1948) - (1) in Section 2, in clause (12), for the word "distribution", the words "distribution or transmission of energy" shall be substituted. (2) for Section 41, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "41. Use of Transmission lines -(1) Where the Board or a Generating Company considers it necessary to use for any of its purposes any transmission lines or main transmission lines of a licensee, the Board or the Generation Company shall have power to use such lines to the extent to which the capacity thereof is or thereafter remains surplus to the requirements of the licensee for the transmission of electricity, for such time and upon such terms as may be agreed with a licensee and on payment of charges calculated in accordance with the provisions of the Fifth Schedule. (2) A transmission licensee may enter into an agreement with the Board, Generating Company, bulk licensee, supply licensee or any other transmission licensee, for the transmission or supply of electricity." (3) in Section 55 - (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "Every licensee", the words "Every licensee or transmission licensee for intra-State transmission" shall be substituted. (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "Every licensee or Generating Company", the words "Every licensee, transmission licensee or Generating Company", shall be substituted. (iii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(4) The State Government in the case of load despatch centres at the State level may, by notification, specify the fees and charges to be paid to a person to whom the load despatch functions are entrusted by the State Government."
Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1998_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Electricity Laws (Karnataka Amendment) Ordinance, 1998 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 2 of 1998) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the respective Acts amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the respective Acts as amended by this Act. 
