Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958, (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka This Act may be called the Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981.1 Received the assent of the Governor on the Fourth day of April, 1981
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka The proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 3-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "3-C. Special provision in respect of certain films - Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 3, 3-A, and 3-B, in the case of a cinematograph show of a Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film - (i) which, as such, has secured an award granted by the Central Government or the State Government, no entertainments tax shall be payable for a period of one year from such date as may be specified by the State Government; and (ii) produced in the State of Karnataka, the rates of entertainments tax payable shall be one half of the rates specified therein. Explanation -For the purpose of this section "entertainments tax" includes surcharge and additional tax leviable under Sections 3-A and 3-B.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4-A of the principal Act - (1) in the proviso, for the words "Kannada film" the words "Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film produced in the State of Karnataka" shall be substituted. (2) the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided further that in the case of a cinematograph show of a Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film which, as such, has secured an award granted by the Central Government or the State Government no tax shall be payable under sub-section (1), for a period of one year from such date as may be specified by the State Government."
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) - (1) for the words "which, having regard to" the words "other than a Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu film produced in the State of Karnataka, which, having regard to" shall be substituted; and (2) for the words "either in full or in part", the words "not exceeding fifty per cent of the tax payable" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8-A of the principal Act, for the words "to the nearest multiple of five paise", the words "to the next higher multiple of five paise" shall be substituted. Law: Indirect Tax 
