Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty- third Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982.1 (2) Clauses (1) and (2) of Section 3 shall be deemed to have come into force on the First Day of July, 1982 and the remaining provisions shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Eighth day of January, 1983
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 3-C of the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following shall be substituted, namely - "3-C. Special provision in respect of certain films -Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 3 and 3-A, in the case of a cinematograph show of a Kannada, Kodava, Konkani or Tulu Film, the rates of entertainments tax payable shall be one half of the rates specified therein: Provided that where such film has secured an award granted by the Central Government or the State Government, no entertainments tax shall be payable for a period of one year from such date as may be specified by the State Government. Explanation -For the purpose of this section "entertainments tax" includes surcharge leviable under Section 3-A."
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 4-A of the principal Act - (1) after the words, "cinematograph shows held in cinema theatres", the words "other than drive-in-theatres" shall be inserted; (2) for the first proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely - "Provided that in respect of a cinema theatre situated within the limits of a local authority falling under Sl. No. (b) of the above Table the proprietor may, at his option to be exercised in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed and given to the prescribed authority, pay - (i) entertainments tax and surcharge under Sections 3 and 3-A of this Act; or (ii) entertainments tax at twenty per cent of the gross collection capacity on the maximum number of shows permitted to be conducted per day under the provisions of the Karnataka Cinemas (Regulation) Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 23 of 1964). The option shall be exercised once a year and shall be final for that year." (3) in the third proviso, the words "produced in the State of Karnataka" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Ordinance; 1982 (Karnataka Ordinance 4 of 1982) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. Law: Indirect Tax 
