Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the First day of April, 1984. Received the assent of the Governor on the Thirty first day of March, 1984
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Entertainments Tax Act, 1958 (Karnataka Act 30 of 1958) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) - (1) in clause (e), for the words "cinematograph show or a game" the words "or cinematograph show" shall be substituted; and (2) clause (e-1) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the provisos shall be omitted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 4-A of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(5)(a) Notwithstanding anything in this section, where a cinematograph film is allowed exemption from, or reduction in the payment of tax under sub-section (1) the rates of payment for admission shall be reduced in respect of each admission to the extent of the tax exempted to reduced in respect of such payment. Where a Proprietor does not reduce the rates of payment for admission he shall, in addition to any other penalty under this Act, be liable to pay tax as if no exemption or reduction from the payment of tax was made under sub-section (1); (b) Notwithstanding the reduction in the rates of payment for admission under clause (a) the gross collection capacity for the purpose of payment of tax under sub-section (1) shall remain unaltered."
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the proviso shall be omitted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after the word "penalty" the words "not less than a sum equal to but" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6-B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the word "penalty" the words "not less than a sum equal to but" shall be inserted. Law: Indirect Tax 
