Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 21 of 1966), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This may be called the Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Tenth day of August, 1987. Received the assent of the President on the Tenth day of November, 1987
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 21 of the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 21 of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in the heading, the word "etc.," shall be inserted at the end; (2) in sub-section (1), the words "or the prevention of the spreading of any infectious diseases" shall be inserted at the end.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 32 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the words "two years and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees", the words "three years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (2) in the proviso to sub-section (1),- (a) in item (i), for the words "three months rigorous imprisonment and fine of not less than rupees one hundred", the words "six months rigorous imprisonment and fine, of not less than rupees one thousand" shall be substituted; (b) in item (ii), for the words "six months rigorous imprisonment and fine of not less than rupees one thousand" the words "one year rigorous imprisonment and fine of not less than rupees two thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 34 of the principal Act,- (1) for the words "six months" and "two thousand rupees" the words "two years" and "four thousand rupees" shall respectively be substituted. (2) in the first proviso,- (a) in item (i), for the words "three months imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand" the words "six months imprisonment and fine of rupees one thousand" shall be substituted. (b) in item (ii), for the words, "six months and fine of not less than rupees one thousand", the words, "one year and fine of not less than rupees two thousand" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 43 of the principal Act, the proviso to sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 43 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- 43-A. Confiscation by Excise Officers in certain cases -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, whether anything liable for confiscation under Section 43 is seized or detained under the provisions of this Act, the officer seizing and detaining such property shall, without any reasonable delay, produce the same before an officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Excise authorised by the Government in this behalf by. notification (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer). (2) On production of the seized property under sub-section (1), the authorised officer, if satisfied that an offence under this Act has been committed may, whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission of such offence, order confiscation of such property. (3) When making an order of confiscation under sub-section (2), the authorised officer may also order that such of the properties to which the order of confiscation relates, which in his opinion cannot be preserved or are not fit for human consumption, be destroyed. (4) Where the authorised officer after passing an order of confiscation under sub-section (2), is of the opinion that it is expedient in the public interest so to do, he may order the confiscated property or any part thereof to be sold by public auction. (5) Where any confiscated property is sold as aforesaid, the proceeds thereof, after deduction of the expenses of any such auction or other incidental expenses, relating thereto, shall, where the order of confiscation made under this section is set aside or annulled by an order under Section 43-D or 43-E, be paid to the owner thereof or to the person from whom it was seized as may be specified in such order. 43-B. Issue of show-cause notice before confiscation under Section 43-A -(1) No order confiscating any property shall be made under Section 43-A unless the person from whom the same is seized. (a) is given a notice in writing informing him the grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate such property; (b) is given an opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the grounds of confiscation; and (c) is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), no order confiscating any animal, cart,, vessel or other conveyance shall be made under Section 43-A, if the owner of the animal, cart, vessel or other conveyance proves to the satisfaction of the authorised officer that it was used in carrying the liquor or intoxicant or the material, still, utensil, implements or apparatus or the receptacle, package or covering without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person incharge of the animal, cart, vessel, or other conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable and necessary precautions against such use. 43-C. Order of confiscation when an offender is not known or cannot be found etc -When an offence under this Act has been committed, but the offender is not known or cannot be found, or when anything liable to confiscation under this Act, and not in the possession of any person cannot be satisfactorily accounted for, the authorised officer may order such confiscation: Provided that no such order shall be made until the expiration of one month, from the date of seizing the goods intended to be confiscated or without hearing the persons if any, claiming any right thereto, and the evidence, if any, which they produce, in support of their claims. 43-D. Revision -Any Excise Officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner of Excise specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, may, before the expiry of thirty days from the date of order of the authorised officer under Section 43-A or 43-C suo motu call for and examine the records of that order and may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and may pass such orders as he deems fit after giving the person against whom such order is made an opportunity of being heard. 43-E. Appeal -Any person aggrieved by an order passed under Section 43-A, 43-C or 43-D may, within thirty days from the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Sessions Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which the property to which such order relates has been seized and the Sessions Judge shall, after giving an opportunity to the appellant to be heard pass such orders as he deems fit and such order shall be final. 45-F. Award of confiscation not to interfere with other punishments -The award of any confiscation under sub-section (2) of Section 43-A or Section 43-C or Section 43-D or Section 43-E shall not prevent infliction of any other punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act. 43-G. Bar of jurisdiction in certain cases -Whenever any liquor, intoxicant, material, still, utensil, implements or apparatus or any receptacle, package or covering in which such liquor, intoxicant, material, still, utensil, implement or apparatus found or any animal, cart, vessel or other conveyance is used in committing any offence, is seized and detained under the provisions of this Act, the authorised officer appointed under Section 43-A or the officer specially empowered under Section 43-D or the Sessions Judge hearing an appeal under Section 43-E, shall have, and notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force, any other officer or Court, Tribunal or authority shall not have, jurisdiction to make orders with regard to the custody, possession, delivery, disposal or distribution of such property".
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka Section 44 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "one thousand rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 45-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 55 of the principal Act, for the words and figures "Section 36 or Section 37", the words and figures "Section 35, Section 36, Section 37, Section 38 or Section 38-A" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 57 of the principal Act,- (i) in clause (a), for the punctuation mark "," and the word "and" the punctuation mark ";" shall be substituted. (ii) in clause (b), the words "or the thing seized", shall be omitted and for the punctuation mark "." the punctuation mark ";" and the word "and" shall be substituted; (iii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(c) make a report of such seizure and take or send the things seized, with all convenient despatch, to the authorised officer."
Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Excise (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1987 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 4 of 1987) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
