Karnataka Excise (Third Amendment) Act, 1993_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 21 of 1966) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-fourth year of the Republic of India, as follows:
Karnataka Excise (Third Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Excise (Third Amendment) Act, 1993.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the 21st day of February, 1995
Karnataka Excise (Third Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 68-A of the Karnataka Excise Act, 1965 (Karnataka Act 21 of 1966), the following Sections shall be inserted, namely:- "68-B. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Courts -No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which any excise officer or other authority empowered by or under this Act has to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any Court in respect of any action taken or to be taken by such excise officer or authority in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act. 68-C. Injunction not to be granted in respect of recovery of excise dues -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) or in any other law for the time being in force, no Court shall grant any permanent or temporary injunction or make any interim order restraining any proceeding which is being or about to be taken for,- (i) the recovery of any sum or fee or both levied in consideration of grant or lease of any exclusive or other right under this Act, or the rules made thereunder or any fee, duty or countervailing duty and including licence fee and litre fee or any other fee levied under this Act or the rules made thereunder; (ii) the grant of any exclusive or other right under Section 17. (2) All interim orders issued or made by such Court whether in the nature of temporary injunction or otherwise, restraining any proceeding referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-section. (1) which is being or about to be taken shall stand dissolved or vacated, as the case may be. 68-D. Excise revenue to be paid irrespective of pendency of any Writ Petition, Suit, etc -Notwithstanding that a writ petition has been preferred before the High Court or a suit or other proceeding has been instituted in any Court or any appeal has been filed before any Court, the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal or the Excise Commissioner or a revision has been filed before the State Government, any sum due to the State Government under this Act as a result of demand or order made or passed by any officer or authority empowered in this behalf by or under this Act shall be payable in accordance with such demand or order."
Karnataka Excise (Third Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka All suits, appeals and other proceedings (including execution proceedings) in respect of the matters referred to in Section 68-B and matters connected therewith pending before any Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act shall not have effect and shall abate: Provided that in computing the period specified in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 61, the period during which any suit, appeal or other proceedings referred to in this section is pending in any Court, shall be excluded. 
