Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-first day of June, 1974
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-clause (a) of clause (7), for the words and bracket "Phyllanthus Emblica)", the words and bracket "Phyllanthus Emblica, Ramapatre and Shigakai" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka After sub-section (1) of Section 28 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely - "Provided that no such notification shall be issued unless a resolution to that effect has been passed by both Houses of the State Legislature".
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the principal Act - (1) in clause (k), for the words "within specified local limits", the words "within the whole of the State of Karnataka or specified local limits" shall be substituted; (2) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(k-a) regulate (including requiring the owner or proprietor to obtain a licence) the existing saw pits, saw mills or any other sawing contrivance".
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 64 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "64-A. Penalty for unauthorisedly taking possession of land constituted as reserved forest -(1) Any person unauthorisedly occupying any land in reserved forest, may, without prejudice to any other action that may be taken against him under any other provision of this Act or any other law for the time being in force, be summarily evicted, by a Forest Officer not below the rank of an Assistant Conservator of Forests and any crop including trees raised in the land and any building or other construction erected thereon shall, if not removed by him within such time as the Forest Officer may fix, be liable to forfeiture: Provided that before evicting a person under this sub-section he shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (2) Any property forfeited under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of in such manner as the Forest Officer may direct and the cost of removal of any crop, building or other work and of all works necessary to restore the land to its original condition shall be recoverable from the person evicted in the manner provided in Section 109. (3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Forest Officer under sub-section (1) may, within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed, appeal against such order to the State Government or to such officer as may be authorised by the State Government in this behalf and the order of the Forest Officer shall subject to the decision in such appeal, be final".
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 86 of the principal Act, for the words "or with fine", the words "and with fine" shall be substituted and for the words "two thousand rupees or with both", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (2) of Section 102 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the following clauses shall be and shall be deemed always to have been inserted, namely - "(e) to regulate the cutting, felling, sale or disposal of blackwood or bite tree (Dalbergia Latifolia); (f) to prescribe the fees to be levied in respect of licences, permits, passes or permissions issued under this Act or rules made thereunder; (g) in respect of any other matter which is required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed".
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 104 of the principal Act, for the words "one month", the words "six months" and for the words "five hundred rupees", the words "one thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 104 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "104-A. Restrictions on trade and transport of blackwood or Bite trees and timber thereof -(1) No person other than - (a) the State Government; or (b) the officers of the State Government not below the rank of a Divisional Forest Officer, authorised in writing in this behalf, shall purchase or transport any blackwood or bite tree (Dalbergia Latifolia) or timber thereof: Provided that the purchase of any such tree or timber from the State Government or the aforesaid officers shall not be deemed to be a purchase in contravention of the provisions of this sub-section: Provided further that the State Government may by order exempt any such tree or timber below such measurements as may be specified by it from time to time from the provisions of sub-section (1). (2) No person shall sell or otherwise dispose of any such tree or timber to any person other than the State Government or the aforesaid officers. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) any such tree or timber purchased from the State Government or the aforesaid officers by any person for bona fide personal use may be transported by such person in accordance with the terms and conditions of a permit issued by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed. (4) The price of any such tree or timber shall be such as the State Government may by order specify from time to time, having regard to - (a) prevalent market price; (b) quality of the timber in the locality; (c) transport facilities available in the locality; (d) the cost of transport; (e) general level of wages for labour prevalent in the locality; and (f) such other matters as may be prescribed. (5) The State Government or the aforesaid officers may establish such number of depots as may be necessary where any such tree or timber may be sold to the State Government or the aforesaid officers. (6) The State Government or the aforesaid officers subject to the general supervision and control of the State Government shall be bound to purchase at the price fixed under sub-section (4) any such tree or timber offered for sale during the hours of business. (7) Any tree or timber purchased under sub-section (1) shall be sold or otherwise disposed of in such manner as the State Government may from time to time direct. (8) Any person contravening the provisions of this section or any rule made thereunder shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. 104-B. Certain offences to be cognizable -All offences under Chapter X and Section 104-A and rules made thereunder shall be cognizable". 
