Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963. Whereas, it if expedient further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Twenty-fourth day of December, 1975. Received the assent of the Governor on the Sixth day of March, 1976
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Chapter XI of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely - "Chapter XI-A Forest Development Tax 98-A. Levy of Forest Development Tax -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, in respect of forest produce disposed of by the State Government by sale or otherwise, there shall be levied and paid to the State Government a tax at the rate of five per cent on the amount of consideration paid therefor. (2) The said tax shall be collected along with such consideration. (3) It is hereby declared that the said tax shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any tax payable in respect of such produce under any other law in force. 98-B. Forest Development Fund -(1) There shall be constituted for the State of Karnataka a Fund called the Karnataka Forest Development Fund. (2) The tax levied and collected under Section 98-A shall be first credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State and under appropriation duly made by law in this behalf, be entered in and transferred to the Karnataka Forest Development Fund. (3) Any amount transferred to the said fund under sub-section (2), shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State. (4) The amount at the credit of the said fund shall not be expended except for the raising of forest plantation and for such other purpose as are ancillary thereto".
Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Forest (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 32 of 1975) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
