Karnataka Forest (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964). Whereas, there has been large scale illicit removal of timber, sandalwood, ivory, firewood and charcoal belonging to the State Government from the forests in the State; And whereas, the existing provisions of law are found inadequate to effectively check such illicit removal; And whereas, the State Government are satisfied that deterrent provisions should be made for effectively preventing such illicit removal; Be, it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Forest (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Forest (Second Amendment) Act, 1976.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Nineteenth day of June, 1976
Karnataka Forest (Second Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 71 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963 (Karnataka Act 5 of 1964) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, namely- "71-A. Confiscation by Forest Officers in certain cases -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, where a forest offence is believed to have been committed in respect of timber, sandalwood, ivory, firewood and charcoal which is the property of the State Government, the officer seizing the property under sub-section (1) of Section 62 shall, without any unreasonable delay produce it, together with all tools, ropes, chains, boats, vehicles and cattle used in committing such offence, before an officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf by Notification in the Official Gazette, not being below the rank of an Assistant Conservator of Forests (hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer). (2) Where an authorised officer seizes under sub-section (1) of Section 62 any timber, sandalwood, charcoal, firewood and ivory which is the property of the State Government, or where any such property is produced before an authorised officer under sub-section (1) and he is satisfied that a forest offence has been committed in respect of such property, such authorised officer may, whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission of such forest offence, order confiscation of the property so seized together with all tools, ropes, chains, boats, vehicles and cattle used in committing such offence. 71-B. Issue of show-cause notice before confiscation under Section 71-A -(1) No order confiscating any timber, sandalwood, charcoal, firewood, ivory, tools, ropes, chains, boats, vehicles or cattle shall be made under Section 71-A except after notice in writing to the person from whom it is seized and considering his objections, if any. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), no order confiscating any tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle proves to the satisfaction of the authorised officer that it was used in carrying the timber, sandalwood, charcoal, firewood or ivory without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person in charge of the tool, rope, chain, boat, vehicle or cattle and that each of them had taken all reasonable and necessary precautions against such use. 71-C. Revision -Any Forest Officer not below the rank of Conservator of Forests authorised by the State Government in this behalf by notification in the official Gazette may, before the expiry of thirty days from the date of the order of the authorised officer under Section 71-A, suo motu call for and examine the records of that order and may make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made may pass such orders as he deems fit: Provided that no order prejudicial to a person shall be passed under this section without giving him an opportunity of being heard. 71-D. Appeal -(1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed under Section 71-A or Section 71-C may, within thirty days from the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the District Judge having jurisdiction over the area in which the property to which the order relates has been seized and the District Judge shall, after giving an opportunity to the appellant to be heard, pass such order as he may think fit confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed against. (2) An order of the District Judge under sub-section (1) shall be final. 71-E. Award of Confiscation not to interfere with other punishments -The award of any confiscation under Section 71-A or Section 71-C shall not prevent the infliction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable under this Act. 71-F. Property confiscated when to vest in Government -When an order for confiscation of any property has been passed under Section 71-A or Section 71-C and such order has become final in respect of the whole or any portion of such property, such property or portion thereof, as the case may be, shall vest in the State Government free from all encumbrances." 
