Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to make provision to ensure the preservation of certain Government parks in the State of Karnataka. WHEREAS it is expedient in public interest to preserve certain parks vested in the State Government in the State of Karnataka. BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act unless the context other-wise requires "Park" includes a garden [or any land with or without building earmarked by the State Government for development and preservation as parks.] 1 Inserted by Act 42 of 2003 w.e.f. 6.9.2003
Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act shall apply to all lands and buildings within the limits of such parks belonging to the State Government as the State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the official Gazette, specify. (2) The notification referred to in sub-section (1) shall specify as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such parks.
Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It shall be the duty of the State Government to preserve and maintain as horticultural gardens the parks to which this Act is applicable and take such action as may be necessary to improve the utility of such parks as such gardens. (2) No land or building within the parks to which this Act is applicable shall be alienated by way of sale, lease, gift, exchange, mortgage or otherwise or no licence for the use of any such land or building shall be granted and any alienation made or licence granted in contravention of this section shall be null and void: Provided that the restriction under this sub-section to lease shall not apply in the case of buildings existing on the date of coming force of this Act.
Karnataka Government Parks (Preservation) Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka [XXX]1 Inserted by Act 24 of 1976 and Omitted by Act 30 of 1982 w.e.f. 9.1.1976 
