Karnataka Highways (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Highways Act, 1964. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Highways Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 44 of 1964) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:
Karnataka Highways (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Highways (Amendment) Act, 1997.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the President on the Ninth day of December, 1998
Karnataka Highways (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Highways Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 44 of 1964) after Chapter III, the following chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely:- "Chapter III-A Power to Enter Into Agreement and Penalty for Mischief 19-A. Power of the State Government to enter into agreement for development and maintenance of highways - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other Act for the time being in force, the State Government may enter into an agreement with any person in relation to the construction, development and maintenance of the whole or any part of the highway. (2) To facilitate or secure such construction, development and maintenance, the agreement may, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, provide for the transfer of any land belonging to or to be acquired by the State Government under this Act or any other Act, for the time being in force, to such person or persons by way of lease or otherwise during the period of such agreement. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 48-A the person referred to in sub-section (1) is entitled to collect and retain fee at such rate or rates, for service or benefits rendered by him as the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify having regard to the expenditure involved in cost of acquisition of land and construction, development and maintenance of highway. (4) A person referred to in sub-section (1) shall have powers to regulate and control the traffic in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 59 of 1988) on the highway forming subject-matter of such agreement, for proper management thereof. 19-B. Punishment for mischief by injury to highway -Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any highway referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 19-A impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. Explanation -For the purpose of this section, the expression "Mischief" shall not include any peaceful demonstration or agitation held by any person or group of persons on any highway urging fulfillment of any legitimate demand." 
