Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Home Guards Act, 1962. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Home Guards Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act No. 35 of 1962); Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Act, 1977.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on twenty-eighth day of January, 1977. Received the assent of the President on the Thirtieth day of April, 1977
Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 5 of the Karnataka Home Guards Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act No. 35 of 1962), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) the following section shall be inserted, namely - "5-A. Obligation of Employer to Permit Home Guards to Join Duty -(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, every employer shall permit a Home Guard, who is for the time being employed by or under him, to join, his duty as such, and notwithstanding anything contained in any law or agreement between him and such Home Guard, the employer shall be liable to pay to such Home Guard, for the period of his duty as such Home Guard, not exceeding sixty days in a year, the pay and allowances, as if such Home Guard had not been called out to join his such duty. Explanation -For the purpose of this sub-section duty includes any training as such Home Guard. (2) No employer shall dismiss, remove or suspend any employee or take any other action which may prejudice such employee only by reason of his being a member of the Home Guards. (3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or (2) shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to an employer unless he had been informed by the employee of his being, or by the concerned Commandant of such employee being, a Home Guard at the time of applying for employment under such employer or at the time of enrolment as a member of the Home Guards while being such employee".
Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Act, 1977_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Home Guards (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 1 of 1977) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
