Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to regulate the qualifications and practice of homoeopathic medicine and to provide for the registration of practitioners of the homoeopathic system of medicine in the State of Karnataka. WHEREAS it is expedient to regulate the qualifications and practice of homoeopathic medicine and to provide for the registration of practitioners of the homoeopathic system of medicine in the State of Karnataka. BE it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the 1 [Karnataka] Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961. (2) It extends to the whole of the 2 [State of Karnataka]. (3) Chapters I, IV and VI shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such 3 [date] as the State Government may by notification appoint. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 with effect from . 1.11.1973 Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 with effect from . 1.11.1973 Remaining provisions came into force on 17.7.1970 by notification. Text of the notification is at the end of the Act.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Board" means the 1 [Karnataka Board of Homoeopathic System of Medicine] established under section 3; (b) "Court" means the Court of Examiners constituted under section 16; (c) "homoeopathy" means the system of medicine founded by Dr. Hahnemann and includes the allied branches of Biochemistry founded by Dr. Schussler and the expression "homoeopathic" shall be construed accordingly; (d) "Inspector" means an Inspector appointed by the Board under sub-section (4) of section 14; (e) "member" means a member of the Board; (f) "notification" means a notification published in the official Gazette; (g) "practitioner" means a person who practises the homoeopathic system of medicine, as his principal occupation; (h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules; (i) "President" means the President of the Board; (j) "qualifying examination" means an examination in homoeopathic system of medicine specified in the Schedule; (k) "register" means a register of practitioners prepared and maintained under this Act; (l) "registered practitioner" means a practitioner whose name is for the time being entered in the register; (m) "Registrar" means the Registrar appointed under section 14; (n) "regulations" means regulations made under section 36; (o) "rules" means rules made under section 35. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 with effect from . 1.11.1973
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, as soon as may be, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute a Board, to be called the 1 [Karnataka Board of Homoeopathic System of Medicine]. The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may by the said name sue and be sued. (2) The Board shall consist of eleven members including the President and shall be constituted in the following manner, namely:- (i) A President who shall be a registered practitioner; (ii) Five members nominated by the State Government out of whom two at least shall be registered practitioners; and 2 [(iii) six members elected by the registered practitioners from among themselves, whose names are entered in Part A and B of the register:] Provided that,- (a) for a period of five years after the coming into force of this Chapter, the President shall be appointed by the State Government; (b) at the first and subsequent constitution of the Board after the expiry of the said period of five years, the President shall be elected by the members from among themselves 3 [x x x]. 2. Substituted by Act 13 of 1992 w..e.f. 24.4.1992 3. Omitted by Act 13 of 1992 with effect from . 24.4.1992 Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 with effect from . 1.11.1973
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka If at any election, the electors fail to elect the requisite number of members, the State Government shall nominate such registered practitioners as it deems fit, to fill the vacancies and the practitioners so nominated shall for the purpose of section 3 be deemed to have been duly elected under the said section.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The election of members under section 3 shall be held 1 [x x x] in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) All elections under this Act shall be held according to the distributive system of voting. Explanation.-Distributive system of voting means a system of voting in which every voter shall be entitled to give as many votes as there are seats to be filled: Provided that no voter shall give more than one vote to any one candidate: Provided further that no voting paper shall be deemed to be valid unless the voter has recorded all the votes which he is entitled to give. Omitted by Act 14 of 1972 with effect from . 11.10.1972
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Save as otherwise provided by this Act, the term of office of the members whether elected or nominated, shall be for a period of five years commencing from the date on which the first meeting of the Board is held after the election of the members under section 3. (2) An out-going member shall continue in office until the election or nomination of his successor, as the case may be. (3) An out-going member shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In the event of a vacancy arising out of the death, resignation, removal, disability or disqualification of a member or the President, or otherwise, previous to the expiry of the period of his office, the vacancy shall be filled in the prescribed manner. Any person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 6, hold office only so long as the member in whose place he is elected or nominated would have held office if the vacancy had not occurred.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any member may at any time resign his office by a letter addressed to the President. (2) The President, if appointed by the State Government, may at any time resign his office by a letter addressed to the State Government. If the President is elected, he may resign his office by a letter addressed to the Board.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka If any member,- (a) absents himself from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Board without such reasons as may, in the opinion of the State Government in the case of the President, and in the case of any other member in the opinion of the Board, be sufficient, or (b) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 10, 2 [or] 3 [(c)abuses his position as a member so as to render his continuance as a member detrimental to the interest of the Board; or (d) is otherwise unfit to continue as a member.] the State Government 4 [may remove such member from office: Provided that no member shall be removed from office on the grounds specified in clause (c) or clause (d) without giving such member an opportunity to submit his explanation]. Substituted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979 Inserted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979 Inserted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979 Substituted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Board,- (a) if he has been sentenced by a criminal court for an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding three months, such sentence not having been subsequently reversed, quashed or remitted, unless he is, by order, which the State Government is hereby empowered to make in this behalf, been relieved from the disqualification arising on account of such sentence; (b) if he is an undischarged insolvent; (c) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; (d) if his name has been removed from the register; (e) if he is a whole time officer or servant of the Board.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka No disqualification or defect in the election, nomination or appointment of any person as a member or as the President or as a presiding authority of a meeting shall of itself invalidate any act or proceeding of the Board in which such person has taken part.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka The Board shall meet at such time and place and every meeting shall be summoned in such manner as may be provided for by regulations: Provided that until such regulations are made, it shall be lawful for the President to summon a meeting of the Board at such time and place as he may deem expedient by circulating a notice to each member.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The President if present, shall preside at every meeting of the Board. In the absence of the President, the members present shall elect one amongst themselves to preside. (2) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by the votes of the majority of the members present and voting at the meeting. (3) Six members including the President shall form a quorum. (4) The President or the person presiding at a meeting shall have a second or casting vote in case of an equality of votes.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board shall, with the previous sanction of the State Government, appoint a Registrar. The Registrar shall receive such salary and allowances as may be prescribed. (2) The Board may from time to time grant him leave and may appoint a person with the previous sanction of the State Government to act in his place during his leave or absence; provided that if the period of such leave does not exceed two months, such leave may be granted by the President who shall also make temporary appointment of any other person to act during the said period and report the appointment to the State Government. Any person duly appointed to act as Registrar shall be deemed to be the Registrar for the purposes of this Act. (3) An appeal shall lie to the State Government from every order of the Board punishing or removing any person from the office of the Registrar. (4) The Board may appoint Inspectors and such other officers and servants as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act. (5) The Registrar and any other officer or servant appointed under this section shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. (6) The Registrar shall be the Secretary and the Executive Officer of the Board.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka The Board shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be prescribed by or under the provisions of this Act or as the State Government may direct for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by notification, constitute a Court of Examiners which shall consist of seven persons including the Chairman, as follows:- (i) the 1 [Director of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy in Karnataka] who shall be the Chairman of the Court; (ii) three persons elected by the Board from amongst its members; and (iii) three persons possessing any of the qualifications specified in the Schedule nominated by the State Government: Provided that every person elected under clause (ii) shall continue to hold office of a member of the Court only so long as he is a member of the Board: Provided further that pending the election of such persons by the Board after its constitution for the first time, the State Government shall nominate three persons who shall be registered practitioners or entitled to have their names entered in the register. The persons so nominated shall hold office until the Board has elected all the three persons under this sub-section. (2) The members of the Court shall hold office for a period of two years. (3) Any vacancy in the office of the members of the Court shall be filled in the prescribed manner and any person elected or nominated to fill any vacancy shall hold office only so long as the person in whose place he is elected or nominated would have held office, if the vacancy had not occurred. (4) Any member of the Court other than the Chairman may at any time resign his office by a letter addressed to the Chairman. (5) It shall be the duty of the Court to appoint examiners and to conduct examinations held by it, to make recommendations to the State Government through the Board in respect of the course of studies, and to perform such other duties and functions as may be prescribed. (6) The Court shall meet at such time and place, and the procedure regarding its working shall be such, as may be prescribed. Substituted by Act 8 of 1976 with effect from . 16.4.1975
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall, as soon as may be, cause to be prepared a register of homoeopathic practitioners for the State. (2) The register shall include the following particulars, namely:- (a) the full name, nationality and residential address of the registered practitioner; (b) the date of his first admission to the register; (c) the qualification for registration and the date on which he obtained his degree or diploma in homoeopathy, if any, and the authority which conferred or granted it; (d) his professional address; and (e) such further particulars as may be prescribed. (3) The register shall be divided into three parts as follows:- (i) Part A - This part shall include,- (a)persons who have been engaged in the practice of the homoeopathic system of medicine for a period of not less than ten years immediately before the date of the coming into force of this Chapter as the principal occupation; (b) persons who have received personal clinical instruction for a period of not less than two years in a hospital where indoor patients are kept and where the service includes surgery, gynaecology and midwifery and homoeopathic medicine and passed an examination in the said subjects approved by the Registration Tribunal; (ii) Part B - This part shall include medical practitioners who are registered under the 1 [Karnataka] Medical Registration Act, 1961 or the 2 [Karnataka] Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners' Registration and Medical Practitioners' Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961, and who practise the homoeopathic system of medicine; and (iii) Part C - Other persons who have been in practice of the homoeopathic system of medicine for not less than two years as the principal occupation on the date of coming into force of this Chapter: Provided that the entries of the names of persons in Part C shall be provisional and their names shall be removed from the register, unless they pass only the third and final examination in the subjects specified in Part I and Part II for the diploma of L.C.E.H. specified in the Schedule within a period of seven years from the aforesaid date: Provided further that if any such person passes the final examination in the subjects referred to in the preceding proviso within the period specified therein, the entries of the names of such persons shall be transferred from Part C to Part A of the register. Adapted by the Krnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w..e.f .1.11.1973 Adapted by the Krnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w..e.f .1.11.1973
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka (1) For the purpose of the preparation of the first register, the State Government may by notification constitute a Registration Tribunal constituting of three persons out of whom two shall be persons who are entitled to have their names entered in the register, and shall appoint a Secretary of the Tribunal. (2) The State Government, by notification, shall appoint a date on or before which application for registration shall be made to the Registration Tribunal. Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of 1 [thirty] rupees. (3) The Registration Tribunal shall examine every application received on or before the appointed date, and after making inquiry in the prescribed manner if it is satisfied that the applicant is qualified for registration under section 17 shall direct the entry of the name of the applicant in the register in the Part in which he is entitled to have his name entered. (4) The register so prepared shall thereafter be published in such manner as the State Government may direct, and any person aggrieved by a decision of the Registration Tribunal, express or implied in the register as so published may within thirty days from the date of the publication of the register and after payment of a fee of five rupees appeal to the State Government. (5) The Secretary shall amend the register in accordance with the decision of the State Government under sub-section (4) and shall thereupon issue to every practitioner whose name is entered in the register a certificate of registration in the prescribed form. Substituted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Upon the constitution of the Board for the first time after the commencement of this Act, the register shall be given into its custody and the State Government may direct that all or any specified part of the application fees for registration in the first register shall be paid to the credit of the Board. The State Government shall publish in the official Gazette, the date on which the register is given to the custody of the Board. (2) It shall be the duty of the Board to maintain and revise the register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka After the constitution of the Board referred to in sub-section (1) of section 19, a person shall on payment of 1 [thirty] rupees be entitled to have his name entered in the register, only if he possesses any of the qualifications specified in the Schedule. Substituted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 6.11.1979
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka The name of any practitioner shall not be entered either in the first register or a register maintained under section 19, unless he gives an undertaking in writing that he shall not use any degree, diploma or licence which is identical with or is a colourable imitation of any degree, diploma or licence granted by a body or institution authorised under the Indian Medical Degrees Act, 1916, or the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. It shall be lawful for such persons to use after his name the words "Registered Practitioner of Homoeopathy" in full to indicate that his name has been entered in the register.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka (1) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to make entries in the Register, from time to time to revise the same and to issue the certificates of registration in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the rules, and the orders of the Board. (2) The names of registered practitioners who die or whose names are directed to be removed from the register under section 23, shall be removed therefrom. (3) The Board may direct that any alteration in the entries as respects additional qualifications shall not be made except on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board may direct that the name of any practitioner who has been convicted of a cognizable offence as defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act V of 1898) or any other law for the time being in force, which discloses such defect of moral character as is, in the opinion of the Board, sufficient to make him unfit to practice his profession or who after due inquiry has been found guilty of conduct, which is in the opinion of the Board infamous in any professional respect, shall be removed from the register. On such removal, the certificate of registration issued to the practitioner shall be deemed to have been cancelled. The Board may, on sufficient cause being shown and with the approval of the State Government direct that the name of the practitioner so removed shall be re-entered in the register. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board under sub-section (1) directing the removal of his name from the register may within ninety days from the date of communication of the order, appeal to the State Government and the State Government may pass such order thereon as it deems fit. (3) If the name of the practitioner is entered in a Register maintained under the 1 [Karnataka] Medical Registration Act, 1961, or the 2 [Karnataka] Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners' Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961, it shall be the duty of the Board to give intimation of such removal to the authority entitled to maintain the said registers. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w.e..f 1.11.1973. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w.e..f 1.11.1973.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 18 or 20, each registered practitioner shall pay to the Board on or before the thirty-first day of December of every year a renewal fee of 1 [ten] rupees for the continuance of his name in the register. (2) If the renewal fee is not paid before the due date, the Registrar shall remove the name of the defaulter from the register. On such removal, the certificate of registration issued to the practitioner shall be deemed to have been cancelled: Provided that the name so removed may be re-entered in the register on payment of the renewal fee in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and a new certificate of registration may be re-issued. Substituted by Act 34 of 1979 with effect from . 2.11.1979
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force,- (i) the expression "legally qualified medical practitioner" or "duly qualified medical practitioner" or any word importing a person recognised by law as a medical practitioner or member of medical profession shall in all Acts of Legislature in the 1 [State of Karnataka] and in all Central Acts in their application to the 2 [State of Karnataka] in so far as such Acts relate to any matters specified in List II or List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, include a practitioner whose name is entered in Part A or Part B of the Register. (ii) a certificate required by any Act from any medical practitioner or medical officer shall be valid, if such certificate has been signed by a practitioner whose name is entered in Part A or Part B of the register; (iii) a practitioner whose name is entered in Part A or Part B of the register shall be eligible to treat patients according to the Homoeopathic system of medicine or to hold any appointment as a physician or other medical officer in any homoeopathic dispensary, hospital or infirmary supported by or receiving a grant from the State Government and treating patients according to the homoeopathic system of medicine or in any public establishment, body or institution dealing with such system of medicine; (iv) a practitioner whose name is entered in Part A of the register may possess and prescribe the drugs relating to the homoeopathic system of medicine only. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w.e..f 1.11.1973. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w.e..f 1.11.1973.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka Every Registrar of Deaths on receiving notice of the death of a registered practitioner shall forthwith transmit by post to the Registrar a certificate under his own hand of such death with the particulars of time and place of death and may charge the cost of such certificate and transmission as an expenditure of his office.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The course of studies and the examinations specified in the Schedule and such other course of studies and examinations as may, on the recommendation of the Board, be included in the Schedule by the State Government by notification, shall be the course of studies and the qualifying examinations held for the purpose of granting a diploma or a degree conferring the right of registration under this Act. (2) The Board may recommend to the State Government for recognition of institutions to give instruction in the homoeopathic system of medicine or to hold examinations therein. (3) It shall be the duty of the Board to secure maintenance of an adequate standard,- (i) of instruction in each of the subjects of the course of studies specified in the Schedule and for the purposes of securing such standard, the Board shall have authority to call on the governing body or the authorities of any institution giving such instruction,- (a) to furnish such particulars as the Board may require about the details of instruction; (b) to permit Inspectors to inspect the institution; (ii) in each of the qualifying examinations specified in the Schedule and for the purpose of securing such standard, the Board shall have authority to call on the governing body or authorities of any institution authorised to hold any of such examinations,- (a)to furnish such particulars as the Board may require about the conduct of such examinations; (b)to permit Inspectors to be present at the examinations and to report to the Board about the nature of the questions asked, the standard of giving marks and such other details as the Board may require. (4) It shall also be the duty of the Board to inspect all institutions recognised under section 28 once at least in every two years.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any institution applying for recognition under this Act shall send an application to the Registrar and shall give full information in respect of the following matters:- (a) the constitution and personnel of the governing or managing body; (b) subjects and courses on which it gives or proposes to give instruction; (c) accommodation, equipment and the number of students for whom provision has been made or is proposed to be made; (d) the strength of the staff, their qualifications, salaries and the research work done by them; (e) fees levied or proposed to be levied and the financial provision made for the capital expenditure on buildings and equipment and for the continued maintenance and efficient working of the institution. (2) Any institution applying for recognition to hold qualifying examinations shall send an application to the Registrar and shall give full information in respect of particulars specified in clauses (b) to (e) of sub-section (1) and such other particulars as the Board may require. (3) The Registrar shall place the application before the Board and the Board may direct the Registrar to call for any further information which it may deem necessary. The Board may also direct a local inquiry to be made by a competent person or persons authorised by it in this behalf. (4) After recording the report of such local inquiry and after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, the Board shall forward the application with its report to the State Government stating its opinion whether the recognition asked for should or should not be granted. The State Government may thereupon grant or refuse the recognition or may grant it subject to such conditions as it deems fit. The decision of the State Government shall be final.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka If it shall appear to the State Government on the report of the Board or otherwise that the instruction given in any recognised institution or the qualifying examination conducted by any of the institutions recognised to hold such examinations are not such as to secure the maintenance of the adequate standard of proficiency for the practice of surgery and midwifery and homoeopathic medicine, it shall be lawful for the State Government from time to time to direct that the recognition of any institution for the purpose of giving instruction or holding an examination under section 27 shall be withdrawn and the said institution shall not be authorised to give instruction or to hold the examination, as the case may be: Provided that before any direction for the withdrawal of the recognition of any institution is made under this section, the said institution shall be required to take steps within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government to remedy the defect.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka If it shall appear to the State Government on the report of the Board or otherwise that it is necessary or expedient to modify the Schedule by making any addition or alteration in the course of studies or the examinations specified therein, the State Government may, after calling for the report of the Board if it has not already made the report and after making such inquiries as it thinks fit, make addition or alteration in the Schedule by notification, and the Schedule on such addition or alteration shall be deemed to have been so modified from the date specified in the notification.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every registered practitioner shall be exempt, if he so desires, from serving on an inquest, or as a juror under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act V of 1898).
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka There shall be paid to the members of the Board and the Court such fees and allowances for attendance and such reasonable travelling allowances as shall from time to time be prescribed.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The income of the Board shall consist of,- (a) fees received from practitioners and examinees; (b) the fees, if any, collected by the Court; (c) grants received from the Government; (d) donations and other sums received by the Board. (2) The expenses of the Board shall include the salaries and allowances of the Registrar, the staff appointed by the Board including Inspectors, and fees and allowances paid to members of the Board and the Court, expenses for the conduct of examinations and such other expenses as are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The State Government may also direct the Board to pay such other expenses to the Court as it thinks fit.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Registrar shall every year on or before the thirtieth day of June publish in the official Gazette a correct list of the names and qualifications of all practitioners entered in the register on the first day of January of that year. (2) A copy of the list published under sub-section (1) shall be evidence in all courts and judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings that the persons therein specified are registered according to the provisions of this Act, and the absence of the name of any person from such copy shall be evidence, until the contrary is proved, that such person is not registered according to the provisions of this Act: Provided that in the case of any person whose name does not appear in such copy, a certified copy under the hand of the Registrar of the entry of the name of such person on the register shall be evidence that such person is registered under the provisions of this Act.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, by notification, and after previous publication, make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may be made for any of the following matters:- (a) 1 [x x x] the manner in which election shall be held under section 5; (b) the manner in which vacancies shall be filled under section 7; (c) the salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Registrar under section 14; (d) the powers to be exercised and functions to be performed by the Board under section 15; (e) the manner of filling a vacancy under sub-section (3), the duties and functions to be performed by the Court under sub-section (5) and the time and place of the meeting and the procedure to be followed regarding its working under sub-section (6) of section 16; (f) the particulars to be entered in the register under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 17; (g) the manner of making inquiry under sub-section (3), and the form of certificate under sub-section (5) of section 18; (h) the fees chargeable for the alteration of entries as respects additional qualification under sub-section (3) of section 22; (i) the manner of payment of renewal fee and conditions subject to which such fee shall be paid under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 24; (j) the fees and other allowances to members of the Board and Court under section 32; and (k) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything done under that rule. Omitted by Act 14 of 1972 with effect from . 11.10.1972
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 36--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Board, may with the previous sanction of the State Government make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or the rules for any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the time and place at which and the manner in which the Board shall hold its meetings under section 12; (b) the salary, allowances and other conditions of service of officers and servants of the Board and the Court, other than the Registrar, under section 14; (c) the language in which the examinations shall be conducted and instruction shall be given; (d) the detailed curriculum, the number of lectures, the period of terms devoted to practical and clinical studies in each subject and the recommendation of text books, if any; (e) the conditions of appointment of examiners and fees to be paid to them, the conduct of examinations and the fees to be charged for the conduct of such examinations; (f) all other matters which are not prescribed by rules, but which are necessary for the purpose of carrying out the object of this Act: Provided that the Board shall, before proposing any regulation under clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f), consult the Court and in case of difference of opinion between the Board and the Court in respect of any such regulation, the Board shall, while submitting such regulation to the State Government for sanction, report the grounds for such difference of opinion. (2) The State Government on receiving the draft regulations may sanction or refuse to sanction the same or sanction them subject to such modifications as it may think fit or return them to the Board for further consideration. (3) All regulations when sanctioned, with or without modification shall be published in the official Gazette. (4) It shall be lawful for the State Government by notification to cancel or alter any regulation made under this Act.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 37--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If at any time it appears to the State Government that the Board has failed to exercise or has exceeded or abused any of the powers conferred upon it by or under this Act, or has failed to perform any of the duties conferred upon it, by or under this Act, the State Government may, if it considers such failure, excess or abuse to be of a serious character, notify the particulars thereof to the Board, and if the Board fails to remedy such failure, excess or abuse within such time as the State Government may fix in this behalf, the State Government may by notification dissolve the Board and cause all or any of the powers or duties of the Board to be exercised and performed by such person and for such period not exceeding two years as it may think fit and shall take steps to constitute a new Board. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, rules or regulations, if at any time it shall appear to the State Government that the Board or any other authority empowered to exercise any of the powers or to perform any of the functions under this Act, has not been validly constituted or appointed, the State Government may by notification direct that any of such powers or functions be exercised or performed by such person in such manner and for such period not exceeding six months and subject to such conditions as the State Government thinks fit.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 37A--> State(s): Karnataka Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, pending the constitution of the Board for the first time under this Act, the powers and functions of the Board shall be exercised and performed by a committee appointed by the State Government consisting of the 2 [Director of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy in Karnataka] as Chairman and four members who shall be practitioners eligible to have their names entered in the register.] Inserted by Act 9 of 1969 with effect from . 24.4.1969 Substiuted by Act 8 of 1976 with effect from . 16.4.1975
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 38--> State(s): Karnataka No act done in the exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act on the State Government or the Board or the Court or the Registrar or by any officer or servant under the direction of the State Government, the Board or the Court shall be questioned in any civil court.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section 39--> State(s): Karnataka The Bombay Homoeopathic Act, 1951 (Bombay Act XLVIII of 1951), as in force in the 1 [Belgaum Area], is hereby repealed. Adapted by the Karnataka Adaptations of Laws Order 1973 w.e..f 1.11.1973.
Karnataka Homoeopathic Practitioners Act, 1961_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Karnataka (Section 27) I. Course of Studies. 1 [1. F.C.E.H. :-(For those registered under the Karnataka Medical Registration Act, 1961, or the Karnataka Ayurvedic and Unani Practitioners Registration and Medical Practitioners Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1961). Period of Study:-One year. Subjects:-Medicine including the principles of Homoeopathy Therapeutics, Reportory, Pharmacy and Dispensing Organon of Medicine, Homoeopathic Philosophy, Homoeopathy materia medica. Chronic miasma, Development of Homoeopathy and Research in Homoeopathy. Examination:-Four papers of three hours' duration and clinical, Practical and viva voce examination. Paper-I:-Organon, Homoeopathic Philosophy, Chronic Miasma. Paper-II:-Homoeopathic materia medica pharmacy and dispensing. Paper-III:-Therapeutics, Repertorisation and case taking. Paper-IV:-The scientific method, and the Development of & ; research in Homoeopathy. 2. B.H.M.S. :-Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine & ; Surgery. For this course, the existing Central Council Syllabi shall apply and any amendment to the syllabi as and when issued shall be applicable.] II. Qualifying Examinations. Licentiate of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy (L.C.E.H.) Graduate of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy (G.C.E.H.) Fellow of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy (F.C.E.H.) Diploma in Medicine and Surgery D.M.S of W.B. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine D.H.M. of A.P. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine D.H.M. of Kerala. Licenciate Certificate of Examination in Homoeopathy L.C.E.H. of Maharastra Recognised medical qualification in Homoeopathy Substituted by notification NO. HFW 44 IME 87 dated 12.5.1988 
