Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Twenty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the third day of November, 1973. Received the assent of the Governor on the Eleventh day of April, 1974
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Karnataka Housing Board Act, 1962 (Karnataka Act 10 of 1963) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely - "(g-1) "Housing Commissioner" means the Officer appointed under Section 10."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, (1) in sub-section (2), for the word "twelve", the word "fifteen" shall be substituted; (2) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) The names of members appointed including the Chairman shall be notified in the Official Gazette." (3) in sub-section (3), after the word "Board", the words "including the Chairman" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "6. Term of office and conditions of service -(1) The Chairman and every other member shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Chairman and every other member shall hold office for three years from the date of their appointment, but they shall be eligible for reappointment. (3) The Chairman and every other member shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed. (4) The allowances to the Chairman and the other members shall be paid from the funds of the Board and such allowances and other conditions of service shall be such as may be prescribed."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 7 of the principal Act,- (1) for the words "If a member", the words "If the Chairman or any other member" shall be substituted; (2) for the words "cease to be a member", the-words "cease to be the Chairman or a member" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "Any vacancy of a member of the Board", the words, "Any vacancy in the office of the Chairman or of a member" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 10 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:- "10. Appointment and powers of Housing Commissioner, Chief Engineer and Secretary -(1) The State Government shall appoint an Officer not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner to be the Housing Commissioner for the Board. (2) The State Government shall from among its Officers appoint a Chief Engineer and a Secretary to the Board. (3) The Housing Commissioner, the Chief Engineer and the Secretary shall receive such monthly salary and other allowances payable wholly by the Board as the State Government may, from time to time determine. (4) The State Government may, from time to time grant, leave of absence for such period as it thinks fit to the Housing Commissioner, the Chief Engineer and the Secretary. A copy of every order granting such leave shall be communicated to the Chairman. (5) The Housing Commissioner shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the Board. He shall, in addition to performing such functions as are conferred on him by or under this Act or under any law for the time being in force, operate the accounts of the Board and be responsible for the maintenance of accounts of the Board. He shall also be responsible for implementing the housing schemes and labour housing schemes of the Board. (6) The Housing Commissioner shall have all the powers of a major Head of the Department of the State Government under the Karnataka Civil Services Rules for the time being in force as respects the Officers and the servants of the Board. (7) The Chief Engineer and the Secretary shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as the Board may, subject to any general or special order of the State Government specify from time to time. 10-A. Officers and servants of the Board -(1) Subject to such rules as may be made under this Act, the Board may have such Officers and servants as are necessary for its purposes. In making these appointments it shall be the duty of the appointing authority to reserve adequate number of posts for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled tribes and other backward classes of citizens in the same manner and to the same extent as are applicable to recruitment to the State Civil Services. (2) The emoluments, allowances and other conditions of service of the Officers and servants referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the same as are applicable to the Officers and servants of the State Government governed by the Karnataka Civil Services Rules except as otherwise prescribed. (3) The Karnataka Public Service Commission shall exercise the same functions as respects the services of the Board as the said Commission exercises under Article 320 of the Constitution of India as respects the services of the State and Every appointment to posts carrying a maximum monthly salary exceeding rupees two hundred, other than those prescribed, shall be made in consultation with the Karnataka Public Service Commission: Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to an officiating or temporary appointment for an aggregate period not exceeding one year: Provided further that no appointment shall be made contrary to the advice of the said Commission except with the approval of the State Government."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-sections (1) and (3), for the word "Chairman", the words "Housing Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely - "16. Delegation -The State Government may, by notification, authorise the delegation by the Housing Commissioner to such person or class of persons and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such notification, of any powers conferred or duties imposed upon him by or under this Act."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka Section 24 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) The Board shall not execute any housing scheme or labour housing scheme unless the same has been sanctioned by the State Government.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 50 of the principal Act, sub-section (6) shall be omitted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 70 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely - "70-A. Housing Commissioner to furnish returns and reports etc., to the State Government -The Housing Commissioner shall furnish to the State Government such reports and returns as such intervals as the State Government may by order direct. 70-B. Power of Board to require returns, reports production of documents, etc -(1) The Board may require the Housing Commissioner to furnish it with - (a) any return, statement, estimate, statistics or other information regarding any matter pertaining to the administration of this Act; (b) a report on any such matter; and (c) a copy of any document in his charge. (2) The Housing Commissioner shall comply with every requisition without unreasonable delay."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 71 of the principal Act, for the words, "The Chairman or any person either generally or specially authorised by the Chairman", the words "The Housing Commissioner or any person either generally or specially authorised by him or the Board" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 72 of the principal Act - (i) after the words "against the Board" a comma and the words "Housing Commissioner, Chief Engineer, Secretary" shall be inserted; (ii) after the words "giving to the Board", a comma and the words "Housing Commissioner, Chief Engineer, Secretary" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 74 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of sub-section (2), for the words "of members", the words "of the Chairman and other members" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 84 of the principal Act, the words "after giving an opportunity to the Board to state its objections, if any, to such directions and after considering the said objections" shall be omitted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka Section 85 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely - "87-A. Control by the State Government -(1) The State Government shall have general administrative control and supervision over all the activities and affairs of the Board. (2) The State Government may call for the records of any proceedings of the Board, the Housing Commissioner or any Officer subordinate to the Board, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such proceedings and may pass such order with respect thereto as it thinks fit."
Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka The Karnataka Housing Board (Amendment) Ordinance, 1973 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 6 of 1973) is hereby repealed: Provided that anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
