Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board Act, 1991. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1991) for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Forty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows -
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the 26th day of May, 1993
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (5) of Section 3 of the Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board Act, 1991 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1991) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "Development Commissioner" the words "Divisional Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 8 of the principal Act,- (i) for sub-section (1), the following shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) The meeting of the Board shall be covened by the Chairman or by the Secretary, with the prior approval of the Chairman and shall be held at any place within the jurisdiction of the Board or at the State Headquarters". (ii) In sub-section (3), after the word "meeting", the following shall be inserted, namely - "Or the Secretary, with the prior approval of the Chairman may convene such meeting which shall be held at any place within the Jurisdiction of the Board or at the State Headquarters."
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10 of the principal Act, clause (b) shall be omitted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 12 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "and Zilla Parishads" a comma and the words "Zilla Parishads and Non-Governmental Organisation recognised by the Board" shall be substituted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 13 of the principal Act, after the words "Development Department", the words "Zilla Parishads and non-Governmental organisations recognised by the Board functioning" shall be inserted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 14 of the principal Act, for the words "and Zilla Parishads" occurring at two places, the words "Zilla Parishads and non-Governmental organisations recognised by the Board" shall be substituted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "and Zilla Parishads" the words "Zilla Parishads and non-Governmental Organisation recognised by the Board" shall be substituted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 17 of the principal Act, for the words "Implementing Committee", the words, "Implementation Committee or the Secretary of the Board" shall be substituted.
Hyderabad Karnataka Area Development Board (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 20 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely - "20-A. Power of Government to direct the Board - Not withstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, if in the opinion of the State Government it is expedient in public interest so to do, it may, by general or special order issue such directions to the Board as are necessary to carry-out the purposes of the Act. It shall be the duty of the Board to comply with such directions." 
