Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966 (Karnataka Act 18 of 1966) for the purposes here in after appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the fourty eighth year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka in section 2 of the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966. (Karnataka Act 18 of 1966) hereinafter referred to as the principal Act. (1) In clause (6) after the words "where Industries are to be accommodated" the words "and industrial infrastructure facilities and amenities are to be provided" shall be inserted. (2) After clause (7) the following clause shall be inserted namely:- (7a) "Industrial Infrastructure facilities" means facilities which contribute to the development of industries established in industrial area such as research and development, communication, transport, Banking, Marketing, Technology parks and Townships for the purpose of establishing trade and tourism centres and any other facility as the State Government may by notification specify to be an industrial infrastructural facility for the purposes of this Act.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) after the words "development of Industries" the words "and for providing industrial infrastructural facilities and amenity" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In section 13 of the principal Act in clause (1) after the words "development of industries" the words "and to provide industrial infrastructural facilities and amenity" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka in section 14 of the principal Act, in clause (c), after the word "amenities" a comma and the words "industrial infrastructural facilities" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development (Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka section 16 of the principal Act shall be omitted. By Order and in the name of the Governor of Karnataka, (M.R. HEGDE) Secretary to Government, Department of Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation. 
