Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in its application to the Province of Madras. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in its application to the Province of Madras, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted as follows -
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the 2 [State] of Madras. Repealed by Karnataka Act No. 1 of 1960, w.e.f. 21-1-1960 Substituted for the word Province by A.O. 1950
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the  said Act), in clause (n), sub-clause (vi), the words "specified in the Schedule" shall be omitted.
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 10 of the said Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely - "(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), where a Tribunal has been constituted under this Act for the adjudication of disputes in any specified industry or industries and a dispute exists or is apprehended in any such industry, the employer or a majority of the workmen concerned may refer the dispute to that Tribunal"
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka The Schedule to the said Act shall be omitted.
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka Whereas, before the commencement of this Act, any Industrial Tribunal has been constituted by the 1 [State] Government under the said Act, all proceedings taken, all awards made, and all other acts and things done, whether before or after such commencement, by or before such Tribunal in connection with any industrial dispute, shall be deemed to be valid and shall not be called in question in any Court of Law on the ground that the Tribunal was not constituted in accordance with the provisions of the said Act or the dispute to which the proceeding, award, act or thing relates was not referred to the Tribunal in accordance with such provisions. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any decision or order of a Court which became final before the commencement of this Act. Substituted for the -word "Provincial" by A.O. 1950
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka All awards passed by Industrial Tribunals and mentioned in the Schedule hereto which could not be enforced on account of the proceedings before the High Court, shall be current and valid for a further period of one year from the commencement of this Act.
Industrial Disputes (Madras Amendment) Act, 1949_Section Sch.--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Motor Transport award. (2) The awards in the disputes between the Managements of Cinema Theatres and Workers. (3) The awards in the disputes between the Beedi Workers and Managements. (4) The awards in the disputes between the Cigar Workers and Managements. Law: Labour & Industrial Law 
