Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to amend the Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) Act, 2002. Whereas, it is expedient to amend the Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) Act, 2002 (Karnataka Act 45 of 2003), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India, as follows-
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the Third day of January, 2014
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In the Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) Act, 2002 (Karnataka Act 45 of 2003) (hereinafter referred to as the " principal Act'), in Section 2, after clause (x), the following shall be inserted, namely- "(xi) "State Level Empowered Committee" means the State Level Empowered Committee constituted under Section 11-A".
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 'fifty crores', the words 'one hundred crores' shall be substituted.
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "three crores rupees and less than rupees fifty crores each", the words "fifteen crores rupees and less than rupees one hundred crores each" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "rupees three crores", the words "rupees fifteen crores" shall be substituted.
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 11 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely. - "11-A. State Level Empowered Committee - (1) The Government may constitute a State Level Empowered Committee, consisting of the following, namely- (a) The Chief Secretary to Government of Karnataka Chairman (b) The Principal Secretary to Government, Commerce and Industries Department Member (c) The Principal Secretary to Government, Revenue Department Member (d) The Principal Secretary to Government, Water Resource Department Member (e) The Principal Secretary to Government, Energy Department Member (f) The Principal Secretary to Government, Information and Technology Department Member (g) The Principal Secretary to Government, Urban Development Department Member (h) The Secretary to Government, Department of Forest, Environment and Ecology Member (i) The Secretary to Government, Department of Commerce and Industries (Small Scale Industries, Textiles and Mines) Member (j) The Principal Secretary/Secretary to Government, Agriculture Department Member (k) The Principal Secretary/Secretary to Government, Infrastructure Development Department Member (l) The Principal Secretary/Secretary to Government, Tourism Department Member (m) The Chairman, The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board Member (n) The Director General and Inspector General of Police, The Karnataka State Fire Extinguishing and Emergency Services Member (o) The Chief Executive Officer and Executive Member, Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board, Bangalore Member (p) The Commissioner for Industrial Development and Director for Industries and Commerce Member- Secretary Note - For the purpose of this section, The Principal Secretary to Government, Commerce and Industry Department, means the officer-in-charge of the subject "industries (Facilitation)", who is either Secretary or Principal Secretary or Additional Chief Secretary to Government. (2) The Committee may co-opt an expert or knowledgeable person as co-opted member, if necessary. (3) The functions of the State Level Empowered Committee are. - (i) to monitor the status of implementation of the projects cleared by the State Level Single Window Clearance Committee and State High Level Clearance Committees; and (ii) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed".
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka For Section 14 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely- "14. Combined Application Forms (CAF) - The State Government may, prescribe Combined Application Form for the use of entrepreneurs for obtaining clearance from the State High Level Clearance Committee or State High Level Single Window Clearance Committee or District Level Single Window Committee. This Combined Application Form shall also be used in lieu of existing forms prescribed under applicable Central or State Acts except the application for Licensing of a Factory as provided in Section 41-A of the Factories Act, 1948 and the rules made thereunder for obtaining the required clearances. All Departments or Authorities concerned shall accept such Combined Application Form for processing and issue of required clearances".
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka Section 16 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka After Section 18 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted, namely- "18-A. Review - (1) Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State High Level Clearance Committee may appeal to the State High Level Clearance Committee for review of its decision given earlier, if the applicant- (a) has any new facts or grounds on which the decision has to be reconsidered by the Committee; (b) points out an apparent error on the face of the decision. (2) The State High Level Clearance Committee may consider such appeal and take appropriate decision, which shall be final". 
