Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act further to amend the Karnataka Improvement Boards Act, 1976. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Improvement Boards Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1976), for the purposes hereinafter appearing. Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature, in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Tenth day of October, 1984. Received the assent of the Governor on the Twenty-nineth day of April, 1985
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In Section 2 of the Karnataka Improvement Boards Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), clause (a) shall be relettered to as clause (aa) and before the clause (aa) as so relettered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(a) Bagalkot Town Area means the area comprising the Bagalkot City Municipality constituted or continued under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 and such other area adjacent thereto, as the Government may, from time to time, by notification specify". (2) In clause (aa) as so relettered, the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "and it includes the Bagalkot Town Development Authority constituted under Section 12-A."
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka In Section 6 of the principal Act, after the word and figure "Section 4", the words, and letter "or Section 12-4" shall be inserted.
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka after Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely:- "Chapter II-A Bagalkot Town Development Authority 12-A. Constitution and incorporation of Bagalkot Town Development Authority -(1) The Government shall by notification, constitute for the Bagalkot Town Area an authority to be called the Bagalkot Town Development Authority (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the Authority). (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:- (i) a Chairman who shall be appointed by the Government; (ii) the Member of the Parliament representing part or whole of Bagalkot Town Area; (iii) the Members of the Karnataka Legislative Assembly representing a part or whole of Bagalkot Town Area; (iv) the President of the City Municipal Council, Bagalkot; (v) the Secretary to Government, Finance Department, Government of Karnataka, or his nominee; (vi) the Secretary to Government, Housing and Urban Development Department, Government of Karnataka, or his nominee; (vii) the Secretary to Government, Public Works, Command Area Development and Electricity Department, Government of Karnataka, or his nominee; (viii) the Chief Engineer, Upper Krishna project, Dam Zone, Almatti; (ix) the Deputy Director of Town planning, Belgaum; (x) the Deputy Commissioner, Bijapur District; (xi) three non-official members being residents of Bagalkot Town Area appointed by the Government; and (xii) the Chief Engineer of the Authority who shall be the member-secretary. (4) The Authority shall execute the works approved by the Action Plan Committee constituted under Section 12-B. (5) Subject to the provisions of Sections 12-A, 12-B, 12-C, 12-D, 12-E, 12-F and 12-G, the provisions of this Act shall mutatis mutandis apply to the Authority. 12-B. Action Plan Committee -(1) In addition to the other powers and duties of the Authority under this Act, the Authority shall take expeditious steps to shift that portion of the Bagalkot Town Area which is to be submerged by the Almatti Dam and for this purpose, there shall be constituted an Action Plan Committee consisting of the following members, namely:- (i) the Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Karnataka who shall be the Chairman; (ii) the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Revenue Department, Government of Karnataka; (iii) the Secretary to Government, Housing and Urban Development Department, Government of Karnataka; (iv) the Secretaries to Government, Public Works, Command Area Development and Electricity Department, Government of Karnataka; (v) the Secretary to Government, Finance Department, Government of Karnataka. (vi) the Director, Karnataka Engineering Research Station, Krishnaraja Sagar; (vii) the Chief Architect to Government of Karnataka; (viii) the Director of Town Planning, Government of Karnataka; (ix) the Chief Engineer, Upper Krishna Project, Dam Zone, Almatti; (x) the Divisional Commissioner, Belgaum Division, Belgaum; (xi) the Divisional Joint Director, Health and Family Welfare Services, Belgaum Division, Belgaum, and (xii) the Chief Engineer of the Authority who shall be the member-secretary: (2) The Authority shall be bound by the directions, orders and instructions issued from time to time by the Action Plan Committee or the High Level Review Committee constituted under Section 12-C. 12-C. High Level Review Committee -To review the progress of works done by the Authority there shall be a High Level Review Committee consisting of the following members, namely:- (i) the Chief Minister, Karnataka, who shall be the Chairman; (ii) The Minister in-charge of Public Works, Karnataka; (iii) the Minister in-charge of Irrigation, Karnataka; (iv) the Minister in-charge of Bijapur District; (v) the Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Karnataka; (vi) the Development Commissioner, Government of Karnataka; (vii) the Secretary to Government, Finance Department, Government of Karnataka; (viii) the Secretary to Government, Housing and Urban Development Department, Government of Karnataka; and (ix) the Secretary to Government, Public Works, Command Area Development and Electricity Department, Government of Karnataka or his nominee who shall be the member-convenor. 12-D. Powers of Different authorities -(1) The Chief Engineer of the Authority (hereinafter referred to in this Chapter as the Chief Engineer) may, on behalf of the Authority, sanction any estimate, call for tenders or enter into any contract or agreement the value or amount whereof shall not exceed ten lakhs of rupees in such manner and form as according to the law for the time being in force would bind him, if such contract or agreement were on his own behalf; and every such contract or agreement shall be reported to the Authority at its next meeting. (2) The Authority may sanction any estimate, call for tenders or enter into any contract or agreement the Value or amount whereof exceeds ten lakhs of rupees but does not exceed fifty lakhs of rupees; and where the value or amount of any estimate, contract or agreement exceeds fifty lakhs of rupees the same shall not be entered into except with the previous sanction of the Government. (3) Every contract or agreement on behalf of the Authority other than a contract or agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in writing and shall be signed by the Chief Engineer and sealed with the common seal of the Authority. (4) The common seal of the authority shall be in the custody of the Chief Engineer who shall personally affix the seal to any contract or instrument. (5) The acceptance of any tender shall be subject to such rules as may be prescribed. (6) A contract not made or executed as provided in this section and the rules made thereunder shall be null and void and shall not be binding on the Authority. 12-E. Appointment of Chief Engineer -The Government shall appoint an Officer not below the rank of a Chief Engineer to be the Chief Engineer of the Authority. (2) The Chief Engineer shall receive such monthly salary and other allowance as the Government may from time to time, determine. (3) The Government may, from time to time, grant leave of absence for such period as it thinks fit to the Chief Engineer. A copy of every order granting such leave shall be communicated to the Chairman. 12-F. Powers and duties of Chief Engineer -(1) The Chief Engineer shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the Authority. (2) The Chief Engineer shall, in addition to performing such functions as are conferred on him by or under this Act or under any law for the time being in force,- (a) carry into effect the resolutions of the Authority; (b) keep and conduct the Authoritys correspondence; (c) carry out and execute such schemes and works as the Government may direct and incur necessary expenditure therefor; (d) be responsible for implementing the schemes of the Authority; (e) operate the accounts of the Authority and be responsible for the maintenance of the accounts of the Authority; (f) exercise supervision and control over the accounts and proceedings of all Officers and servants of the Authority in matters of executive administration and in the matters concerning the accounts and records of the authority and exercise the powers of the Chairman under sub-section (1) of Section 54 relating to the Officers and servants of the Authority; (g) furnish to the Government a copy of the minutes of the Authoritys proceedings and any return or other information which the Government may, from time to time, call for; (h) authenticate by his signature all permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the Authority and the orders of the Chairman: and (i) have all the powers of a major Head of the Department of the State Government under the Karnataka State Civil Service Rules for the time being in force as respects the Officers and servants of the Authority. 12-G. Powers to remove difficulties -(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act in its application to the Authority, the Government may, by order, make such modification to the Act or to any rule or bye-law made thereunder as it may consider necessary to remove such difficulty. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one or more successive sessions and if before the expiry or the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions, both Houses agree in making any modification to the order or the annulment of the order, the order shall, with effect from the date on which the modification or annulment is notified by the Government in the official Gazette, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything done under such order".
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka In sub-section (3) of Section 50 of the principal Act, the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "The audited accounts and the report shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature, as soon as may be, after it is received by the Government".
Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Improvement Boards (Amendment) Ordinance, 1985 (Karnataka Ordinance No. 3 of 1985) is hereby, repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the Karnataka Ordinance No. 14 of the 1984 and 3 of 1985 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
