Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section Preamble--> State(s): Karnataka An Act to make provision relating to the construction, maintenance and regulation of irrigation works, the supply of water therefrom, obtaining labour in emergencies and certain other matters pertaining to irrigation in the State of Karnataka. Whereas, it is expedient to make provision relating to the construction, maintenance and regulation of irrigation works, the supply of water therefrom obtaining labour in the emergencies and certain other matters pertaining to irrigation in the State of Karnataka; Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India, as follows -
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 1--> State(s): Karnataka (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Karnataka. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint. Received the assent of the President on the Twenty-third day of July, 1965
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 2--> State(s): Karnataka In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - (a) "Canal Officer" means any officer appointed or invested with powers of a Canal Officer under Section 3; (b) "Chief Engineer" means an officer appointed by the State Government as Chief Engineer for Irrigation and includes any officer appointed to perform the functions of a Chief Engineer under this Act; 1 [(bb) "Command Area Development Authority" means the Command Area Development Authority established under the Karnataka Command Area Development Act, 1980 (Karnataka Act 6 of 1980);] (c) "Deputy Commissioner" includes any officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner appointed by the State Government to exercise all or any the powers of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act; (d) "Drainage work" includes - (i) channels, either natural or artificial, for the discharge of waste or surplus water, and all works connected with or auxiliary to such channels; (ii) escape channels from an irrigation work, dams, weirs, embankments, sluices, groynes and other works connected therewith, but does not include works for the removal of sewage; (iii) any work in connection with a system of reclamation made or improved by Government for the purpose of drainage of the country; and (iv) all works for the protection of lands from inundation or erosion constructed or maintained either wholly or in part by the State Government. (e) "Field channel" means any water course, hikkal or pipe having a capacity not exceeding one cubic foot per second, which is supplied with water from an irrigation work, and includes all subsidiary works belonging to such field channel, except the sluice or outlet through which water is supplied to such channel or pipe; (f) "Flood-embankment" means any embankment constructed or maintained by Government in connection with any system of irrigation or reclamation works for the protection of lands from inundation or which may be declared by the State Government to be maintained in connection with any such system, and includes all groynes, spursdams and other protective works connected with such embankments; (g) "Irrigation Officer" means any officer appointed as an Irrigation Officer or invested with the powers of an Irrigation Officer under Section 3; (h) "Irrigation work" includes - (i) all reservoirs, tanks, wells, anicuts, bandharas, ponds, spring ponds, canals, field-channels, thalapariges, pipes, channels, aqueducts and sluices constructed maintained or controlled wholly or partly by Government for the supply, conveyance or storage of water; (ii) all works, embankments, structures, supply and escape channels, connected with such reservoirs, tanks, anicuts, bandharas, channels, canals, pipes, sluices and all roads constructed for facilitating the construction or maintenance of such reservoirs, tanks, anicuts, bandharas, canals, channels, pipes and sluices; (iii) all drainage works and flood embankments; (iv) any part of a river, stream, lake, natural collection of water or natural drainage channel to which the State Government may apply the provisions of Section 5 or of which the water has been applied or used before the commencement of this Act for the purpose of any existing irrigation work; (v) all lands appropriated by the State Government for the purpose of such reservoirs, tanks, anicuts, bandharas, canals, channels, pipes, sluices and all buildings, machinery, fences, gates and other erections upon such lands. (i) "Land Holder" or "Holder" means the person in whom a right to hold the land is vested, whether solely on his own account or wholly or partly in trust for another person or for a class of persons or for the public and includes a mortgagee vested with right of possession; (j) "Notification" means a notification published in the official Gazette; (k) "Occupier" means in respect of any land, any person who has an interest in the land and cultivates the land himself or by his servants, or by hired labour, and includes a tenant; (l) "Owner" includes every person having a joint interest in the ownership of the thing specified; and all rights and obligations which attach to an owner under this Act shall attach jointly and severally to every person having such joint interest in the ownership; (m) "Patel" means such officer as the State Government may declare to be a patel for the purposes of this Act; (n) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (o) "Tahsildar" includes any officer appointed by the State Government to exercise all or any of the powers of a Tahsildar under this Act. 2 [(p) "Water Users Apex Level Federation" means a Water Users Apex Society registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) which shall consist of members as specified in its bye-laws; (q) "Water Users Distributory Level Federation" means a Federation of Water Users Societies at Distributory Level registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) the members of which consist of not less than fifty-one per cent of the Water Users Societies within an area in relation to a distributory of a major or medium irrigation project, as may be notified by the State Government; (r) "Water Users Project Level Federation" means - (i) in the case of a major irrigation project, a Federation of Water Users Distributory Level Federations at the project level registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) the members of which consist of not less than fifty-one per cent of Water Users Distributory Level Federation within an area in relation to the major irrigation project as may be notified by the State Government; (ii) in the case of a medium irrigation project, a federation of Water Users Societies at the project level registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) the members of which consist of not less than fifty-one per cent of Water Users Societies within an area in relation to the medium irrigation project as may be notified by the State Government; (iii) in the case of a minor irrigation or lift irrigation works, a Federation of Water Users Societies in relation to such minor irrigation or lift irrigation works registered under the Karnataka Co- operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) the members of which consists of not less than fifty-one per cent of Water Users Societies within such area as may be notified by the State Government; (s) "Water Users Society" means a Water Users Co- operative Society registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 1959) - (a) members of which consist of not less than sixty per cent of the Water Users for cultivation of land; or (b) majority of members of which consists of Water Users for cultivation of land and holding not less than fifty-one per cent of land; under an irrigation work within the area of operation of the society. Explanation -For the purpose of this clause "area of operation" means an area comprising a contiguous block of land within an irrigation work as may be notified by the Irrigation Officer.] Clause (bb) inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Clauses (p) to (s) inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 3--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government, or, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any officer of Government empowered in this behalf, may by notification - (a) appoint such officers with such designations, and assign to them respectively such powers and duties over such areas or such irrigation works under this Act, as the State Government or such officer may deem fit; (b) invest any officer of Government in any Department or any other person with such powers and impose upon him such duties over such areas or such irrigation works under this Act, as the State Government or such officer may deem fit.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 4--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No person shall construct, control or maintain wholly or partly any reservoir, tank, anicut, bandhara, pond, spring pond, canal, field channelfi talaparige, channel or aqueduct except with the previous sanction of the State Government or such other authority as may be authorised by the State Government in this behalf and subject to such conditions as the State Government or such authority may impose: 1 [Provided that the State Government may entrust to a Water Users Society control, maintenance and monitoring of any irrigation work either wholly or in part and thereupon such Water Users Society shall be responsible for the control, maintenance and monitoring of such irrigation work.] (2) Where the State Government is of the opinion that in the interests of proper irrigation from any irrigation work constructed or proposed to be constructed it is necessary to control the construction of wells in any area or areas, the State Government may, by notification specify such area or areas; and thereupon no person shall within such area or areas construct any well except with the previous sanction of the State Government or other authority authorised by the State Government in this behalf, and subject to such conditions as the State Government or such authority may impose. Proviso inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 5--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whenever it appears expedient to the State Government or any officer generally or specially authorised by it in this behalf, that the water of any river or stream flowing in a natural channel or of any lake or any other natural collection of still water, should be applied or used by the State Government for the purpose of any existing or proposed irrigation work, the State Government or the authorised officer may, by notification, declare that the said water will be so applied or used after a day to be specified in the said notification, not being earlier than three months from the date thereof. (2) At any time after the day specified under sub-section (1), the Irrigation Officer may enter on any land, remove any obstruction, close any channel and do any other thing necessary for such application or use of the said water, and for such purpose, may take with him, or depute or employ such subordinates and other persons as he deems fit.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 6--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever it shall be necessary to make any inquiry or examination in connection with a proposed irrigation work or with the maintenance of an existing irrigation work, the Irrigation Officer, or any person acting under the general or special order of such Irrigation Officer may - (a) enter upon such land as he may think necessary for the purpose; and (b) exercise all powers and do all things in respect of such land as he might exercise and do, if the State Government had issued a notification under the provisions of Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, to the effect that land in that locality is likely to be needed for a public purpose; and (c) set up and maintain water-gauges and do all other things necessary for the purpose of such inquiry and examination.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 7--> State(s): Karnataka The Irrigation Officer or any person acting under the general or special order of such Irrigation Officer, may enter upon any land, building or field-channel, for the purpose of inspecting or regulating the use of water supplied or of measuring the land, irrigated thereby or chargeable with a water rate, and of doing all things necessary for the proper regulation, maintenance and management of the irrigation work from which such water is supplied.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 8--> State(s): Karnataka In case of any accident or damage being apprehended or occurring to an irrigation work, the Irrigation Officer, or any person or persons acting under the general or special order of such Irrigation Officer, may enter upon any land adjacent to or in the neighbourhood of such irrigation work and may remove trees and other materials and execute all works which may be necessary for the purpose of preventing such accident or repairing any damage.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 9--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever an Irrigation Officer or any other person acting under his general or special order in this behalf, proposes, under the provisions of Sections 6, 7 or 8, to enter into any building or enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling house, which is not supplied with water from an irrigation work not adjacent to a flood-embankment, he shall previously give to the occupier of such building, court or garden such reasonable written notice as the urgency of the case may allow.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 10--> State(s): Karnataka Suitable means of crossing canals and channels shall be provided at such places as the State Government 1 [or the Water Users Society in respect of any irrigation work entrusted to it, as the case may be] thinks necessary for the reasonable convenience of the inhabitants of the adjacent land; and suitable bridges, culverts, or other works shall be constructed to prevent the drainage of the adjacent land being obstructed by any canal or channel. Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 11--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever it appears to the State Government that injury to the public health, or public convenience, or to any irrigation work or to any land for which supply from an irrigation work is available, has arisen or may arise from the obstruction of any river, stream or natural drainage channel, the State Government may, by notification, prohibit within limits to be defined in such notification, or may, within such limits, order the removal or other modification of such obstruction; and thereupon so much of the said river, stream or natural drainage channel as is comprised within such limits, shall be deemed to be a drainage work as defined in Section 2.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 12--> State(s): Karnataka The Irrigation Officer may, after the publication of the notification under Section 11, issue an order to any person causing or having control over any such obstruction to remove or modify the same within such period as may be specified in such order.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 13--> State(s): Karnataka If within the period specified under Section 12 such person does not comply with the order, the Irrigation Officer may cause the obstruction to be removed or modified and such person shall be liable to pay the expense of such removal or modification; and if the person to whom the order was issued does not, when called upon, pay the expenses of such removal or modification, such expenses shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 14--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever it 1 [appears to the Water Users Society in case of any irrigation work entrusted to it and in other cases to the State Government] that any drainage work is necessary for the public health or for the improvement of the proper cultivation or irrigation of and land, or that protection from floods or other accumulations of water or from erosion by a river is required for any land, 2 [the State Government or as the case may be, Water Users Society] in its discretion cause a scheme for such work to be drawn up and carried into execution, and the person authorised by the State Government 3 [or as the case may be, Water Users Society] to draw up and execute such scheme may exercise, in connection therewith, the powers conferred on Irrigation Officers by Sections 6, 7 and 8 and shall be liable to the obligations, imposed upon Irrigation Officers by Sections 9 and 35. Substituted for the words "appears to the State Government" by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6- 2000 Substituted for the words "the State Government may" by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 15--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Irrigation Officer on being satisfied that the construction of field-channels in any area is necessary in public interest for supply of water from an irrigation work to lands requiring such supply for purposes of cultivation, shall declare by notification that such field-channels may be constructed after a date to be specified in the notification, not being earlier than thirty days from the date of publication thereof. A copy of such notification shall be sent to the Tahsildar of the area for publication in the villages concerned. (2) After the date specified in the notification under sub-section (1), the Irrigation Officer shall determine the suitable alignment for the field-channels and shall mark out the land, which in his opinion, it is necessary to occupy for the construction thereof. He shall forthwith publish a notification by affixture on the notice board in his office that so much of such land as is situated within such village or villages has been so marked out and shall send a copy of such notification to the Tahsildar for publication in every village through which the field-channel is taken on such lands. He shall also send a copy of such notification to the Deputy Commissioner of every District in which such land is situated.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 16--> State(s): Karnataka (1) On receipt of a copy of a notification under Section 15, 1 [the Deputy Commissioner shall issue notices to the owner of such land and other persons interested in it to show cause why such land should not be acquired and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if satisfied] that such land is required for a field-channel, proceed to acquire and take possession of such land under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, as if a declaration had been issued by the State Government for the acquisition thereof under Section 6 of that Act and as if the State Government had thereupon directed the Deputy Commissioner to take order for the acquisition of such land under Section 7 of the said Act as if the State Government had issued orders for immediate possession being taken under Section 17 of the said Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the acquisition of any land for the purpose of constructing a field-channel under Section 15 shall be deemed to be for a public purpose 2 [x x x x x.] Substituted for the words "the Deputy Commissioner shall, on being satisfied" by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words, letters and brackets "and Compensation to be awarded shall be -(a) in the case of land which is assessed as wet, one hundred times, and(b) in the case of land which is assessed as dry, two hundred times, the land revenue payable in respect of the land acquired" and Explanations I and II omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 17--> State(s): Karnataka On possession of the land being taken, the Irrigation Officer shall fix the boundary marks in the prescribed manner, and thereupon ownership of such land shall vest in the State Government.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 18--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Sections 18 and 19 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 19--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Sections 18 and 19 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 20--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every 2 [user of] the field-channel shall be bound - (a) to maintain such field-channel in a fit state of repair for the conveyance of water; 3 [(b) x x x x x.] (2) Every user of a field-channel 4 [x x x x x] shall, subject to the provisions of Chapter IV, be entitled to have a supply of water by such field-channel on such terms as may be prescribed. Substituted for the words "person having a right to use" by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 Substituted for the words "person having a right to use" by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 Clause (b) omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "and every person duly authorised under the provisions hereinafter contained to use a field-channel" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 21--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Sections 21, 22 and 23 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 22--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Sections 21, 22 and 23 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 23--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Sections 21, 22 and 23 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 24--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If any user of a field-channel fails to fulfil any obligation imposed upon him by clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 20, the Irrigation Officer may require him, by notice, to execute the necessary repair within a period to be specified in such notice of not less than seven days and, in the event of failure may execute the same, and except as hereinafter provided in this section, all expenses incurred in the execution of such repair shall be a sum due by such user to the State Government recoverable as an arrear of land revenue: 1 [Provided that in respect of an irrigation work entrusted to a Water Users Society such expenses shall be deemed to be dues by such user to a Co-operative Society and shall also be recoverable in accordance with the provisions of the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959.] 2 [(2) x x x x x.] Proviso inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Sub-section (2) omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 25--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Section 25 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 26--> State(s): Karnataka After any land has been acquired under Section 16 and has vested in the State Government under Section 17, the Irrigation Officer shall construct the field channels necessary in the area.] Section 26 substituted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 27--> State(s): Karnataka An Irrigation Officer duly empowered by the State Government by a notification in respect of any irrigation work or class of irrigation works may, after such inquiry as he deems fit, and after consultation with a committee appointed by the State Government, consisting of such number of official and non-official members as may be prescribed, regulate in respect of any irrigation work for each year or for a specified term of years at a time, as circumstances may require - (i) the time for letting out water for irrigation; (ii) the period of supply; (iii) the quantity of supply; and (iv) the areas to be supplied at different times. Explanation -A land shall be deemed to have been supplied with water is made available for irrigation of such land: 1 [Provided that where an irrigation work is entrusted to a Water Users Society, the Irrigation Officer, instead of consulting the committee so appointed by the State Government, shall - (i) in the case of a Water Users Society whose area of operation extends to one or more minor irrigation or lift irrigation works, consult such Water Users Society; and (ii) in other cases, consult the Water Users Project Level Federation.] Proviso inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 28--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Any person desiring to have a supply of water from an irrigation work for irrigating a land 1 [x x x x x] not included in any area to which supply of water is regulated under Section 27, shall make a written application to that effect to the Irrigation Officer. Subject to any general or special order made by the State Government determining the extent of lands for which water can be made available from such irrigation work, such officer may, if in his opinion such supply can be made without detriment to the supply of water to lands 2 [x x x x] included in any area to which supply of water is regulated under Section 27, order the supply of water and for such period not exceeding six years subject to such conditions as may be specified in such order. (2) If after a period of six successive years of supply of water made to any land referred to in sub-section (1), the holder of such land applies for the supply of water being made permanent, such application, with the opinion of the Irrigation Officer, shall be forwarded to the Deputy Commissioner of the district. The Deputy Commissioner of the district shall then take steps in accordance with law 3 [x x x x x], to include the land in the area to which supply of water is regulated by Section 27. (3) The water rate 4 [or Water charges, as the case may be] leviable for the use of water for temporary cultivation under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be twice the water rate 5 [or Water charges, as the case may be] 6 [x x x x x]. (4) With the sanction of, and subject to such conditions, payments and restrictions, as may be imposed by the State Government or such officer as may be authorised by the State Government in this behalf, the Irrigation Officer, may, without detriment to the supply of water to lands 7 [x x x x x] included in any area to which supply of water is regulated under Section 27, give permission for water to be taken from an irrigation work, for purposes other than those of agriculture. (5) If any person uses water from an irrigation work without obtaining the permission required under this section, he shall in addition to any penalty he incurs under this Act for such unauthorised use of water be liable to pay water rate 8 [or as the case may be, water charges] at such rate as may be determined by the prescribed officer not being less than ten times and not exceeding thirty times the rate 9 [or the water charges, as the case may be] he would otherwise have been required to pay, had he applied for and obtained the permission. The words "not assessed as a wet land or" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "not assessed as a wet land or" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "to convert the land into wet or garden or" by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 The words "when such rate is levied separately on the land or in other cases twice the difference between dry assessment of the land and the wet assessment of the neighbouring wet lands" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "assessed as wet lands or" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 29--> State(s): Karnataka The supply of water to any field-channel or to any person who is entitled to such supply shall not be stopped, except - (a) whenever and so long as it is necessary to stop such supply for the purpose of executing any work ordered by the competent authority; (b) whenever and so long as any field-channel by which such supply is received is not maintained in such repair as to prevent the wasteful escape of water thereof; (c) whenever and so long as it is necessary to do so in order to supply in rotation the legitimate demands of other persons entitled to water; (d) whenever and so long as it may be necessary to do so in order to prevent the wastage or misuse of water; (e) within the periods fixed from time to time by the Irrigation Officer of which due notice shall be given; (f) whenever there is diminution in the supply of water in the irrigation work due to any natural or seasonal causes and so long as it is necessary to do so. 1 [(g) whenever and so long as water is used for sowing planting or growing crops in contravention of notification issued under sub-section (2) of Section 32; (h) whenever and so long as stoppage of supply of water is necessitated due to any cause beyond the control of Irrigation Officer; (i) whenever and so long as a person does not pay the arrears of water rate or as the case may be water charges.] Clauses (g) to (i) inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e. f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 30--> State(s): Karnataka When water from an irrigation work is supplied for the irrigation of one or more crops only, the right to use such water shall be deemed to continue only until such crop or crops shall come into maturity, and to apply only to such crop or crops.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 31--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to the provisions of Section 32, and subject to such directions as may be issued from time to time, the Irrigation Officer may in any year, having regard to the quantity of water available in any irrigation work under his control determine, by order published in the prescribed manner and within the time prescribed, the areas or lands 2 [x x x x x x] in the irrigable are of such irrigation work, to be cultivated with paddy, sugarcane, or any perennial crop or intermittent irrigated dry crops or with dry or semi-dry crops and regulate the supply of water for irrigation accordingly. (2) If, in accordance with a decision of the Irrigation Officer under sub-section (1), any land entitled to supply of water under the irrigation work is not supplied with water, the holder of such land shall be liable to pay only the dry assessment of such land. (3) From the order of the Irrigation Officer under this section, an appeal shall lie within fifteen days from the date of publication of the said order, to the Deputy Commissioner of the district. The word "wet" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "or portions of the wet lands" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 32--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whenever the State Government is satisfied that for the better cultivation of lands and due preservation of the water resources of an irrigation work, it is expedient and desirable in public interests to regulate the kind of crop that should be grown on lands under such irrigation work and the period of sowing such kinds of crop it may by notification make a declaration to that effect. (2) On the making of a declaration under sub-section (1), the Irrigation Officer, after consultation with the committee appointed under Section 27 and with the approval of the Deputy Commissioner, may specify by notification published in such manner as may be prescribed, the kinds of crop that shall be grown on any land under such irrigation work and the period of sowing and planting such crops. (3) On the publication of a notification under sub-section (2), no person shall grow or allow any crop other than the crops specified in such notification to be grown on any land under such irrigation work and no person shall sow or plant or allow the sowing or planting of crop at any time other than during the period specified in such notification. 1 [(4) In all cases in which the person who has sown or grown any unauthorised crop or allowed any land to be grown or sown with such unauthorised crop cannot be found, the holder of the land, in addition to such other person concerned, shall - (a) be liable for contravening the provisions of this section; and (b) also be liable to pay such water rate, 2 [or water charges as the case may be] as may be determined by the Irrigation Officer, not being less than five times and not exceeding ten times the water rate 3 [or water charges as the case may be] which he would otherwise have been required to pay: Provided that if no water is utilised either directly or indirectly from the irrigation work for growing any crop, the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) shall not be applicable.] Sub-section (4) substituted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 33--> State(s): Karnataka Compensation may be awarded in respect of any substantial damage caused by the exercises of any of the powers conferred by this Act, which is capable of being ascertained: Provided that no compensation shall be so awarded in respect of any damage arising from - (a) deterioration of climate or soil; or (b) stoppage of navigation or of the means of floating timber or of watering cattle; or (c) stoppage or diminution of the supply of water in consequence of the exercise of the powers conferred by Section 5, if no use has been made of such supply within the five years next before the date of the issue of the notification under Section 5; or (d) failure or stoppage of any water in a channel or irrigation work where such failure or stoppage is due to- (i) any cause beyond the control of the authority incharge of the irrigation work; (ii) the execution of any repairs, alterations or additions to the channel or irrigation work; (iii) any measures considered necessary by the Irrigation Officer, for regulating the proper flow of water in the channel or for maintaining the established course of irrigation; or (iv) circumstances mentioned under clause (a) to (f) of Section 29: Provided further that any person who suffers loss from any stoppage or diminution of water supply to his lands due to any of the causes named in clause (d) of the preceding proviso shall be entitled to such remission of the water rate payable by him as may be authorised by the State Government.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 34--> State(s): Karnataka No claim for compensation under this Act for any damage shall be entertained after the expiration of one year from the time when the damage complained of commenced, provided that the Deputy Commissioner on sufficient cause shown to his satisfaction by the claimant for not making the claim within such period, may condone the delay, and entertain the claim.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 35--> State(s): Karnataka (1) In every case of entry upon any land or building or the utilisation of materials under Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8, the Irrigation Officer or the person making the entry shall ascertain and record the extent of the damage, if any, caused by the entry, or in the execution of any work, to any crop, tree, building or other property and the value of the materials taken or utilised and within one month from the date of such entry, compensation shall be tendered by the Irrigation Officer to the land-holder or owner of the property, as the case may be. (2) If such tender is not accepted within a week of such tender, the Irrigation Officer shall forthwith refer the matter to the Deputy Commissioner for the purpose of determining the amount of compensation.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 36--> State(s): Karnataka (1) All claims for compensation under this Act other than claims of the nature provided for in Section 35 shall be made to the Deputy Commissioner of the district in which such claim or part of it arises. (2) The Deputy Commissioner shall enquire into all such claims and determine the amount of compensation, if any, which should be awarded. In determining such amount, the Deputy Commissioner shall, 1 [x x x x x], be guided by the provisions of Sections 23 and 24 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, 2 [ x x x x ]: Provided that regard shall be had to the diminution in the market value, at the time of awarding compensation, of the property in respect of which compensation is claimed; and where such market value is not ascertainable, the amount shall be reckoned at twelve times the amount of the diminution of the annual net profits of such property caused by the exercise of the powers conferred by this Act: Provided further that no order determining the amount of compensation shall be made by the Deputy Commissioner under this section without the previous approval of the State Government or such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf. The words "except in cases of acquisition under Section 16" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The words "as far as possible" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 37--> State(s): Karnataka Any person aggrieved by the order of the Deputy Commissioner under Section 35 or Section 36 may within ninety days from the date of communication of the order, prefer an appeal to the Karnataka Revenue Appellate Tribunal.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 38--> State(s): Karnataka All sums of money payable for compensation awarded under this Chapter shall become due three months after the final award is made, and simple interest at the rate of four percentum per annum shall be allowed on any such sum remaining unpaid after the said three months, except when the non-payment of such is caused by the neglect or refusal of the claimant to apply for or receive the same.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 39--> State(s): Karnataka 1 [x x x x x.] Section 39 omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 40--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Whenever it appears to an Irrigation Officer or in his absence to the Tahsildar that - (a) (i) unless some work or repair is immediately executed an irrigation work would sustain such serious damage as to cause sudden and extensive public injury; or (ii) unless some clearance of an irrigation work which necessary is order to maintain the established course of irrigation or drainage is immediately executed, serious public loss would occur, and (b) persons necessary for the proper execution of such work, repair or clearance cannot be obtained in the ordinary manner in time to prevent such injury or loss, it shall be lawful for such officer to either himself call upon or to require the patel of the village or villages in the vicinity to call upon all or any of the able bodied persons who reside or hold land in or near the locality where such work, repair or clearance has to be executed to assist in the execution of the same as such officer or other person authorised by him in this behalf may direct. (2) In calling upon the able bodied persons to assist the execution of any work under sub-section (1), no discrimination shall be made on grounds of religion, race, caste or class or of any of them. (3) Every person so requisitioned shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code. (4) An order made under sub-section (1), shall be immediately reported to the Deputy Commissioner and the Canal Officer.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 41--> State(s): Karnataka All persons complying with the requisition under Section 40 shall, as soon as may be reasonably practicable, and in any case within fifteen days from the date of such compliance, be paid by the Canal Officer or the Tahsildar, as the case may be, for the work done by them at fifty per cent in excess of the rates payable for the time being prescribed by the competent authority of the Public Works Department to persons attending to similar work: Provided that for work done at night, payment shall be made at double such rates.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 42--> State(s): Karnataka Any person who does not accept the amount tendered in payment under Section 41 may appeal, within thirty days from the date of such tender, to the Deputy Commissioner whose decision shall be final.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 43--> State(s): Karnataka If the State Government considers that in the interest of the proper irrigation of lands under any irrigation work maintained by any person or body of persons, the work of maintenance in a fit state of repair of such irrigation work should be undertaken by the State Government, and the cost of such maintenance or any part thereof recovered from the holders of lands benefited by such irrigation work, the State Government may, by notification, make a declaration to that effect, and thereafter the State Government shall take over and maintain in a fit state of repair such irrigation work: Provided that no artificial reservoir owned by any land holder which is actually used for the purpose of irrigation by such land holder shall be notified under this section except - (i) on the request of land holder; or (ii) if in the opinion of the State Government such notification is necessary in the public interest: Provided further that where a notification is issued in accordance with clause (ii) of the preceding proviso, the land holder concerned shall be paid such compensation for his rights as may be awarded by the Deputy Commissioner of the district after such enquiry as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 44--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government shall levy a maintenance cess at rupees four per acre, per annum on all lands in the area benefited by any irrigation work maintained by the State Government, the Tungabhadra Board or a 1 [Zilla Panchayat or a Taluk Panchayat] or other authority: Provided that where water is not made available for the use of any land benefited by an irrigation work for a period of not less than two consecutive years, the maintenance cess shall not be payable in respect of such land during the said period: Provided further that where the maintenance cess has been paid for any year in respect of which such cess is not payable under the preceding proviso the amount so paid shall be refunded or adjusted towards the liability to pay the cess in respect of any later year in which water is made available for the use of such land: 2 [Provided also that no maintenance cess shall be levied and collected under this sub-section in respect of any land in the area benefitted by any irrigation work maintained by a Water Users Society.] (2) On and from the date of levy of the maintenance cess under sub-section (1), the irrigation cess, if any, levied as a separate charge on the lands liable to pay maintenance cess shall cease to be levied. (3) The maintenance cess shall be a tax on the land in respect of which it is payable, and the provisions of the Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (Karnataka Act 12 of 1964) and the rules thereunder shall apply to the payment and recovery of the maintenance cess as they apply to the payment and recovery of the land revenue due upon the land in respect of which the maintenance cess is payable. Substituted for the words "Taluk Development Board" by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Proviso inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 45--> State(s): Karnataka Where under any law for the time being in force the duty of maintenance of any irrigation work devolves on the Thungabhadra Board, a 1 [Zilla Panchayat or Taluk Panchayat] or other authority, an amount equal to the amount collected as maintenance cess on lands benefited by such irrigation work during every year shall be paid to the Tungabhadra Board, the 2 [Zilla Panchayat or Taluk Panchayat] or other authority concerned, in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted for the words "Taluk Development Board" by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000 Substituted for the words "Taluk Development Board" by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 46--> State(s): Karnataka Except as may be prescribed, no person other than the Irrigation Officer shall - (a) interfere with or divert the course of a natural stream; or (b) construct any earthern or masonry bund or weir on any channel or stream, flowing above or below any held channel.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 47--> State(s): Karnataka No person, except with the written permission of the Irrigation Officer, shall obstruct the proper functioning of the various cross drainage works, such as culverts, aqueducts, super-passages, syphons, weirs and allied works constructed for the safety of the canals or channels.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 48--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Every owner whose tank, well, pond, spring pond, talaparige or other reservoir is situated above any irrigation work, shall maintain the bunds and surplussing arrangements of such tank, well, pond, spring pond, talaparige or reservoir in a safe and efficient condition. (2) If, in the opinion of the Irrigation Officer, such bunds or surplussing arrangements of the works referred to in sub-section (1) are not in a fit condition and are likely to endanger the irrigation works below, then the owner concerned shall be server with a notice to bring such bunds or surplussing arrangements to a reasonably fit condition, in such manner within such time as may be specified in the notice. (3) If the said owner fails to comply within the time specified or does repairs which in the opinion of the Irrgation Officer are unsatisfactory, the Irrigation Officer may carry out the necessary repairs and the cost thereof shall be recovered from the said owner as an arrear of land revenue. (4) From any order of the Irrigation Officer under this section an appeal shall lie within one month from the date of communication of the order, to the Deputy Commissioner, whose decision thereon shall be final.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 49--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall conduct mining or quarrying operations requiring the use of explosives within a distance of one kilometre from the boundaries of an irrigation work without the written permission of the Irrigation Officer.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 50--> State(s): Karnataka Save as provided in sub-section (2) of Section 4, no new wells shall be excavated within such distance as may be specified by the State Government from time to time, from the boundaries of an irrigation work, without the written permission of the Irrigation Officer.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 51--> State(s): Karnataka No person other than Irrigation Officer in this behalf, shall have the right to operate a sluice gate, regulator or flood gate of a reservoir, canal or channel.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 52--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall have the right to fish or ply any vessel in a reservoir or tank or across or along a canal or channel maintained or controlled by the Government without the permission in writing of the State Government or of such officer as may be empowered in this behalf by the State Government, and except under such terms and conditions and subject to payment of such fees as may be prescribed: Provided that no permission for fishing in any tank with an achkat of not more than five hundred acres shall be granted by any officer empowered under this section except with the concurrence of the Irrigation Officer.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 53--> State(s): Karnataka No person other than the Irrigation Officer or any officer duly empowered in this behalf shall let out water from a canal or channel by cutting the bund, constructing a sluice or outlet or any other similar contrivance.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 54--> State(s): Karnataka No person shall deposit any produce of mines in or near any channel or other work, whether natural or artificial, through which rain or other water flows into any irrigation work.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 55--> State(s): Karnataka Whoever voluntarily and without proper authority - (i) damages, alters, enlarges or obstructs any irrigation work; (ii) interferes with, increases, or diminishes the supply of water in, or the flow of water from, through, over, or under any irrigation work or by any means raises or lowers the level of the water in any irrigation work; (iii) opens, shuts or obstructs or attempts to open, shut or obstruct, any sluice or outlet or any other similar contrivance in any irrigation work; (iv) corrupts or fouls the water of any irrigation work so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used; (v) destroys, defaces or moves any land-mark or level-mark or water-gauge fixed by the authority of a public servant; (vi) destroys, tampers with, or removes any apparatus, or part of any apparatus, for controlling, regulating or measuring the flow of water in any irrigation work; (vii) causes any animal or vehicle to pass on or across any of the works, banks, canals or channels of an irrigation work contrary to rules made under Section 71 after he has been required to desist therefrom; (viii) causes or permits any animal to graze or be tethered upon the bank of any irrigation work; (ix) removes or injures any tree, bush, grass or other vegetation intended for the protection of any irrigation work; (x) puts up a dam across or otherwise obstructs the free course of water the right to which vests in the Government; (xi) being responsible for the maintenance of the field channel or using the field channel, neglects to take proper precautions for the prevention of waste of the water thereof, or interferes with the authorised distribution of the water therefrom or uses such water in an unauthorised manner; 1 [(xii) x x x x x;] (xiii) contravenes any provision of this Act; (xiv) contravenes any rule made under Section 71, the contravention whereof is declared in the rules made under that section to be an offence punishable under this section shall, on conviction, be punished for offences under clauses (vi), (x), (xi) 2 [x x x x x] with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both, and for offences under any other clause with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both: Provided that for a second or subsequent offence under clauses (vii) and (viii) such fine shall not be less than fifty rupees and under the other clauses such fine shall not be less than two hundred and fifty rupees: Provided further that in the case of a continuing offence a daily fine not exceeding fifty rupees during the period of the continuance of the offence shall also be imposed. Clause (xii) omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969 The word, brackets and figures "and (xii)" omitted by Act No. 12 of 1969, w.e.f. 19-6-1969
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 56--> State(s): Karnataka When any person is convicted of an offence under Section 55, the Magistrate may order that the said person shall remove the obstruction or repair the damage or replace or repair the land-mark, level-mark, water-gauge or apparatus in respect of which the conviction has taken place within a period to be fixed in such order. If such person neglects or refuses to obey such order within the period so fixed, the Irrigation Officer may carry out the work in accordance with such order and the cost thereof shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land revenue.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 57--> State(s): Karnataka Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act, or attempts to commit any such offence shall be punished with the punishment provided in this Act for such offence.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 58--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If any officer or other person duly empowered to take action under this Act, exercises without reasonable cause for the purpose of vexatious or with malicious intention any power under this Act, he shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. (2) No prosecution under sub-section (1) shall be entertained except on a complaint by an officer authorised by the State Government in that behalf.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 59--> State(s): Karnataka Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent any person from being prosecuted under any other law for the time being in force for any act or omission made punishable by this Act.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 60--> State(s): Karnataka All offences under this Act except offences under clauses (vii) and (viii) of Section 55, shall be cognizable.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 60A--> State(s): Karnataka (1) Subject to such restrictions and conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed, Irrigation Officer may either before or after initiation of any proceeding for an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder accept a sum of money not exceeding five thousand rupees by way of composition of an offence which such person has committed or is suspected to have committed. (2) On payment of such money, such person if, in custody, shall be discharged, property, if any, seized shall be released and no further proceeding shall be taken against such person or property.] Section 60-A inserted by Act No. 24 of 2000 and shall be deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 14-6-2000
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 61--> State(s): Karnataka Any person in charge of or employed upon any irrigation work may remove from the land or buildings belonging thereto, or may take into custody without a warrant, and without unnecessary delay make over to a police officer or in the absence of a police officer take or cause to be taken in custody to the nearest police station, any person who within his view - (a) wilfully damages, alters, enlarges or obstructs any irrigation work; (b) without proper authority interferes with the supply or flow of water, in or from any irrigation work so as to endanger, damage or render less useful such irrigation work.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62--> State(s): Karnataka Whenever any person is fined for an offence under this Act, the Court which imposes such fine, or which confirms in appeal or revision a sentence of such fine, or a sentence of which such fine forms a part, may direct that the whole or any part of such fine may be paid by way of reward to any person who gave information leading to the detection of such offence or to the conviction of the offender. If the fine is ordered to be paid as a reward by a Court whose decision is subject to appeal or revision, the amount ordered to be so paid, shall not be paid until the period prescribed for presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or if an appeal is preferred till after the decision of the appeal.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62A--> State(s): Karnataka Water Users Society shall perform the following functions, namely - (1) to develop irrigation infrastructure by availing institutional finance; (2) to procure water in bulk on volumetric basis from the Irrigation Department or Krishna Jala Bhagya Nigam or Karnataka Neeravari Nigam and distribute it to the landholders in accordance with the principles laid down by the General Body for equitable distribution of water; (3) to operate and maintain canals situated within its jurisdiction; (4) to levy and collect water charges and service charges from the landholders; (5) to educate and train landholders in the efficient and economical use of water and adoption of new technology as well as to implement necessary programmes; (6) to prepare water budget and financial budget for each irrigation season; (7) to resolve disputes that may arise among landholders; (8) to mobilise financial resources for undertaking activities and efficient management of the society; (9) to implement or execute on farm development works; (10) to assist the Irrigation Department and Command Area Development Authority in implementing irrigation and drainage works; (11) to levy water charges and service charges on non-members at rates approved by the General Body of the Society; (12) to send annually to the prescribed authority on or before the prescribed date, an audit statement of all receipts and expenditure for the year ending; (13) to send a statement of the assets and liabilities of the society on or before such date and to such authority as may be prescribed; (14) the General Body of the Society shall prepare guidelines and decide the procedures for its day-to-day functioning, in conformity with the bye-laws of the society and conditions of the agreement to be entered into with the Executive Engineer concerned; (15) the Society shall furnish such information as may be prescribed to the prescribed authority; (16) to encourage avenue plantation in its area of operation; (17) to do such other acts as may be prescribed.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62B--> State(s): Karnataka The Water Users Distributory Level Federation shall perform the following functions, namely - (1) to prepare an operational plan based on its entitlement, area, soil and cropping pattern at the beginning of each irrigation season consistent with the operational plan prepared by the project level federation; (2) to identify the critical maintenance work that are to be carried out and prioritise these works; (3) to monitor the maintenance works being executed and ensure that they conform to prescribed standards; (4) to monitor and regulate the use of water among various societies in its area of operation; (5) to abide by the decisions of the Water Users Project Level Federation; (6) to undertake periodical social audit; (7) to promote economy in the use of water; (8) to encourage avenue plantation in its area of operation; (9) to prepare water budgets and crop plans.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62C--> State(s): Karnataka The Water Users Project Level Federation shall perform the following functions, namely - (1) to prepare an operational plan based on its entitlement area, soil and cropping pattern at the beginning of each irrigation season; (2) to identify the critical maintenance works that are to be carried out and prioritise these works; (3) to monitor the maintenance works being executed and ensure that they conform to prescribed standards; (4) to prepare water budgets and crop plans; (5) to undertake periodical social audit; (6) to promote economy in the use of water; (7) to encourage avenue plantation in its area of operation.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62D--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The committee of management of the Water Users Apex Level Federation shall consist of the following members, namely - (a) the Minister-in-charge of Major and Medium Irrigation, Government of Karnataka who shall be the Chairperson; (b) the Minister-in-charge of Minor Irrigation, Government of Karnataka who shall be the co-Chairperson; (c) the Secretary to Government, Irrigation Department, Government of Karnataka; (d) one expert in the field of participatory irrigation management nominated by the State Government; (e) Chief Executive/Managing Director of the Water Users Apex Level Federation; (f) Chairpersons of all the Command Area Development Authorities; (g) such number of persons representing different projects and minor irrigation and lift irrigation works in the State and elected in such manner as may be specified in the bye-laws of the Water Users Apex Level Federation. (2) Vice-Chairperson shall be elected from amongst the members of the Water Users Apex Level Federation. (3) The Water Users Apex Level Federation shall make recommendation to the State Government on the policies to be adopted and the guidelines to be formulated regarding construction, maintenance and regulation of irrigation work and supply of water therefrom. (4) The Water Users Apex Level Federation may give directions to the Water Users Project Level Federation, Water Users Distributory Level Federation and the Water Users Society to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62E--> State(s): Karnataka Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 62F--> State(s): Karnataka The State Government having regard to the size and nature of any irrigation project or works, may, be notification, exempt such project or works from the application of the provisions relating to Water Users Distributory Level Federation or Water Users Project Level Federation.]
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 63--> State(s): Karnataka When the person causing any damage, alteration, enlargement or obstruction to any irrigation work without proper authority cannot, after such enquiry as the Deputy Commissioner may deem sufficient, be ascertained or identified, the Deputy Commissioner may, on a requisition from the Irrigation Officer, after giving not less than one months notice to the holders and occupiers of all lands benefited thereby, and after hearing their representations, if any, recover from them, as an arrear of land revenue, in such proportion as he thinks fit, the cost of repairing such damage, or of removing such alteration, or obstruction.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 64--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If water supplied through a field channel is used in any unauthorised manner, and if the person by whose act or neglect such use has occurred cannot be found after such enquiry as the Irrigation Officer may deem sufficient, the Irrigation Officer after giving not less than one months notice to the holders and occupiers of all lands benefited thereby and after hearing their representations, if any, make an order for the recovery of such charges as may be prescribed for such use from such holders and occupiers in such proportion as he may find just. (2) All charges for the unauthorised use of water determined under sub-section (1) shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 65--> State(s): Karnataka Any person aggrieved by an order of an Irrigation Officer under Sections 12 or 24 may within thirty days from the date of communication of the order, prefer an appeal to the Deputy Commissioner of the district.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 66--> State(s): Karnataka The Divisional Commissioner may call for and examine the records of the proceedings under this Act of a Deputy Commissioner or an Irrigation Officer or any officer subordinate to the Deputy Commissioner or the Irrigation Officer for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any decision or order passed and the regularity of the proceedings of such officer. When on examination of the records of any case, the Divisional Commissioner considers that any order or decision of such officer should be revised, such order or decision may be revised or altered and the Divisional Commissioner may pass such other orders as he may deem just.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 67--> State(s): Karnataka Any officer empowered under this Act to conduct any enquiry, may exercise all such powers connected with the summoning and examining of witnesses and the production of documents as are conferred on a Civil Court, by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and every such enquiry shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding for purposes of Sections 193 and 224 of the Indian Penal Code.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 68--> State(s): Karnataka Service of any notice under this Act shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof signed by the officer therein mentioned. Whenever it may be practicable, the service of the notice shall be made on the person therein named. When such person cannot be found, the service may be made on any adult male member of his family residing with him and if no such adult male member can be found, the service of the notice may be made by sending a copy of such notice by registered post to such person at his usual place of residence.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 69--> State(s): Karnataka (1) No suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie against any officer or servant of the State Government, for any act done or purporting to be done under this Act, without the previous sanction of the State Government. (2) No officer or servant of the State Government shall be liable in respect of any such act in any civil or criminal proceeding if the act was done in good faith in the course of the execution of duties or the discharge of the functions imposed by or under this Act. (3) No suit shall be instituted against the State Government in respect of any act done unless the suit is instituted within six months from the date of the act complained of. (4) In the case of an intended suit against any officer or servant of the State Government under sub-section (1), the person intending to sue shall be bound to give the officer or servant, as the case may be, one months notice at least of the intended suit with sufficient description of the cause of action, failing which such suit shall be dismissed. (5) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall entertain any suit instituted in respect of any matter to which this Act applies.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 70--> State(s): Karnataka (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act, has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation -For the purposes of this section - (a) "company" means any body, corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 71--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The State Government may, after previous publication, by notification, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, and such rules may be general for all irrigation works or may be special for one or more irrigation works, as may be specified in such rules. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may be made in respect of the following matters - (a) the proceedings of any officer who under any provision of this Act is required or empowered to take action in any matter; (b) the amount of and charges to be made under this Act; (c) the economic use of water supplied from any irrigation work; (d) the manner in which and the officer by whom complaints, as to the inadequacy or means of crossing shall be investigated under Section 10; (e) regulating the period of opening and closing of channels, distributaries and sub-distributaries of irrigation works. (3) All rules made under this Act shall, subject to any modification made under sub-section (4), have effect as if enacted in this Act. (4) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1965_Section 72--> State(s): Karnataka (1) The Karnataka Irrigation Act, 1932 (Karnataka Act I of 1932), the Hyderabad Irrigation Act, 1357-F (Hyderabad Act 24 of 1357-F), the Bombay Irrigation Act, 1879 (Bombay Act 7 of 1879), the Madras Irrigation Tanks (Improvement) Act, 1949 (Madras Act XIX of 1949), and the Madras Irrigation Works (Repairs, Improvement and Construction) Act, 1943 (Madras Act XVIII of 1943), are hereby repealed: Provided that the provisions of Section 6 of the Karnataka General Clauses Act, 1899 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1899), shall be applicable in respect of the said repeal and Sections 8 and 24 of the said Act shall be applicable as if the said enactments had been repealed and re-enacted by this Act. (2) The Karnataka Tank Panchayat Act, 1911 (Karnataka Act 1 of 1911), is hereby repealed: Provided that the provisions of Section 6 of the Karnataka General Clauses Act, 1899 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1899), shall be applicable in respect of the repeal of the said enactment: Provided further that the properties, rights and liabilities of a Tank Panchayat constituted under the repealed enactment shall vest in the Village Panchayat constituted under the Karnataka Village Panchayats and Local Boards Act, 1959, and having jurisdiction over the area, and the moneys at the credit of the tank fund under the control of such Tank Panchayat shall stand transferred to the Panchayat Fund of the said Village Panchayat. 
