Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-six Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> (1) This Act may called the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> For section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 3.Salaries and daily constituency allowances-(1) Each Minister shall be entitled to receive a salary per mensum and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as such Minister at the same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 with respect to members of Parliament. (2) Each Ministers shall be entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is specified under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of Parliament,".
Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 5.Sumptuary allowances to Ministers-There shall be paid a sumptuary allowance to each Minister at the following rates, namely:- (a) the Prime Minister Rupees one thousand fivehundred per mensum; (b) every other Minister who Rupees one thousand peris a member of the Cabinet mensum; (c) a Minister of State Rupees five hundred per mensem.". (d) a Deputy Minister Rupees three hundred per mensum."
Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- '(1A) A minister and any one member of his family accompanying him shall be entitled to travelling allowances in respect of not more than six return journeys performed, during each year, within India, at the same rates at which travelling allowances are payable to such Minister under clause (b) of sub-section (1) in respect of tours referred to in that clause. Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, "return journey" means a journey from one place to another place and the return journey from such other place to the first mentioned place.".
Salaries and Allowances of Ministers (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> In the principal Act, after section 10, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 10A.Exemption from, liability to pay income-tax on certain perquisites receives by a Minister-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 , the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to a Minister under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" under section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 .'. 
