Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition In Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition In Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of opposition in Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985. (2) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 26-12-1985: vide Notification No. General Statutory Rules (G.S.R.) 938 (E), dated 26-12-1985, Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, section 3(i).
Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition In Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> For section 3 of the Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament Act, 1977 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 3.Salary and daily, constituency and sumptuary allowances-(1) Each Leader of the Opposition shall, so long as he continues as such Leader, be entitled to receive a salary per mensum and allowance for each day at the time rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 with respect to members of Parliament. (2) Each Leader of the Opposition shall also be entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate al is for time being specified under section 8 of the said Act with respect to members of Parliament. (3) There shall be paid to each Leader of the Opposition a sumptuary allowance of one thousand rupees per mensum.".
Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition In Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> Section 5 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- '(2) A Leader of the Opposition and any one member of his family accompanying him shall be entitled to travelling allowances in respect of not more than six return journeys performed, during each year, within India at the same rates at which travelling allowances are payable to such Leader under clause (b) of sub-section (1) in respect of tours referred to in that clause. Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, "return journey" means a journey from one place to another place and the return journey from such other place to the first mentioned place.'.
Salary and Allowances of Leaders of Opposition In Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> In the principal Act, after section 10, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- 9A. Exemption from inability to pay incometax on certain perquisites received by a Leader of the Opposition- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to a Minister under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" under section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 .'. 
