Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985. (2). It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> For section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted namely:- 3.Salaries etc, of officers of Parliament:- (1) There shall be paid to the Chairman of the Council of States of a salary of seven thousand five hundred rupees per mensum. (2) Each officer of Parliament other than the Chairman of the Council of States, shall be entitled to receive a salary per mensum and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as such officer at the same rates as are specified in section 3 of the Salaries, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 with respect to members of Parliament. (3) Each officer of Parliament, other than the Chairman of the Council of States, shall be entitled to receive a constituency allowance at the same rate as is specified under section 8 of the said Act, with respect to members of Parliament.".
Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 5.Sumptuary allowance-There shall be paid to the Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People a sumptuary allowance of one thousand rupees per mensum and to the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Speaker a sumptuary allowance of five hundred rupees per memsum.".
Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> In section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- '(1A) An officer of Parliament and any one member of his family accompanying him shall be entitled to travelling allowances in respect of not more than six return journeys performed during each year, within India, at the same rates at which travelling allowances are payable to such officer under clause (b) of sub-section (1) in respect of tours referred to in that clause. Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, "return journey" means a journey from one place to another place and the return journey from such other place to the first mentioned place.'.
Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> In the principal Act, after section 10, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- '10A.Exemption from liability to pay income tax on certain perquisites received by an officer of Parliament.- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 , the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance thereof) provided to an officer of Parliament under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computation of his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" under section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 .'. 
