Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section Preamble--> An Act for bringing under the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay the territories of Satara, certain villages and lapsed States in the Collectorate of Sholapur and in the Southern Maratha Country, 1 [...] and for excluding the village of Muchandi, Paragana Jath, from the operation of the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay. WHEREAS it is expedient for the better administration of justice in the territory of Satara that the Collectorate should be brought under the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay; and whereas certain villages which now belong to Government in Sholapur and the Southern Maratha Country have not yet been made subject to the operation of the general Regulations and Acts affecting the Bombay Presidency; 2 [...] and whereas the village of Muchandi, paragana Jath, in the territory of Satara, was inadvertently included in 3 Act VI of 1842, by which certain villages in the Southern Maratha Country were brought under the operation of the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay; It is hereby enacted as follows:- The following portion of the preamble was repealed and:- "And whereas lands in certain villages have been ceded by His Highness the Gaithewar and His Excellency the Nawab of Sucheen of the Government of Bombay for Railway purposes and it is expedient that such lands should be made subject to the Regulations and Acts of the said Presidency and whereas the District of North Canara which formed a part of the Presidency of Fort Saint George has with the exception of the Talooka of Cundapur, been detached from that Presidency and annexed to the Presidency of Bombay, from the sixteenth day of April 1862, and now forms part of the latter, and it is expedient that District so transferred should be brought under the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay." The words "certain lands ceded to the Government of Bombay for Railway purposes; and the District of North Canara, with the exception of the talooka Cundapoor were repealed by the Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895). The following portion of the preamble was repealed and:- "And whereas lands in certain villages have been ceded by His Highness the Gaithewar and His Excellency the Nawab of Sucheen of the Government of Bombay for Railway purposes and it is expedient that such lands should be made subject to the Regulations and Acts of the said Presidency and whereas the District of North Canara which formed a part of the Presidency of Fort Saint George has with the exception of the Talooka of Cundapur, been detached from that Presidency and annexed to the Presidency of Bombay, from the sixteenth day of April 1862, and now forms part of the latter, and it is expedient that District so transferred should be brought under the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay." Act 6 of 1842, relating to the Nepani Jagir, was repealed by the Laws Local Extent Act, 1874 (15 of 1874).
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 1--> The villages in the Collectorate of Satara as described in Schedule A 1 [...] shall from and after the first day of January, 1863, be subject to the Regulations and Acts which are or shall at any time hereafter be in force within the territories subject to the Presidency of Bombay. The words "to this Act" were repealed by the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1886 (Bom. 3 of 1886) Schedule B. This Schedule has been printed as an Appendix to the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1905 (Bom. I of 1904).
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 2--> The villages in the Collectorate of Sholapur and in the Southern Maratha Country described in Schedule B 1 [...] shall, from and after the passing of this Act, be subject to the Regulations and Acts which are shall at any time hereafter be in force within the territories subject to the Presidency of Bombay. The words "to this Act" were repealed by the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1886 (Bom. 3 of 1886) Schedule B. This Schedule has been printed as an Appendix to the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1905 (Bom. I of 1904).
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 3--> [Bar of Jurisdiction of Civil Courts in certain cases.] Rep. Act X of 1876.
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 4--> Clause 1st:- It is also further enacted that the privileges and exemptions provided in sections 3, 4 and 5, Regulation XXIX, A.D. 1827 and section 5 of Regulation VII, A.D. 1830 and Regulations I and XVI, A.D. 1831, as amended by section 6, 1 Act XIII of 1842, are equally applicable in the districts now brought under the Regulations and Acts to the persons of rank therein referred to, as they are in the Dekkhan, Khandesh and Southern Maratha Country. Clause 2nd.- [Process against Shrimant Sagunabai Ai Saheb Maharaj.] Rep. Act XVI of 1895. Act 13 of 1842 is not republished, having been repealed locally by the Bombay Land-revenue Code, 1879 (Bom. 5 of 1879).
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 5--> [Railway lands; North Kanara; saving of prior proceedings.] Rep. Act XV of 1874.
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 6--> [Railway lands; North Kanara; saving of prior proceedings.] Rep. Act XV of 1874.
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 7--> [Railway lands; North Kanara; saving of prior proceedings.] Rep. Act XV of 1874.
Satara, Sholapur and southern Maratha Country Laws Act, 1853_Section 8--> The village of Muchandi, paragana Jath, in the territory of Satara, included in 2Act VI of 1842, by which certain villages in the Southern Maratha Country were brought under the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay, shall from and after the passing of this Act, be excluded from the operation of the Regulations and Acts of the Presidency of Bombay, anything in the said 2Act VI of 1842 to the contrary in anywise notwithstanding. SCHEDULES 
