Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> An Act to establish standards of weight throughout British India. WHEREAS it is expedient to establish standards of weight throughout British India ; It is hereby enacted as follows :-
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Standards of Weight Act, 1939.1 (2) It extends to the whole of British India. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor General on the 28th March, 1939.
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 2--> (1) The unit for weight shall be the standard grain, that is to say, that weight which when multiplied by 1799 84585 is the weight in vacuo of the iridio-platinum cylinder in the custody of the Mint Master, Bombay, certified by the Standards Department of the British Board of Trade as having a weight of 1799-84585 grains in vacuo. (2) The standard grain shall be the only unit from which all other standard weights shall be ascertained.
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 3--> (1) There shall be the following standard weights, namely :- (a) the standard tola, being a weight of 180 standard grains; (b) the standard seer, being a weight of 80 standard tolas or 14,400 standard grains ; (c) the standard maund, being a weight of 40 standard seers; (d) the standard pound, being a weight of 7,000 standard grains; (e) the standard ounce, being one-sixteenth part of the weight of a standard pound ; (f) the standard hundred weight, being a weight of 112 standard pounds; (g) the standard ton, being a weight of 2,240 standard pounds. (2) No weight other than the weights set forth in subsection (1) and integral multiples or sub-multiples of any such weight shall be used as a standard weight.
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 4--> (1) The Central Government shall cause to be prepared one set of such of the standard weights specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 or multiples or sub-multiples thereof as the Central Government may consider expedient, and shall cause each weight of such set to be authenticated as having been ascertained from the standard grain, and shall deposit the set in such custody as the Central Government may think fit. (2) The Central Government shall cause similar sets of weights, similarly authenticated, to be prepared, and shall supply one set to each Provincial Government. (3) The Central Government shall cause similar sets of weights, similarly authenticated, to be prepared and shall supply one set to the Government of any Indian State or foreign settlement situated in India which applies for it and pays the price fixed by the Central Government.
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 5--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under this section may regulate- (a) the preparation of the sets of standard weights referred to in section 4 ; (b) the custody of the set of such weights which is to be maintained by the Central Government and the periodical verification and adjustment there-of; (c) the periodical verification and adjustment of the sets of standard weights supplied to Provincial and other Governments.
Standards of Weight Act, 1939_Section 6--> The Indian Weights and Measures of Capacity Act, 1871, in so far as it relates to the establishment of standards of weight, is hereby repealed. 
