Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section Preamble--> 1 An Act to regulate the price of sugar-cane intended for use in sugar factories.WHEREAS it is expedient, for the purpose of assuring to sugar-cane growers a fair price for their procedure to regulate the price at which sugar-cane intended to be used in the manufacture of sugar may be purchased by or for factories; It is hereby enacted as follows:-- . This Act has been Repealed in Bihar Bihar Act 7 of 1937, in U.P.by U.P.Act 1 of 1938 and in Punjab by Punjab Act 40 of 1953 This Act has been Repealed in Bihar Bihar Act 7 of 1937, in U.P.by U.P.Act 1 of 1938 and in Punjab by Punjab Act 40 of 1953
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Sugar-Cane Act, 1934. 1 (2) It extends to the whole of India, except Part B States. (3) This section shall come into force at once; the remaining sections of this Act shall come into force at once; the remaining sections of this Act shall come into force in any State on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in that behalf. Substituted by the A.O.for the former sub-section.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,--- (1) "controlled area", means any area specified in a notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 3; (2) "factory" means any premises (including the precincts thereof) wherein twenty or more workers are working or were working on any day of the preceding twelve months and in any part of which any manufacturing process connected with the production of sugar is being carried on or is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power; and (3) "sugar" means any form of sugar containing more than ninety per cent.of sucrose.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 3--> (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare any area specified in the notification to be a controlled area for the purpose of this Act. (2) 1 The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix a minimum price for the purchase in any controlled area of sugar-cane intended for use in any factory. (3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit in any controlled area the purchase of sugar-cane intended for use in any factory otherwise than from the grower of the sugar-cane or from a person licensed by the State Government to act as a purchasing agent. The words "Subject to the control of the Governor-General in Council " by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 .
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 4--> Not less than thirty days before the issue of any notification under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3, the State Government shall publish in the Official Gazette and in such other manner (if any) as it thinks fit a draft of the proposed notification specifying a date on or after which the draft of the proposed notification specifying a date on or after which the draft will be taken into consideration, and shall consider any person with respect to the draft before the date so specified.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 5--> Whoever in any controlled area purchases any sugar-cane intended for use in a factory at a price less than the minimum price fixed therefor by notification under sub-section 3 or in contravention of any prohibition made under sub-section (3) of section 3 of shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 6--> No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 5 except upon complaint made by order of, or under authority from, the District Magistrate.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 7--> (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects o this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for-- (a) the carrying out of inquires preliminary to the exercise of the powers conferred by section 3; (b) establishment Advisory Committee for any purpose connected with the administration of this Act and defining the powers, functions and procedure of such Committees; (c) the issue of licence to purchasing agents the fees for such licence, and the regulation of the purchase and sale of sugar-cane by and to such agents. (d) the organisation of growers of sugar-cane into societies for the sale of sugar-cane to factories; (e) the authorities by which any functions under this Act or the rules made thereunder are to be performed; and (f) the records, registers and accounts to be maintained for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act. (3) In making any rule under sub-section (1) or under clause (c) or clause (f) of sub-section (2) ,the State Government may provide that a breach of the rule shall, where no other penalty is provided by this Act, be punishable with fine not exceeding two thousand rupees.
Sugar-Cane Act, 1934_Section 8--> The State Government after previous publication may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules providing for the exemption of factories or any class of factories from the previous of this Act. 
