Vaccination Act, 1880_Section Preamble--> [Fn. 1] An Act to give power to prohibit inoculation and to make the vaccination of children compulsory in certain Municipalities and Cantonments. [Fn. 2] WHEREAS it is expedient to give power to prohibit inoculation and make the vaccination of children compulsory in certain municipalities and cantonments [Fn. 3] , ; It is hereby enacted as follows:-FOOTNOTES : 1. This Act has been amended in its application to- Ajmer by Act 6 of 1945 ;C.P.by Central Provinces Act 3 of 1915 , 6 of 1932 and 4 of 1933;This Act has been repealed in Coorg Act 4 of 1950 ; and in Punjab by Punjab Act 49 of 1953.2. The long title and preamble have been amended in U.P.and Central Provinces so as to include other local areas.3. The long title and preamble have been amended in U.P.and Central Provinces so as to include other local areas. Statement of Object Owing to the vast number of death caused every year by small-pox in India it has been found necessary to enact special measures for checking the growth and spread of the disease and preventing the ravages caused by it.  2. This Bill has been drafted with the object of providing the required law. Its provisions are intended to extend to the municipalities and military cantonments of all those provinces which do not possess local legislatures. But it has been left to the power of the Local Governments to extend the provisions of the proposed law to any municipality and, with the previous sanction of the Governor-General of India in Council, to any military cantonment of British forces situate in British India and to the power of the Governor-General in Council to extend them to any cantonment situate within the territories of Native States.  3. Most of the provisions of this Bill have been taken from the Bengal Inoculation Act of 1865 and the Bombay Vaccination Act of 1877, with such modifications as are deemed necessary in consideration of the circumstances of the provinces in which the proposed law is intended to be promulgated.  4. In preparing the draft, it has been especially kept in view that the proposed law should find popularity among the people, and not interfere with their customs and ways of life.  5. Provisions is made to enable municipalities to establish vaccination quarters and stations which would facilitate the vaccination of children and render the operation of the proposed law free from practical difficulties. In order to secure the success of proposed legislation, it has been provided that children may be vaccinated at their own residences, whilst the co-operation of Municipal Commissioners most of whom usually are Native gentlemen of respectability and local influence, required by the Bill is calculated to secure its popularity. For similar reasons, the provisions of sections 16 and 17 have been framed to restrict as far as possible the interference of the police; and, by entrusting Municipal Commissioners and the Superintendent of Vaccinators with the duty of keeping registers of the names of unprotected children and making investigations, it is expected that all unnecessary inconvenience will be avoided which would arise from enforcing the attendance of children and their guardians before Magistrates.  6. Considering the physical constitution and the notions of the natives of India, the minimum age for vaccination has been fixed at one year and the maximum at fourteen years.  7. In consideration of the prejudices (whether well-founded or not) of the Native gentry against the extraction of virus from the arms of their children the Bill expressly prohibits such a practice; and provision is made for securing the virus under special circumstances with the consent of the parents or guardians of children by payment of compensation.8. Special care has been taken in providing punishments for the contravention of the proposed law, and they have been restricted for the most part of pecuniary fines.  9. As the circumstances of different parts of the country are not alike it has been left to the discretion of the Local Governments, and in the case of military cantonments of British forces in Native States to the Governor-General of India in Council, to frame rules, not inconsistent with the proposed law for facilitating it practical working. At the same time the essential principles which should be kept in mind in framing such rules have been expressly specified in section 21 of the Bill.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Vaccination Act, 1880: and it shall apply only to such municipalities and cantonments 1 situate in 2 Uttar Pradesh, 3 Punjab as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956, the Central Provinces, Assam, Delhi, Ajmer and Coorg as it may be extended to in manner hereinafter provided. This provision has been amend in U.P and C.P so as to include other local areas. The original words have been successively amended by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 and Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 to read as above. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.2) Order, 1956, for "Punjab".
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 2--> In this Act unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) the expression "Municipal Commissioners" means a body of Municipal Commissioners or a Municipal Committee constituted under the provisions of any enactment for the time being in force; ("Municipal Commissioners") (2)"parent" means the father of a legitimate child and the mother of an illegitimate child: ("Parent") (3)"guardian" includes any person who has accepted or assumed the care or custody of any child: ("Guardian.") (4) "unprotected" child means a child who has not been protected from small- pox by having had that disease either naturally or by inoculation, or y having been successfully vaccinated, and who has not been certified under this Act to be insusceptible to vaccination: ("Unprotected child.") (5) "inoculation" means any operation performed with the object of producing the disease of small- pox in any person by means of variolous matter: ("Inoculation") (6) "vaccination-circle" means one of the parts into which a municipality or cantonment has been divided under this Act for the performance of vaccination: ("Vaccination circle.") (7) "vaccinator" means any vaccinator appointed under this Act to perform the operation of vaccination, or any private person authorized 1 in manner hereinafter provided to perform the same operation; and includes a "Superintendent of vaccination".("Vaccinator") (8)"vaccination-season" means the period from time to time fixed by the State Government for any local area under its administration by notification in the Official Gazette, during which alone vaccination may be performed under this Act.("Vaccination season.") The words" by the Local Government " omitted by Act 4 of 1914 , Section 2.and Schedule , Part I.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 3--> A majority in number of the persons present at a meeting of the Municipal Commissioner specially convened in this behalf may apply to the State Government to extend this Act to the whole or any part of a municipality, and thereupon the State Government may, if it thinks fit, by notification published in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to extend this Act in the manner proposed. Any inhabitant of such municipality or part thereof who objects to such extension in writing to the Secretary to the State Government and the State Government shall take such objection into consideration.When six weeks from the said publication have expired, the State Government, if no such objections have been sent as aforesaid, or (when such objection have been so sent) if in its opinion they are insufficient, may by like notification effect the proposed extension. 1 . In the U.P..a new Section 3A has been inserted by U.P.Act 2 of 1907 providing for extension of the Act to other local areas.In the Central Provinces Ss.3A, 3B, 3C and 3D have been inserted for a similar purpose by Central Provinces Acts 3 of 1915 , 6 of 1932 and 4 of 1933, respectively
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 4--> The State Government may 1 by notification in the Official Gazette, extend this Act to the whole or any part of a military cantonment. The words." subject to the Governor-General in Council " omitted by Act 38 of 1920 , Section 2 and Schedule I.The words "subject to the control" were Substituted by Act 4 of 1914, s, 2 and Schedule , Part I for" with the previous sanction."
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 5--> The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, withdraw any local area in a municipality 1 any local area in a cantonment from the operation of this Act. This Provision has been amended in the U.P.and the Central Provinces so as to include other local areas.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 6--> In any local area to which the provisions of this Act apply, inoculation shall be prohibited ; and Inoculated persons not to enter, without certificate, local area subject to Act - no person who has undergone inoculation shall enter such area before the lapse of forty days from the date of the operation, with out a certificate from a medical practitioner, of such class as the State Government may from time to time by written order authorize to grant such certificates, stating that such person is no longer likely to produce small- pox by contact or near approach.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 7--> .Every local area to which this Act applies shall be a vaccination-circle, or shall in manner hereinafter provided be divided in to a number of such circles; Vaccinators.- one or more vaccinators shall be appointed in manner hereinafter provided for each such circle; and Superintendent of vaccination.- one or more Superintendents of vaccination shall be appointed in manner hereinafter provided for each such local area.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 8--> 1 Commissioner may be written licence authorize private vaccinators to perform vaccination in any vaccination-circle, and may suspend or cancel any` such licence. Substituted by Act 4 of 1914 , Section 2 and Schedule , Part I, for " Local Government "
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 9--> When any unprotected child, having attained the age of 6 months, has resided for a period of one month during the vaccination season in any local area to which the provisions of this Act apply, and has not at the expiration of such period attained the age, if a boy, of fourteen years, and if a girl, of eight years, the parent or guardian of such child shall take it, or cause it to be taken, to a vaccinator to be vaccinated, or send for a vaccinator to vaccinate it. Vaccinator to vaccinate children, or deliver certificates of postponement.- Such vaccinator shall vaccinate the child and deliver to its parent or guardian a memorandum stating the date on which the vaccination has been performed and the date on which the child is to be inspected in order to ascertain the result of the operation, or shall, if he finds such child in a State unfit for vaccination, deliver to its parent or guardian, a certificate under his hand to the effect that the child is in a state unfit for vaccination for the whole or party of the current vaccination season.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 10--> The parent or guardian of every child which has been vaccinated under section nine shall on the date of inspection stated in the memorandum take the child or cause to top be taken to vaccinator; and such vaccinator shall then append to the memorandum a certificate stating that the child has been inspected and the result of such inspection.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 11--> When it is ascertained at the time of inspecting a child under section ten that the vaccination has been successful a certificate shall be delivered by the vaccinator to the parent or guardian of such child to that effect, and such child shall thereafter be deemed to be protected.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 12--> When it is ascertained as aforesaid that the vaccination has been unsuccessful the parent or guardian shall if the vaccinator so direct cause the child to be forthwith again vaccinated and subsequently inspected in manner hereinbefore provided.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 13--> A certificate granted under section nine showing the unfitness of a child for vaccination shall remain in force for the period stated therein, and on the termination of that period or if that period terminates after the vaccination-season is over, when the next vaccination season begins the parent or guardian of such child shall take the child or cause it to be taken to a vaccinator tot be vaccinated or procure its vaccination at his own house by a vaccinator: Renewal of postponement certificates.- Provided that, if the child is still found to be in a State unfit for vaccination the certificate granted under section nine shall be renewed..
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 14--> If the Superintendent of vaccination is of opinion that a child which has been three times unsuccessfully vaccinated is insusceptible of successful vaccination he shall deliver to the parent or guardian of such child a certificate under his hand to that effect; and the parent or guardian shall thenceforth not be required to cause the child to be vaccinated.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 15--> The vaccination of a child shall ordinarily be performed with such lymph as may be prescribed by the rules to be made under this Act : Provided that, 1st, if animal-lymph is so prescribed and the parent or guardian of any child desires that such child shall be vaccinated with human lymph, it shall be so vaccinated, and 2nd, if any local area in which animal - lymph is procurable human lymph is so prescribed and the parent or guardian of any child desires that such child should be vaccinated with animal-lymph, and tenders to the vaccinator the amount of such fee, not exceeding one rupee, as may be fixed by such rules in this behalf, such child shall be so vaccinated.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 16--> No fee shall be charged by any vaccinator except a private vaccinator to the parent or guardian of any child for any of the duties imposed on such vaccinator by or order under the provisions of this Act: Proviso.- Provided that it shall be lawful for a vaccinator to accept a fee for vaccinating a child by request of the parent or guardian elsewhere than in the circle for which such vaccinator is appointed.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 17--> 1 The Superintendent of vaccination, in addition to the other duties imposed on him by or under the provision of this Act shall ascertain whether all unprotected children, under the age of fourteen years if boys, and under his superintendence have been vaccinated; and, if he has reason to believe that the parent of any such child is bound by the provisions hereinbefore contained to procure the vaccination of such child or to present it for inspection, and h as omitted so to do, he shall personally go to the house of such parent or guardian, and there make enquiry, and shall if the fact is proved forthwith deliver to such parent or guardian or cause to be affixed to his house a notice requiring that the child be vaccinated, or (as the case may be) that it be presented for inspection, at a time and place to be specified in such notice. Section 17 has been amended in Central Provinces and Berar by Act 44 of 1947 Order by Magistrate when notice not complied with.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 18--> If such notice is not complied with the Superintendent of vaccination shall report the matter the 1 Magistrate of the District or such Magistrate as the State Government or the Magistrate of the District may from time to time appoint in this behalf; and the Magistrate receiving such report shall summon the parent or guardian of the child and demand his explanation and shall if such explanation is not satisfactory, make an order in writing directing such parent or guardian to comply with the notice before a date specified in the order. Procedure when order not obeyed.- If on such date the order has not been obeyed, the Magistrate shall summon the parent or guardian before him and unless just cause or excuse is shown, shall deal with the disobedience as an offences punishable under section twenty-two. Magistrates to be non- officials.- The Magistrates appointed under this section shall, as far as is conveniently practicable, 2 not be paid servants of Government. Read District Magistrate, see the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act 5 of 1898), Section 3, (2). Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 , for 'be Natives of India, and not paid servants of the Crown'.The last word Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for 'Govt.'.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 19--> When this Act has been applied to any municipality or any part thereof the Municipal Commissioners may from time to time, make rules consistent with this Act for the proper enforcement of this Act within the limits to which it applies, Such rules shall be made in the manner in which under the law for the time being in force the 1 Municipal Commissioners make rules or bye- laws for the regulation of other matters within the limits of the municipality and shall when confirmed by the 2 Commissioner and published in the Official Gazette, have the force of law: Provided that the 3 Commissioner may at any time rescind or modify any such rule. 4 Inserted by Act 4 of 1914 , Section 2 and Schedule , Part I. Substituted by Section 2 and Schedule ., Part I, ibid., for 'L.G'. Substituted by Section 2 and Schedule ., Part I, ibid., for 'L.G'. After this section a new Section 19A has been Inserted in the U.P.and two new ss.19A and 19B in the Central Provinces by U.P.Act 2 of 1907 and Central Provinces Acts 3 of 1915 and 6 of 1932, respectively.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 20--> When this Act has been applied to any cantonment or any part thereof, the State Government may, from time to time, 1 make such rules. The words 'subject to the control of the Governor-General in Council ' omitted by Act 38 of 1920 , Section 2and Schedule I.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 21--> The rules to be made for any local area under section nineteen or 1 twenty may, among other matters, provide for--- (a) the division of such local area into circles for the performance of vaccination; (b) the appointment of a place in each vaccination-circle as a public vaccine-station, and the posting of some distinguishing mark in a conspicuous place near such station ; (c) the qualifications to be required of public vaccinators and Superintendents of vaccination; (d) the authority with which their appointment, suspension and dismissal shall rest ; (e) the time of attendance of public vaccinators at the vaccine stations, and their residence within the limits of the vaccination-circles ; (f) the distinguishing mark or badge to be worn by them; (g) the amount of fee chargeable by private vaccinators, and their guidance generally in the performance of their duties ;. (h) the facilities to be afforded to people for procuring the vaccination of their children at their own houses ; (i) the grant and form of certificates of successful vaccination of unfitness for vaccination or of insusceptibility of vaccination; the nature of the lymph to be used and the supply of a sufficient quantity of such lymph ; (k) the fee to be paid for vaccination with animal-lymph under section fifteen; (l) the fee to be paid to a public vaccinator for vaccinating a child beyond the vaccination-circle at the request of the parent or guardian of the said child; (m) the preparation and keeping of registers showing-- the names of children born in such local area on or after the date of the application of this Act; the names of unprotected children born in such local area previous to the application of this Act, and who are, at the time this Act is applied, under the age of fourteen years if boys, and of eight years if girls; the names of unprotected boys and girls respectively under those ages brought within such local area at any time after the application of this Act and who have resided there for a month ; the result of each vaccination or its postponement, and the delivery of certificates , if any; 2 (n) the assistance to be given by the Municipal Commissioners and municipal servants in the preparation of these registers, and in other matters,; and (o) the preparation of vaccination-reports and returns. The word and letter "nineteen A' have been Inserted at this place in the U.P.and the words and letters 'nineteen A, nineteen B'.have been Inserted in the Central Provinces by U.P.Act2 of 1907 and Central Provinces Acts 3 of 1915 and 6 of 1932, respectively. This Clause has been amended in the Central Provinces by Central Provinces Act 6 of 1932, so as to include members of District Boards/Councils and the servants of those local bodies.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 22--> Whoever commits any of the undermentioned offences (that is to say) :-- (a) violates the provisions of section six, (b) neglects without just excuse to obey an order made under section eighteen, (c) breaks any of the rules made under section nineteen 1 or twenty, or (d) neglects without just cause to obey an order made under section eighteen after having been previously convicted of so neglecting to obey a similar order made in respect of the same child, shall be punished as follows (that is to say) :-- in the case of the offence mentioned in clause (a), with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees or with both; in the case of the offence mentioned in clause (b) and (c), with fine which may extend to fifty rupees; and in the case of the offence mentioned in clause (d), with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. The word and letter 'nineteen A' have been Inserted at this place in the U.P.and the words and letters 'nineteen A, nineteen B' have been Inserted in the Central Provinces by U.P.Act 2 of 1907 and Central Provinces Acts 3 of 1915 and 6 of 1932, respectively.
Vaccination Act, 1880_Section 23--> The amount of all fees 1 realized, and the amount of all expenditure incurred, under this Act in any municipality shall respectively be credited to and paid from the Municipal Fund. 2 The words ' and fines' omitted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 . This section has been amended in the U.P., the Punjab and the Central Provinces by U.P.Act 2 of 1907, Punjab Acts 9 of 1925 and 2 of 1929, and Central Provinces Act 6 of 1932 , respectively so as to include other local areas and funds 
