Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> 
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 1--> (1) This Act shall be called the Value Added Tax Act, 2002. (2) It extends to the whole of the State. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different parts of the Act. (4) A tax to be known as value added tax (hereafter referred to as the tax) shall be charged in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (5) The tax shall be charged on the sale or purchase of goods made after such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 2--> (1) "Agriculture" with its grammatical variations includes horticulture, the raising of crops, grass or garden produce and grazing but does not include dairy farming, poultry farming, stock breeding and mere cutting of wood. (2) "Agriculturist" means a person who cultivates land personally. (3) "Agricultural produce or horticultural produce" shall not be deemed to include tea, beedi leaves, raw cashew, timber, wood, tamarind and such produce, except coffee as has been subject to any physical, chemical or other process for being made fit for consumption, save mere cleaning, grading, sorting or drying. (4) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under the Appellate Tribunal Act. (5) "Assessment" means an assessment made under this Act and includes a reassessment. (6) "Business" includes - (a) any trade, commerce, manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce or manufacture, whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern is carried on in furtherance of gain or profit and whether or not any gain or profit accrues therefrom; and (b) any transaction in connection with, or incidental or ancillary to, such trade, commerce, manufacture, adventure or concern. (7) "Capital goods" means plant, including cold storage and similar plant, machinery, goods vehicles, and equipment, whose total cost is not less than a figure to be notified by the Government or the Commissioner, or any other goods as may be notified by the Government or the Commissioner, and used in the furtherance of any business. (8) "Commissioner" means any person appointed to be a Commissioner of Commercial Taxes under section 55 of this Act. (9) "Company" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act No. 1 of 1956). (10) "To cultivate" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means to carry on any agricultural operation; (11) "To cultivate personally" means to cultivate land on one's own account, - (a) by one's own labour, or (b) by the labour of one's own family, or (c) by servants on wages payable in cash or kind but not in crop share, or by hired labour under one's personal supervision or the personal supervision of any member of one's family. Explanations. - (1) A person who is a widow or a minor or is subject to any physical or mental disability shall be deemed to cultivate the land personally if it is cultivated by her or his servants or by hired labour. (2) In the case of undivided family, the land shall be deemed to have been cultivated personally, if it is cultivated by any member of such family. (12) "Dealer" means any person who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods, directly or otherwise, whether for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, and includes - (a) an industrial, commercial or trading undertaking of the Government, the Central Government, a State Government of any State other than the State, a local authority, company, a Hindu undivided family, an Aliyasanthana Family, a firm, a society, a club or an association which carries on such business; (b) a casual trader; (c) a commission agent, a broker or del credere agent or an auctioneer or any other mercantile agent by whatever name called, who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any principal; (d) a non-resident dealer or an agent of a non-resident dealer, a local branch of a firm or company or association situated outside the State; (e) a person who sells goods produced by him by manufacture or otherwise; (f) a person engaged in the business of transfer otherwise than in pursuance of a contract of property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; (g) a person engaged in the business of transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract; (h) a person engaged in the business of delivery of goods on hire purchase or any system of payment of instalments; (i) a person engaged in the business of transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; Explanations. - (1) A society (including a co-operative society), club or firm or an association which, whether or not in the course of business, buys, sells, sale of goods or distributes goods from or to its members for cash, or for deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or a statutory body which whether or not, in the course of business, buy, sell, supply or distribute goods, directly or otherwise, for cash or deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of this Act. (3) In respect of the transfer of the right to use feature films, the person who transfers such right to the exhibitor and from whom the exhibitor derives the right to make such use shall be deemed to be the dealer under this clause. (4)(a) An agriculturist who sells exclusively agricultural produce grown on land cultivated by him personally or a person who is exclusively engaged in poultry farming and sells the products of such poultry farm shall not be deemed to be a dealer within the meaning of this clause; (b) Where the agriculturist is a company and is selling pepper, cardamom, rubber, timber, wood, raw cashew or coffee grown on land cultivated by it personally, directly or otherwise, such company, shall be deemed to be a dealer in respect of turnovers relating to sales of such produce. (13) "Document" includes written or printed records of any sort, title deeds and data stored electronically in whatever form. (14) "Export" means a sale of goods taking place in the course of export of the goods out of the territory of India only if the sale either occasions such export or is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods after the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India and includes the last sale of any goods preceding the sale occasioning the export of those goods out of the territory of India shall also be deemed to be in the course of such export, if such last sale took place after, and was for the purpose of complying with the agreement or order for or in relation to such export. (15) "Goods" means all kinds of movable property (other than newspaper, actionable claims, stocks and shares and securities) and includes livestock, all materials, commodities and articles (including goods, as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract or those goods to be used in the fitting out, improvement or repair of movable property, and all growing crops, grass or things attached to, or forming part of the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale. (16) "Goods vehicle" means any kind of vehicle used for carriage of goods either solely or in addition to passengers (other than aeroplanes and rail coaches) and includes push cart, animal drawn cart, tractor-trailer and the like. (17) "Government" means the Government of the State. (18) "Import" means sale or purchase in the course of the import of goods into the territory of India if the sale or purchase either occasions such import or is effected by transfer of documents of title to the goods before the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India and includes procurement of goods from outside the State either as a result of purchase or otherwise. (19) "Input tax" has the meaning prescribed by section 7 of this Act. (20) "Maximum retail price" (or "MRP") shall mean the price marked on the package in which the goods are contained. (21) "Notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (22) "Output tax' has the meaning prescribed by section 7 of this Act. (23) "Place of business" means any place where a dealer purchases or sells goods and includes, - (a) any warehouse, godown or other place where a dealer stores or processes his goods; (b) any place where a dealer produces or manufactures goods; (c) any place where a dealer keeps his books of account; and in any case where a dealer carries on business through an agent (by whatever name called), the place of business of such agent. (24) "Prescribed" means prescribed by the Rules made under this Act. (25) "Prescribed authority" means an officer of the Commercial Taxes Department, authorised by the Government or the Commissioner to perform such duties as may be assigned to him. (26) "Prevailing market price" shall mean the published wholesale price in force in the market at about the time proceedings are taken to purchase such goods. (27) "Published" shall mean published in any newspaper, journal or periodical or notified by a market committee or any such authority. (28) "Registered dealer" means a dealer registered under this Act. (29) "Resale" means sale of purchased goods, - (a) in the same form in which they were purchased; or (b) which have not been subject to a manufacturing process after the relevant purchase. (30) "Retailer" means a dealer who ordinarily makes sales directly to consumers within the State, but excludes any dealer who purchases or obtains goods from outside the State or from outside the territory of India. (31) "Return" means any return prescribed or otherwise required to be furnished by or under this Act. (32) "Rules" means rules made under this Act. (33) "Sale" with all its grammatical variation and cognate expressions means every transfer of the property in goods (other than by way of a mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge) by one person to another in the course of trade or business for cash or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration and includes, - (a) a transfer otherwise than in pursuance of a contract of property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; (b) a transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract; (c) a delivery of goods on hire purchase or any system of payment by instalments; (d) a transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration; Explanations. - (1) A transfer of property involved in the sale or distribution of goods by a society (including a co-operative society), club, firm, or any association to its members, for cash, or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, whether or not in the course of business, shall be deemed to be a sale for the purposes of this Act. (2) Every transaction of sale by way of or as a part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article of human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) where such sale or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the sale and purchase of those goods by the person to whom such sale is made. (3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, two independent sales or purchases shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have taken place, (a) when the goods are transferred from a principal to his selling agent and from the selling agent to the purchaser, or (b) when the goods are transferred from the seller to a buying agent and from the buying agent to his principal, if the agent is found in either of the cases aforesaid, - (i) to have sold the goods at one rate and to have passed on the sale proceeds to his principal at another rate; or (ii) to have purchased the goods at one rate and to have passed them on to his principal at another rate; or (iii) not to have accounted to his principal for the entire collections or deductions made by him in the sales or purchases effected by him on behalf of his principal; or (iv) to have acted for a fictitious or non-existent principal. (4) Every transfer of property in goods by the Central Government, any State Government, a statutory body or a local authority for cash or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, whether or not in the course of business, shall be deemed to be a sale for the purposes of this Act. (5) Every transaction of sale by way of or as a part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating), where such sale or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the sale and purchase of those goods by the person to whom such sale is made. (34) "State Representative" means any person appointed to be the State Representative under section 53 and includes an officer empowered by the Commissioner under that section to perform the functions of a State representative. (35) "Taxable dealer" means a dealer who is registered, or is required to be registered, under sections 19 and 21 of this Act. (36) "Taxable sale" means any sale of goods which is taxable under the provisions of this Act. (37) "Tax invoice" means a document specified under section 26 listing goods sold with price, quantity and other information as prescribed by the Rules made under this Act. (38) "Tax period" means such periods as may be prescribed by Rules made under this Act. (39) "Taxable turnover" means the turnover on which a dealer shall be liable to pay tax as determined after making such deductions from his total turnover and in such manner as may be prescribed, but shall not include the turnover of purchase or sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of export of the goods out of the territory of India or in the course of import of the goods into the territory of India. (40) "Total turnover" means the aggregate turnover in all goods of a dealer at all places of business in the State, whether or not the whole or any portion of such turnover is liable to tax, including the turnover of purchase or sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of export of the goods out of the territory of India or in the course of import of the goods into the territory of India. (41) "Transaction" means a sale of goods from one dealer to another in the course or furtherance of business for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration. (42) "Turnover" means the aggregate amount for which goods are sold or distributed or delivered or otherwise disposed of in any of the ways referred to in clause 33 by a dealer, either directly or through another, on his own account or on account of others, whether for cash or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, and subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed, in this behalf, - (a) The amount for which goods are sold include any sums charged for anything done by the dealer in respect of the goods sold at the time of or before the delivery thereof. (b) Where for accommodating a particular customer, a dealer obtains goods from another dealer and immediately disposes of the same to the said customer, the sale in respect of such goods shall be included in the turnover of the latter dealer but not in that of the former. (43) "Works contract" includes any agreement for carrying out for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, the building, construction, manufacture, processing, fabrication, erection, installation, fitting out, improvement, modification, repair or commissioning of any movable or immovable property. (44) "Year" means the year commencing on the First day of April.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 3--> (1) The tax shall be leviable on every sale of goods in the State by a taxable dealer, in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (2) The tax shall also be leviable and payable by every taxable dealer on the sale of taxable goods to him by a person who is not liable to be registered, if such taxable dealer, - (a) consumes or uses such goods as inputs in goods specified in schedule I to this Act, or (b) despatches those goods or uses such goods as inputs in other goods that are despatched outside the State, other than as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. (3) Goods specified in Schedule I to this Act shall be exempt.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 4--> (1) Every dealer who is or is required to be registered as specified and further subject to the conditions specified in sections 19 and 21 below, shall collect, account for and pay, on his taxable turnover relating to all taxable sales, tax at the standard rate as shall be specified by the Government and, except as provided by sub-section (2) below and section 3(3) above and sections 14 and 18 below, the standard rate applies to all taxable sales. (2) Rates of tax shown in Schedule II shall apply to the goods described in that Schedule.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 5--> (1)(a) The sale or purchase of goods, other than in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of import or export, shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to have taken place in the State wherever the contract of sale or purchase might have been made, if the goods are within the State, - (i) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time the contract of sale or purchase is made; and (ii) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time of their appropriation to the contract of sale or purchase by the seller or by the purchaser, whether the assent of the other party is prior or subsequent to such appropriation. (2) Where there is a single contract of sale or purchase of goods situated at more places than one, the provisions of clause (a) shall apply as if there were separate contracts in respect of goods at each of such places. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (Central Act No. 3 of 1930), for the purpose of this Act, the transfer of property of goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract shall be deemed to have taken place in the State, if the goods are within the State at the time of such transfer, irrespective of the place where the agreement for works contract is made, whether the assent of the other party is prior or subsequent to such transfer. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (Central Act No. 3 of 1930), for the purpose of this Act, the transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) shall be deemed to have taken place in the State, if such goods are for use within the State irrespective of the place where the contract of transfer of the right to use the goods is made.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 6--> Notwithstanding anything contained in the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (Central Act No. 3 of 1930), for the purpose of this Act, the time of sale of goods shall be deemed to be the earliest of the following :- (a) Issue of the tax invoice. (b) Receipt of payment, in full or in part. (c) Transfer of title or possession of the goods or incorporation of the goods in the course of execution of any works contract.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 7--> (1) Output tax in relation to any dealer means the tax leviable and payable under this Act in respect of any taxable sale of goods made by that dealer in the course of his business, and includes tax payable by a commission agent in respect of taxable sales of goods made on behalf of such dealer. (2) Subject to sections 12, 14 and 15 below, input tax in relation to any dealer means the tax collected or payable under this Act on the sale to him of any goods for use in the course of his business. (3) Subject to sections 12, 14 and 15 below, the net tax payable by a dealer in respect of each tax period shall be the amount of output tax payable by him in that period less the input tax claimed by him in that period and shall be accounted for in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V. (4) When calculating the amount of tax to be paid or rebated, no deduction for input tax may be made unless a tax invoice, debit note or credit note, in relation to a sale, has been produced in accordance with section 28 or section 29 and is held by the registered dealer taking the deduction at the time any return in respect of the sale is furnished. (5) Subject to sections 12, 14 and 15 below, where the amount calculated under sub-section (3) is a negative amount, it will be adjusted or refunded together with interest, as may be prescribed.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 8--> Input tax shall not be deducted in calculating output tax payable, in respect of, - (1) tax collected on purchases attributable to exempt goods as specified in Schedule I; (2) tax collected on purchase of capital goods, except as provided by sub-section (1) of section 9 below; (3) tax collected on goods as specified in Schedule III and goods as may be notified by the Government or the Commissioner; (4) tax collected on purchases attributable to goods despatched to a place outside the State not as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade, except as provided by section 12 below; (5) tax collected on purchases attributable to naptha, liquified petroleum gas, furnace oil, light diesel oil, superior kerosene oil, kerosene, and any other petroleum product used as fuel in generation of power or heat, except as provided in section 12 below; (6) purchases by retailers registered under the Composition scheme under section 14 below; (7) a commission agent selling goods on behalf of any other dealer.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 9--> (1) Deduction of input tax shall be allowed to the taxable dealer in respect of the purchase of capital goods wholly for use in the sale of taxable goods or for use in the furtherance of his business. (2) Deduction of input tax under this section shall be allowed only after commencement of commercial production or sale by the taxable dealer and shall be apportioned over a prescribed period, as prescribed in rules made under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 10--> Deduction of input tax shall be allowed to the taxable dealer, subject to the restrictions of section 8, in respect of tax charged to him by a seller on taxable sale of goods made to him for the purpose of the business within three months prior to the date of his registration provided that the goods are in stock at the date of registration.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 11--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force including this Act, every person who, for an agreed commission or brokerage, buys or sells on behalf of any principal who is a resident of the State shall be liable to tax under this Act at the rate or rates leviable thereunder in respect of such sale, notwithstanding that such principal is not a dealer or that the turnover of sale relating to such principal is less than the minimum specified in sub-section (1) of section 21. (2) The principal shall not be liable to tax on his turnover in respect of which the agent is liable to tax or taxes under sub-section (1), and the burden of proving that the turnover has been effected through an agent liable to tax under the said sub-section, shall be on such principal. (3) Without prejudice to his other rights, the agent who pays tax under sub-section (1) may retain out of the moneys payable to his principal, a sum equal to the amount of tax paid by him.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 12--> Deduction of input tax shall be allowed on the difference between the higher rate of input tax charged and the rate specified in Schedule IIB on purchases specified in sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 8 above.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 13--> (1) Every registered dealer liable to pay tax under the Act shall collect such tax at the rate or rates at which he is liable to pay tax under the provision of this Act. (2) The Central Government, a State Government, a statutory body or a local authority shall in respect of any sale of goods effected by them be entitled to collect by way of tax any amount which a registered dealer effecting such sale would have been entitled to collect by way of tax under this Act and shall pay the tax so collected into the Government Treasury.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 14--> (1) Subject to such conditions and in such circumstances as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may, if any retailer, whose total turnover in a year does not exceed rupees .... ? lakh or any dealer who executes works contracts and who is liable to pay tax under section 4 so elects, accept in lieu of the net amount of tax payable by him under this Act, during any year, by way of composition, an amount at the rate or rates as may be prescribed. (2) This sub-section (1) shall not apply to such dealer or class of dealers as may be prescribed. (3) Any dealer eligible for composition of tax under sub-section (1) and who estimates his total turnover for a year to be not more than Rupees ..... ? lakh may report to the prescribed authority, exercise of his option for payment of the amount as may be prescribed under this section, and he shall pay such amount due in advance during the year in instalments as prescribed and shall submit a return as specified in section 32. (4) Any dealer eligible for composition of tax under sub-section (1) shall not be permitted to claim any input tax on any purchases.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 15--> Where a dealer makes taxable sales and sales of exempt goods as specified in section 3 above, apportionment between such sale of goods and attribution of input tax shall be made in accordance with Rules made under this Act or by special methods to be approved by the Commissioner or any other authorised person, after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 16--> Transitional provisions covering relief on sales tax on stock in hand for manufacture and resale at the date of commencement of this Act shall be prescribed in Rules made under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 17--> (1) Where deduction of input tax depended upon the use to which goods were to be put or upon the fact that they would be sold in inter-State trade or exported and those goods are not so used, sold or exported, any input tax deducted becomes repayable. The amount to be paid is the input tax deducted with the addition of interest at the rate of 2% per month for the period commencing from the date on which those goods were first purchased to the date those goods were put to that other use and ending on the date on which the necessary adjustment is made or the sum over-claimed is repaid, whichever is the later. (2) Where such goods have been wholly or mainly used in taxable sale of goods prior to the change of use, tax will be calculated on the prevailing market value of such goods at the time of change of use.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 18--> When calculating the output tax in relation to any dealer, sale of goods in the course of export from the territory of India shall be deemed as taxable at the zero-rate.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 19--> Tax paid under this Act by any dealer on purchase of inputs in respect of on any goods sold in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be available for deduction, as provided under section 7, in output tax payable by such dealer.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 20--> Tax collected under this Act on purchases made by specialised agencies of United Nations Organisation and Consulates or Embassies of any other country located in the State shall be reimbursed in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. CHARTER III REGISTRATION
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 21--> (1) Every dealer whose taxable turnover in the year preceding and every dealer whose taxable turnover in any twelve consecutive months after the date from which the tax shall be levied, in accordance with sub-section (5) of section 1 and section 3 above, exceeds Rupees ..... ? lakhs, shall be liable to be registered, and report such liability on such date or at the end of the month following the month in which his taxable turnover in any twelve consecutive months first exceeds Rupees ..... ? Lakhs. (2) Every dealer shall register forthwith if there are reasonable grounds for believing that his taxable turnover during any month is likely to exceed the limit prescribed under sub-section (1) Rupees ..... ? lakhs. (3) Every dealer to whom a business or part of a business is transferred by another dealer who is liable to be registered under this Act, shall apply for registration from the date of that transfer, if he is not already registered. (4) Every dealer liable to register under sub-sections (2) or (3) above shall report his liability to be registered in the prescribed manner at the end of the month on which that liability arises. (5) Every dealer who obtains or brings goods from outside the State whether as a result of purchase or otherwise shall be liable to be registered after such first purchase or procurement and shall report such liability at the end of the month in which such purchase or procurement takes place. (6) Every dealer who exports goods from the territory of India is liable to register after the first export and shall report such liability at the end of the month in which such export takes place. (7) Every dealer who effects sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or despatches goods to a place outside the State is liable to register after the first sale or despatch and shall report such liability at the end of the month in which such sale or despatch takes place. (8) Every dealer liable to register under sub-section (1) above, shall be liable to collect and pay tax on his taxable turnover after the date of registration. (9) In determining whether a person is liable to be registered under sub-section (1) above the prescribed authority may have regard to the value of taxable sales made by any other person where both persons are associates. Where the prescribed authority deems that any business has been deliberately broken up into smaller businesses to avoid registration the prescribed authority may issue a notice requiring those businesses to be registered as one business entity.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 22--> A dealer who, though not liable to pay tax under this Act, desires to register voluntarily shall make an application to the prescribed authority in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed, giving correct and complete particulars.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 23--> Where a dealer liable to be registered has failed to inform the competent authority of his liability to be registered, he shall be deemed to be registered, and shall be registered by the prescribed authority under section 21 above, as if an application to register had been made.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 24--> (1) The application to register under sections 21 or 22, specifying the time and manner of the application, shall be prescribed in Rules made under this Act. (2) On receipt of an application to register under Sections 21 or 22, the prescribed authority shall register any such dealer and grant him a certificate of registration, if he is satisfied that the applicant is a bona fide dealer and that he complies with the requirements of this Act, with effect from the first day of the month following the month in which such application is made or from such earlier date as may be agreed between them, and tax shall be collectable and payable from that date. (3) The prescribed authority may, after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, refuse to grant a certificate of registration to the applicant for any goods and sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 25--> (1) The prescribed authority may, for the proper payment of the tax, from time to time demand from a registered dealer or from a dealer who has applied for registration under this Act, reasonable security not exceeding a prescribed amount to be paid in the prescribed manner. (2) The prescribed authority may, by order, forfeit the whole or any portion of the security furnished by a dealer, - (a) for collection of any amount of tax, interest or penalty payable by the dealer; or (b) if the dealer is found to have misused any prescribed certificate or declaration or has failed to keep retain them in the prescribed manner. (3) No order shall be passed under sub-section (2) above, without giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 26--> (1) In any case where, - (a) any business has been discontinued, transferred fully or otherwise disposed of after a certificate of registration has been issued; or (b) the taxable turnover of sale of goods of a registered dealer has, during any period of twelve months, not exceeded rupees ..... ? Lakhs, or (c) a dealer registered under this act dies, and for any other good and sufficient reason, the prescribed authority may, either of his own motion or on the application of the dealer, or in the case of death, the estate of a deceased dealer, in the prescribed manner, cancel the registration certificate from such date, including any anterior date, as he considers fit having regard to the circumstances of the case. (2) The cancellation of a certificate of registration under this section shall not affect the liability of the dealer to pay tax, any penalty and interest due for any period prior to the date of cancellation whether such tax, penalty and interest is assessed before the date of cancellation but remains unpaid, or is assessed thereafter. (3) On cancellation of registration, in any case, where the dealer has availed deduction of input tax, any taxable stocks and assets held shall be deemed to have been sold and tax shall be payable on such goods at their prevalent market price, except where the business is transferred as a growing concern to another registered dealer and in accordance with the Rules prescribed under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 27--> (1) If any of the following circumstances arise, - (a) the registered dealer sells or otherwise disposes of his business or any part thereof; or (b) there is any other change in the ownership of the business including any change in the status; or (c) the registered dealer discontinues his business or changes his place of business or opens a new place of business; or (d) the registered dealer changes the name or nature of the business, the registered dealer or, in case of his death his legal representative, shall within the prescribed time, inform the prescribed authority accordingly. (2) Where a change of ownership of the business transfers it from one taxable dealer to another, the taxable dealer succeeding to the business shall surrender the certificate of registration already issued in respect of the business and apply for registration afresh in the prescribed manner. (3) On any application for amendment of a certificate of registration or upon his own motion, the prescribed authority may amend the registration certificate of the dealer or reject the application within thirty days of the date of receipt of such application, after making such enquiry as he deems fit and after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard. (4) Any amendment of a certificate shall take effect from the date of the event referred to in sub-section (1) where applicable and in all other cases the amendment shall take effect from the date of application.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 28--> (1) A taxable dealer making a taxable sale shall provide at the time of the sale, an original tax invoice for the sale, containing the particulars prescribed, and shall retain a copy thereof. (2) An original tax invoice shall not be provided to any taxable dealer in circumstances other than those specified in sub-section (1), and in a case of loss of the original, a duplicate may be provided where such taxable dealer so requests.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 29--> (1) Where a tax invoice has been issued and the amount shown as tax charged in that tax invoice exceeds the tax properly chargeable in respect of the sale, the taxable dealer making the sale shall provide the recipient of the sale with a credit note containing the particulars as prescribed. (2) Where a tax invoice has been issued and the tax properly chargeable in respect of the sale exceeds the amount shown as tax charged in that tax invoice, the taxable dealer making the sale shall provide the recipient of the goods with a debit note containing the particulars as prescribed. (3) Any registered dealer who receives or issues credit notes or debit notes shall modify his return for the period in which the credit note or debit note is issued and pay any tax due on such return.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 30--> (1) Every registered dealer and every dealer liable to pay tax under this Act shall keep and maintain a true and correct account of all his purchases, sales, other disposals and stock showing the values of goods subject to each rate of tax under this Act including input tax paid and output tax payable. (2) A dealer dealing in both taxable and exempt goods shall keep and maintain records relating to his total purchases, sales, disposals and stock of all goods. (3) If the Commissioner or prescribed authority is of the opinion that the accounts kept and maintained by any dealer or any class of dealers do not sufficiently enable him to verify the returns required under this Act or to make any assessment under it, he may, by order, require any dealer or class of dealers, to keep such accounts, including records of manufacture, sales, purchases, disposals or transfers of stock other than by way of sales in such form and in such manner as he may direct. (4) If the Commissioner considers that any class of dealers is not in a position to keep and maintain accounts in accordance with the provisions of this section, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt such class of dealers from the operation of the provisions of this section. (5) Every dealer whose total turnover in a year exceeds rupees ..... ? lakhs shall have his accounts audited by a Chartered Accountant or a Tax Practitioner subject to such conditions and such limits as may be prescribed and shall submit to the prescribed authority a copy of the audited statement of accounts and prescribed documents in the prescribed manner.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 31--> (1) Every dealer required under this Act to keep and maintain books of account or other records shall retain them until the expiration of five years after the end of the year to which they relate or for such other period as may be prescribed or until the assessment reaches finality, whichever is later. (2) Where such dealer is a party to an appeal or reference under this Act, he shall retain, until the appeal or reference and any appeal therefrom is finally disposed of, every record and accounting document that pertains to the subject-matter of the appeal or reference.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 32--> Every dealer required to keep and maintain records and accounts pursuant to section 30 and who does so by electronic means shall retain them in the electronically readable format for the retention period specified in section 31.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 33--> Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of this Act, the prescribed authority may, for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of this Act, by notice, require any person to provide the prescribed authority, within such reasonable time as is stipulated in the notice, with any information or additional information, including a return under this Act, or any other document, whether inside or outside the State.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 34--> (1) Subject to sub-sections (2) to (6) below, every registered dealer shall furnish returns in such form and manner, including electronic methods, and shall pay any tax payable on such returns within twenty days of the end of the month preceding or as may be prescribed. (2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the form and manner in which returns may be required to be furnished may include requirements as to, - (a) the periods to be covered by the returns; (b) the dates by which they are to be submitted; (c) the authority to whom they are to be submitted; and (d) the place of business. (3) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, the prescribed authority may permit or require any registered dealer, - (a) to furnish returns for such different periods; or (b) to furnish consolidated returns relating to all or any of the places of business of the dealer in the state; or (c) to furnish separate branch returns where the registered dealer has more than one place of business. (4) If any dealer having furnished a return under this Act, discovers any omission or incorrect statement therein, he shall furnish a revised return subject to sub-section (2) of section 69.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 35--> (1) Every dealer shall be liable to pay simple interest on any sum which should have been declared on a return but which has been omitted from it, unless that omission is corrected within three months of the omission subject to sub-section (2) of section 69. Such interest is payable from the date the tax should have been declared and the dealer shall declare his liability to pay that interest on a return in such form and manner as may be prescribed. (2) If a dealer required to furnish a return under this Act, - (a) fails to pay any amount of tax or additional tax declared on the return; or (b) furnishes a revised return more than three months after tax became due, declaring additional tax, but fails to pay any interest declared to be due under sub-section (1); or (c) fails to declare any tax or interest which should have been declared; or (d) fails to make a return; such dealer shall be liable to pay interest in respect of the tax and additional tax payable together with interest payable under sub-section (1) declared by him or the tax payable and interest payable under sub-section (1) for the period for which he has failed to furnish a return.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 36--> (1) The rate of simple interest payable under section 35 shall be 2% per month from the date the tax or interest so payable had become due to the date of its payment or to the date of any assessment under this Act, whichever is earlier. (2) For the purpose of this section interest in respect of parts of a month shall be computed proportionately and month shall mean any period of thirty days.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 37--> (1) Where a taxable dealer fails to furnish his return by the date provided under this Act or Rules made thereunder, the prescribed authority shall notify an assessment in writing to the taxable dealer to best judgment stating that the assessed tax shall be paid on the date of receipt. (2) Where the prescribed authority has grounds to believe that a return filed is incorrect or that any lawful tax has not been paid or that any assessment issued under sub-section (1) above understates the dealers correct tax liability, the prescribed authority, - (a) may, based on any information available, assess, to best judgment, the additional tax due together with any penalty and interest; and (b) shall issue a notice of assessment in writing to the taxable dealer stating that the tax shall be paid within 21 days of the date of the notice. (3) Any penalty or interest assessed under this section shall be deemed to be tax and recoverable as such. (4) Where an assessment has been made under sub-section (1) above and the dealer subsequently furnishes a return for the period to which the assessment relates the prescribed authority may withdraw the assessment but the dealer shall be liable to penalties and interest as applicable. (5) Where the dealer furnishes a return under sub-section (4) above, such return shall be furnished within 30 days of receipt of such assessment. (6) Where a dealer registered under this Act or a dealer not registered under this Act but deemed to be registered under section 23 above, the prescribed authority on any evidence showing a liability to tax coming to its notice may issue a protective assessment on that dealer, if the prescribed authority has reason to suspect that such dealer will fail to pay any tax, penalty or interest so assessed and such tax, penalty or interest shall become payable forthwith.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 38--> (1) An assessment under section 37 above of an amount of tax due for any prescribed tax period shall not be made after the later of the following time-limits, - (a) five years after the end of the prescribed tax period; or (b) two years after evidence of facts, sufficient in the opinion of the prescribed authority to justify making of the assessment, comes to its knowledge. But, where further such evidence comes to the prescribed authorities knowledge after the making of an assessment under section 35 above, another assessment may be made under that section, in addition to any earlier assessment. (2) If tax has been lost as a result of conduct falling within section 76 or for which a dealer has been convicted of fraud, an assessment may be made as if in sub-section (1) above, reference to five years was a reference to ten years. (3) In computing the period of limitation specified for assessment or reassessment, as the case may be under this Act, the period taken for disposal of any appeal against an assessment or other appealable decision by the appellate authority, a tribunal or competent court shall not be taken into account in computing such period for assessment or reassessment as the case may be. (4) Where any return is found to be erroneous or prejudicial to the interest of the public revenue by a judgment or an order of any tribunal or court, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the prescribed authority may proceed to assess the tax payable by the dealer in accordance with such judgment or order at any time within a period of three years from the date of such judgment or order.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 39--> (1) Where any assessment is found to be erroneous or prejudicial to the interest of the public revenue by a judgment or an order of any tribunal or court, then notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the prescribed authority may proceed to reassess the tax payable by the dealer in accordance with such judgment or order at any time within a period of three years from the date of such judgment or order. (2) Where any court or tribunal makes an order or gives judgment to the effect that any tax assessed under this Act or any other law should have been assessed under a provision of a law different from that under which it was assessed, then in consequence of such order or judgment or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in any such order or judgment, such turnover or part thereof, may be assessed or reassessed to tax, as the case may be, at any time within five years from the date of such order or judgment, notwithstanding any limitation period which would otherwise be applicable under the law applicable to that assessment or reassessment. (3) Where any proceedings for the recovery of any tax, penalty, interest or any part thereof remaining unpaid, have been commenced in a court or tribunal and the amount of tax, penalty or interest is subsequently modified, enhanced or reduced in consequence of any decision made or order passed in the appeal, the prescribed authority may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, inform the dealer or the person and the authority under whose order the recovery is to be made, and thereupon such proceedings may be continued with the modified, enhanced or reduced amount of tax, penalty or interest therein substituted. (4) No order of reassessment under this section shall be passed without giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 40--> (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed every registered dealer shall furnish returns to the prescribed authority and the tax due, together with the amount of any penalty, or interest, shall be paid in such manner in such instalments, subject to such conditions on payment of such interest and at such intervals as may be prescribed. (2) Where the amount paid falls short of the aggregate of the tax or any other amount due and interest payable, the amount so paid shall first be adjusted towards interest payable and the balance, if any, shall be adjusted towards the tax or any other amount due. (3) A registered dealer, furnishing a revised return in accordance with this Act, which shows a greater amount of tax, penalties or interest to be due than was paid or payable in accordance with the original return, shall furnish with that revised return further payment in such manner as may be prescribed. (4) Any amount, which remains unpaid under this Act after the due date of payment, shall be recoverable from a dealer in the prescribed manner. (5) Any tax due or assessed, or any other amount due under this Act from a dealer, or any other person, may without prejudice to any other mode of collection be recovered, - (a) as if it were an arrears of land revenue; or (b) by attachment and sale or by sale without attachment of any property of such dealer or any other person by the prescribed authority or the prescribed officer in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed; or (c) notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), on application to any Magistrate, by such Magistrate as if it were a fine imposed by him. (6) Where a dealer or other person who has appealed or applied for revision of any order made under this Act and has complied with an order made by the appellate or the revising authority in regard to the payment of the tax or other amount, no proceedings for recovery under this section shall be taken or continued until the disposal of such appeal or application for revision. (7) The High Court may, either suo motu or on an application by the Commissioner or any person aggrieved by the order, revise any order made by a Magistrate under clause (c) of sub-section (5).
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 41--> Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 , (Central Act 1 of 1956) when any tax due from or assessed on a company under this Act for any period cannot be recovered, then, every person who is or was a director of the company at any time during the period for which the tax is due shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of such tax unless he proves that the non-recovery cannot be attributed to any gross neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 42--> (1) The prescribed authority may at any time or from time to time, by notice in writing, a copy of which shall be forwarded to the dealer at his last address known to the prescribed authority, require any person from whom money is due or may become due to the dealer or any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for or on account of the dealer to pay to the prescribed authority, either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held at or within the time specified in the notice, not being before the money becomes due or is held, so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due by the dealer in respect of arrears of tax or penalty or the whole of the money when it is equal to or less than that amount. (2) The prescribed authority may at any time or from time to time amend or revoke any such notice or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance of the notice. (3) Any person making any payment in compliance with a notice under this section shall be deemed to have made the payment under the authority of the dealer and the receipt of the prescribed authority shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of such person to the extent of the amount referred to in the receipt. (4) Any person discharging any liability to the dealer after receipt of the notice referred to in this section shall be personally liable to the prescribed authority to the extent of the liability discharged or to the extent of the liability of the dealer for the amount due under this Act, whichever is less. (5) Where any person to whom a notice under this section is sent objects to it on the ground that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due by him to the dealer or that he does not hold any money for or on account of the dealer, then nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require such person to pay the sum demanded or any part thereof, to the prescribed authority. (6) Any amount which a person is required to pay to the prescribed authority or for which he is personally liable to the prescribed authority under this section shall, if it remains unpaid, be a charge on the properties of the said person and may be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue. (7) For the purpose of this section, the amount due to a dealer or money held for or on account of a dealer by any person shall be computed after taking into account such claims, if any, as may have fallen due for payment by such dealer to such person and as may be lawfully subsisting.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 43--> (1) When the ownership of the business of a dealer is transferred, the transferor and the transferee shall jointly and severally be liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount remaining unpaid at the time of transfer or that may become payable in respect of such business after the date of transfer but relating to the years up to the date of transfer and for the purpose of recovery from the transferee, such transferee shall be deemed to be the dealer liable to pay the tax or penalty or other amount due under this Act. (2) When a firm liable to pay the tax, or penalty is dissolved, the assessment of the tax and imposition of penalty shall be made as if no dissolution of the firm had taken place and every person who was at the time of dissolution a partner of the firm and the legal representative of any such person who is deceased, shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the tax or penalty assessed or imposed. (3) Where any firm is liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount under this Act, the firms and each of the partners of the firm shall be jointly and severally liable for such payment. (4) Where a partner of a firm liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount under this Act retires, be shall, notwithstanding any contract to the contrary, be liable to pay any tax or penalty or any other amount remaining unpaid at the time of his retirement and any tax or penalty or any other amount due up to the date of retirement, though unassessed. (5) When an individual Hindu family or Aliyasanthana family liable to pay the tax or penalty is partitioned, the assessment of the tax and the imposition of penalty shall be made as if no partition of the family had taken place, and every person who was a member of the family before the partition shall be jointly and severally liable to pay the tax or penalty assessed or imposed. (6) Where a dealer dies, his executor, administrator or other legal representative shall be deemed to be the dealer for the purposes of this Act and the provisions of this Act shall apply to him in respect of the business of the said deceased dealer, provided that, in respect of any tax, penalty or fee assessed as payable by any such dealer or any tax, penalty or fee, which would have been payable by him under this Act if he had not died, the executor, administrator or other legal representative shall be liable only to the extent of the assets of the deceased in his hands.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 44--> (1) Subject to section 29, where any amount is collected by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax from any person by any dealer, whether knowingly or not, such dealer shall pay the entire amount so collected, to the prescribed authority within twenty days after the close of the month in which such amount was collected, notwithstanding that the dealer is not liable to pay such amount as tax or that only a part of it is due from him as tax under this Act. (2) If default is made in payment of the amount in accordance with sub-section (1), - (a) the whole of the amount outstanding on the date of default shall become immediately due and shall be a charge on the properties of the dealer; (b) the dealer liable to pay the amount shall pay interest at the rate of two and one half per cent of such amount for each month of default; and (c) the whole of the amount remaining unpaid along with the interest calculated under clause (b) of this sub-section shall be recoverable in the manner specified in section 38. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in any other law for the time being in force, any amount paid or payable by any dealer under sub-section (1), shall, to the extent it is not due as tax be forfeited to the State Government and be recovered from him and such payment or recovery shall discharge him of the liability to refund the amount to the person from whom it was collected. (4) Where any amount is paid or recovered by or from any dealer under sub-section (1) or (3), a refund of such amount or any part thereof can be claimed from Government by the person from whom, it was realised by way of tax provided an application in writing in the prescribed form is made to the commissioner, within two years from the date of the order of forfeiture. On receipt of any such application, the Commissioner shall hold such inquiry as he deems fit and if the commissioner is satisfied that the claim is valid and admissible that the amount so claimed as refund is actually paid or recovered, he shall refund the amount or any part thereof, which is found due to the person concerned.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 45--> Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force, any amount payable by a dealer on account of tax, penalty or interest or any amount which a dealer is required to pay or deduct from payment or for which he is personally liable to the State Government shall be a first charge on the property of the dealer or such person, as the case may be.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 46--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, no proceedings for the recovery of any amount under this Act shall be initiated after the expiry of twelve years from the end of the relevant tax period or from the date of the relevant assessment, provided that when an appeal or application for revision or reference has been filed, the period of limitation shall run from the date on which the amount due is finally determined. (2) The period of limitation specified under sub-section (1) shall not apply to any case in which, during the course of recovery proceedings initiated under any clause of sub-section 3 of section 40 or under section 42, any other fresh proceedings are initiated.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 47--> (1) Where any amount refundable to any person under an order made under any provision of this Act or Rules made thereunder is not refunded to him within ninety days, - (a) of the date of such order, if that order is made by the refunding authority; (b) of the date of receipt of such order by the refunding authority, if that order is made by an authority other than the refunding authority, the refunding authority, being any officer of the Commercial Taxes Department authorised to make any refund under this Act, shall pay such person simple interest at the rate of twelve per cent per annum on the said amount from the day immediately following the expiry of the said ninety days to the day of the refund. (2) The interest calculable under sub-section (1) shall be on the balance of the amount remaining after adjusting out of the refundable amount of any tax, interest or other amount due under this Act, for any year by the person on the date from which such interest is calculable. (3) If the delay or any part thereof in granting the refund within the aforesaid period of ninety days is attributable to the person to whom the refund is payable the period of such delay shall be excluded for the purpose of calculation of interest. (4) The interest payable for a part of month shall be proportionately determined.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 48--> (1) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the subject-matter of an appeal or any other proceedings under this Act, the prescribed authority may, if, to the best of its judgment it is of the opinion that the grant of a refund is likely to prejudice the public revenue, withhold the refund until such time as it deems proper. (2) The dealer shall be paid interest under sub-section (1) of section 46 on the amount of refund ultimately determined to be due to the dealer as a result of such proceedings for the period commencing from the expiry of ninety days from the date of the order referred in sub-section (1) above to the date of refund,
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 49--> (1) Any officer authorised by the Commissioner in this behalf shall have the power, - (a) to enter and inspect the place of business of any dealer, or any other place where it is believed by such officer that business in being carried on or accounts are being kept by such dealer; (b) to direct such dealer to produce at such time and at such place accounts, registers and documents relating to his business activities for examination; (c) to enter and inspect the goods in the possession of the dealer or in the possession of any other person on behalf of such dealer, wherever such goods are kept; (d) to enter and search such places, including the search of the dealer or person acting on behalf of the dealer found there, where concealment of facts relating to the business are suspected. (e) to seize any accounts, registers or documents from the dealer, where he has reason to suspect that a dealer is attempting to avoid or evade tax or is concealing his tax liability in any manner, after recording such reasons in writing, and give the dealer or any other person from whose custody such accounts, records or documents are seized, a receipt for and, if requested, copies of the same and may retain them in his custody for examination, inquiry, prosecution or other legal proceedings for such period as he considers necessary; (f) to seal any box or receptacle, godown or building or any part of the godown or building in which accounts or taxable goods are suspected to be kept or stored, where the owner or the person-in-charge of the business or any other person-in-charge of the business or any other person-in-occupation either leaves the premises or is not available or fails or refuses to open any box or receptacle, godown or building or any part of the godown or building when called upon to do so; (g) to break open the receptacle, godown or building or part of the godown or building where the owner or the person-in-charge of the business or the person-in-occupation leaves the premises or, after an opportunity having been given to him to do so, fails to open the receptacle, godown or building or part of the godown or building. The officer acting under this sub-clause shall prepare a list of the goods and documents found therein; (h) to record the statement of any dealer or his manager, agent or servant, to take extracts from the records found in any premises and to put identification marks on accounts, registers, documents or goods; (i) to take samples of goods from the possession of any dealer, where he considers it necessary to protect the revenue against mistake or fraud, and provide a receipt for any samples so taken, and the samples shall, except where an offence is found, be returned to the dealer or be disposed of by the Commissioner with that dealer's consent; (j) to seize any goods liable to tax, which are found in possession of a dealer or in the possession of any person on behalf of a dealer and which are not accounted for in his accounts, records or documents maintained in the course of his business, and a list of goods so seized shall be prepared by such officer and a copy thereof shall be given to the dealer or any other person from whose custody such goods are seized; (k) in circumstances where it is not possible to seize the accounts, records or documents under sub-section (1) or the goods under sub-section (3), the Officer concerned may serve on the owner or the person who is in immediate possession or control thereof, an order that he shall not remove, part with or otherwise deal with them except without the prior consent of such Officer, who may, after serving such order take such steps as are deemed necessary to secure the items referred to in the order; (1) to issue an immediate assessment as specified in sub-section (6) of section 37 above. (2) Where the records and accounts under sections 30 and 32 above are maintained by electronic means, the dealer shall provide such access to such accounts and records as may be required by the authorised officer. (3) The powers conferred on the officer under clauses (d) to (g), (i) and (j) of sub-section (1) above shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). (4) The accounts, registers, records, including computer hardware and software, and other documents seized under sub-section (1) above shall not be retained by such officer for a period exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the date of seizure, unless the reasons for retaining the same beyond the said period are recorded by him, in writing and the approval of the next higher authority is obtained and such approval in any case shall not be for more than sixty days at a time. (5) There shall be a presumption in respect of goods, accounts, registers or documents found at any place of business that they relate to that business, unless the contrary is proved by the dealer whose business occupies that place. (6) Where an authorised officer seizes goods under clause (j) of sub-section (1) above, he shall seize only that proportion of goods which relates to the dealers tax liabilities including penalties and interest, if any. (7) The dealer or person from whom goods have been seized under clause (j) of sub-section (1) above shall have a period of seven days in which to appeal against seizure of the goods.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 50--> (1) If the State Government or the Commissioner considers it necessary that, with a view to prevent or check evasion of tax under this Act in any place or places in the State, it is necessary so to do, they may, by notification, direct the establishment of a check post or the erection of a barrier, or both, at such place or places as may be notified. (2) The owner or person-in-charge of a goods vehicle or a boat shall, - (a) carry with him a goods vehicle record, a trip sheet or a log book, as the case may be; and (b) carry with him a bill of sale or a delivery note obtained from the prescribed authority or such other documents, containing such particulars as may be prescribed, in respect of the goods other than those mentioned in sub-clause (c) carried in the goods vehicle or boat; and (c) carry with him in addition to a bill of a sale, a delivery note obtained from such authority containing such particulars as may be prescribed, if the goods carried in the goods vehicle or boat are arecanut, cardamom, cashew, coconut, coffee, copra, cotton, edible oil, including vanaspathi, iron and steel, liquor, oil seeds, pepper, rectified spirit, rubber, timber or such other goods as may be notified by the Commissioner; and (d) produce the documents referred to in sub-clauses (b) and (c) before any officer-in-charge of check post or barrier or any other officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf and obtain seal of such officer affixed thereon, and in respect of a bill of sale, shall give one copy thereof and in respect of a delivery note, shall give a copy marked as original, to such officer and carry and retain with him the other copy until termination of movement of the goods; and (e) on entering the State limits, report at the first situate check post or barrier and on leaving the State limits report at the last situate check post or barrier and shall give a declaration containing such particulars as may be prescribed in respect of the goods carried in the goods vehicle or boat, before any officer-in-charge of the check post or barrier or any other officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf. (3)(a) At every checkpost or barrier, or at any other place when so required by any officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf, the driver or any other person-in-charge of a goods vehicle or boat shall stop the vehicle or boat, as the case may be, and keep it stationary as long as may be required by the officer-in-charge of the check-post or barrier or the officer empowered as aforesaid, to examine the contents in the vehicle or boat and inspect all records relating to the goods carried, which are in the possession of such driver or other person-in-charge, who shall, if so required, give his name and address and the name and address of the owner of the vehicle or boat. (b) Where any goods vehicle is intercepted by the officer empowered at any place other than a check-post or barrier, such officer may, if he deems it necessary, direct the owner or person-in-charge of the goods vehicle to take it to the nearest check-post or police station and such owner or person-in-charge of goods vehicle shall comply with such direction. (4) For purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the officer-in-charge of the check-post or barrier shall be an officer as may be prescribed. (5)(a) Where goods are delivered to a carrier or other bailee for transmission, the movement of the goods shall be deemed to commence at the time of such delivery and terminate at the time when delivery is taken from such carrier or bailee. Where before delivery is taken from him a carrier or bailee to whom goods are delivered for transmission, keeps the said goods in any office, shop, godown, vessel, receptacle, vehicle or any other place of business or any building or place, any officer empowered to exercise the powers under sub-section (3) shall have power to enter into and search such office, shop, godown, vessel, receptacle, vehicle or other place of business or building or place, and to examine the goods and inspect all goods relating to such goods. The carrier or bailee or the person-in-charge of the goods and records shall give all facilities for such examination or inspection and shall, if so required, produce the bill of sale or delivery note or other documents referred to in sub-section (2) and give a declaration containing such particulars as may be prescribed regarding the goods and give his name and address and the name and address of the carrier or the bailee and the consignee. (b) The power conferred by clause (a) shall also include, - (i) the power to seal any box or receptacle, godown or building or any part of the godown or building in which accounts or taxable goods are suspected to be kept or stored, where the carrier or bailee or person-in-charge of the place of business either leaves the premises or is not available or fails or refuses to open any box or receptacle, godown or building or any part of the godown or building when called upon to do so; (ii) the power to break open the receptacle, godown or building or part of the godown or building where the carrier or bailee or the person-in-charge of the place of business leaves the premises, or, after, an opportunity having been given to him to do so, fails to open the receptacle, godown or building or part of the godown or building and the officer acting under this sub-clause shall prepare a list of the goods and documents found therein. (6)(a) If any officer empowered to enter into and search any office, shop, godown, vessel, receptacle, vehicle or any other place of business or any building or place where a carrier or bailee keeps the goods delivered to him for transmission, has reason to suspect that such carrier or bailee has colluded with the owner of the goods in evading payment of any tax, he may for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize accounts, registers, records or other documents of the bailee or carrier as he may consider necessary and shall give a receipt for the same. The accounts, registers, records and other documents seized shall be retained by such officer only for so long as may be necessary for their examination and for any inquiry or proceeding under this Act. (b) The accounts, registers, records and other documents so seized shall not be retained by such officer for a period exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the date of seizure, unless the reasons for retaining the same beyond the said period are recorded by him in writing and the approval of the next higher authority is obtained and such approval in any case shall not be for more than sixty days at a time. (c) Where such officer, upon examining the accounts, registers, records or other documents seized under clause (a) have reason to believe that any dealer has attempted to evade payment of any tax, he may issue a protective assessment on such dealer in accordance with sub-section (6) of section 37. (7) All searches and seizures under sub-sections (5) or (6) shall, be made in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). (8) No person shall tamper with any seal put under sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (5). (9) Where the officer-in-charge of the check-post or barrier, or the officer empowered as aforesaid on interception of the goods vehicle or inspection of any godown, is of the opinion that further verification is necessary with respect to either accuracy of the particulars furnished in the documents accompanying the goods under transport or in transit, or as to the sufficiency and the cause adduced in respect of any contravention of sub-section (2), he may verify the particulars himself or if it is necessary cause it to be verified by referring the matter to any other officer and if such verification is not likely to be completed within a reasonable time, he may direct in writing the carrier or the person-in-charge of the goods vehicle or the godown not to deliver the goods until permitted to do so by him or such other officer to whom the matter is referred for verification and allow the intercepted vehicle, if any, to pass through. (10) The verification under sub-section (8) shall be completed within a period of fifteen days from the date of the direction issued under that sub-section and where such verification cannot be completed within the aforesaid period the officer who has issued such direction, or, as the case may be, the officer to whom the matter is referred for verification shall obtain the permission in writing of the next higher authority to extend such period for completion of the verification, so however such extension shall not be permitted for a period exceeding fifteen days at a time. (11) Where such officer or other officer to whom the matter is referred, upon such verification is of the opinion that there is a non-compliance with sub-section (2), punishable under sub-section (12) below, he may, proceed in respect of such goods in the custody of the carrier, or the person-in-charge of vehicle or the godown in accordance with sub-sections (12) below and (14) below of this section. (12) Where the officer-in-charge of the check-post or any empowered officer has issued a notice for contravention of any of the provisions of this section, further proceedings in pursuance to such notice may, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed, be continued by any other officer empowered by the Commissioner in this behalf, from the stage at which it is pending. (13)(a) The officer-in-charge of a check-post or a barrier or any other officer, in respect of any contravention of, or non-compliance with the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (5) or (8), for which sufficient cause is not furnished, levy a penalty which shall not be less than double the amount of tax leviable and not exceeding three times the amount of tax leviable in respect of the goods under transport. (b) Where the amount of penalty leviable is more than the value of the goods, the amount of penalty leviable shall be restricted to such value; (c) In respect of contravention of sub-section (8), where the penalty levied is not paid, the carrier or bailee or person-in-charge of the goods vehicle shall jointly and severally be liable to pay such penalty and such amount of penalty be deemed to be an amount due under the Act; (d) Before levying any penalty under this sub-section, the officer shall give the person-in-charge of the goods vehicle or boat or carrier, or bailee, or a dealer registered under the Act, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (14) Where the destination of the goods to be delivered in the State is not less than one hundred kilometers, from the check post or barrier or any other place at which the goods vehicle or boat is intercepted, reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be a period of not less than ten days. (15)(a) Where the penalty levied is not paid, the officer levying the penalty shall have power to take possession of so much of the goods as in his opinion would be sufficient to meet the amount of penalty levied and retain the same with him until the penalty levied is paid or for ten days, whichever is earlier; (b) Where it is not practicable to take possession of only so much of the goods as would be sufficient to meet the amount of penalty levied for the reason that the goods vehicle is a tanker carrying goods in liquid or gaseous form or that the goods is a single unit not separable into any part or parts thereof, the officer levying the penalty shall have power to take possession of the goods vehicle or the entire goods, as the case may be, and retain the same with him until the penalty levied is paid or for ten days, whichever is earlier; (c) After the expiry of the period of ten days, if the penalty is not paid, the officer shall dispose of the goods in public auction and adjust the sale proceeds towards penalty, the excess amount shall, after deducting the charges incurred by the State, be refunded in the manner prescribed; (d) Before taking possession or within ten days after taking possession of the goods or the goods vehicle, as the case may be, if the owner or person-in-charge of the goods vehicle or the dealer registered under the Act, furnishes for the amount of penalty a Bank Guarantee having validity until realisation of the penalty or disposal of an appeal, if any, made under section 59, the officer taking such possession shall forthwith return the goods or the goods vehicle to the person furnishing such bank guarantee; (e) In the case of perishable goods, the officer may dispose of the same before the expiry of the period of ten days, if in his opinion such disposal is necessary. (16)(a) The person aggrieved by the levy of penalty under this section may, appeal within thirty days from the date on which the order of penalty was served on the person, to the prescribed authority. (b) Where the person aggrieved is a dealer registered under the Act, such person may appeal to the appropriate appellate Joint Commissioner of the area in which he is registered. (c) .................... (d) Such appeal shall be dealt with as if it were an appeal filed under section 59 and all the provisions of the said Section shall mutatis mutandis apply to such appeal.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 51--> (1) Where a vehicle is carrying goods taxable under this Act, - (a) from any place outside the State and bound for any place outside the State and passes through the State; or (b) imported into the State from any place outside the country and such goods are being carried to any place outside the State,the driver or any other person-in-charge of such vehicle shall furnish the necessary information and obtained a transit pass in duplicate containing such particulars as may be prescribed, from the officer-in-charge of the first check-post or barrier after his entry into the State or after movement has commenced from the State as the case may be, or from the officer empowered for the purposes of sub-section (3) of section 48, upon interception of the goods vehicle after its entry into the State or after movement has commenced as the case may be. (2) The driver or the person-in-charge of the vehicle shall deliver within the stipulated time a copy of the transit pass obtained under sub-section (1) to the officer-in-charge at the last check-post or barrier before his exit from the State. (3)(a) If for any reason the goods the goods carried in a goods vehicle are after entry into the State, or after commencement of movement, as the case may be, not moved out of the State within the time stipulated in the transit pass, the owner of the goods vehicle shall furnish to the officer empowered in this behalf the reasons for such delay and other particulars, if any, thereof and such officer shall after due enquiry extend the time of exist by suitably amending the transit pass. (b) Where the goods carried by a vehicle are, after their entry into the State, or after commencement of movement, as the case may be, transported outside the State by any other vehicle or conveyance, the onus of proving that the goods have Actually moved out of the State shall be on the owner of the vehicle who originally brought the goods into the State. (4) If the driver or any other person-in-charge of the vehicle does not comply with sub-section (2), it shall be presumed that the goods carried thereby have been sold within the State by the owner of the vehicle and shall, irrespective of whether he is a taxable person, be assessed to tax by the officer empowered in this behalf in the prescribed manner. (5) If the owner of the vehicle, having obtained the transit pass as provided under sub-section (1), fails to deliver the same as provided under sub-section (2), he shall be liable to pay by way of penalty a sum not exceeding double the amount of tax leviable on the goods transported. (6) The amount of tax and the penalty levied under this section shall be recovered in the prescribed manner. (7) Where the owner of the vehicle who is assessed to tax under sub-section (4), is carrying after such assessment, any goods taxable under this Act in a goods vehicle from any place outside the State, or movement from within the State, as the case may be, and bound for any other place outside the State and is passing through the State, the prescribed authority may demand from such owner an amount equivalent to two times the tax leviable on such goods under this Act as security. (8) The prescribed authority after being satisfied that the goods carried in the goods vehicle in respect of which the security amount under sub-section (7) was collected, has passed through the State, shall refund such security amount to the owner. (9) The prescribed authority may by an order adjust the whole or any part of security amount towards any amount of tax or penalty payable under this section by such owner. (10) In case where a vehicle owned by a person is hired for transportation of goods by some other person, the hirer of the vehicle shall for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 52--> (1) Where in respect of goods liable to tax under this Act, carried in a goods vehicle or boat, or held in stock by any dealer or on his behalf by any other person, or held in the custody of any transporter, the prescribed authority or any officer empowered under section 55, has reason to believe that the value shown in the document accompanying the goods in transit or the purchase invoice, is lower than the prevailing market price or Maximum Retail Price by a difference of thirty per cent or more, such authority or officers, for reasons to be recorded in writing, may purchase such goods. (2) The power under sub-section (1) shall not be exercisable unless the person or dealer being dispossessed of such goods, is afforded reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) The price payable of purchase of such goods shall be the total price as mentioned in the invoice, challan, delivery note, or any other related document, plus the cost of transportation of the goods incurred up to the time of purchase, if any. (4) In determining whether or not the price shown in the invoice, challan, delivery note, or any other related document involves undervaluation, in the case of owner of the goods other than an owner carrying on business in packaged goods, the authority exercising the power under sub-section (1) shall apply the prevailing market price or fair market value and in the case of an owner carrying on business in packaged goods, shall apply the Maximum Retail Price. (5) Any person objecting to an order affecting him under this section may appeal to the prescribed authority. (6) Such appeal shall be dealt with as if it were an appeal filed under section 59 or section 61, as the case may be, and all the provisions of that section shall mutatis mutandis apply to such appeal. (7) The authority or officer purchasing goods in exercise of the powers of sub-section (1) subject to provisions of sub-section (6), shall dispose of the goods in public auction within thirty days from the date of such purchase and for value not less than the price paid to the owner of the goods. The sale proceeds so realised should forthwith be paid into the Government Treasury.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 53--> (1) Every person or a clearing or forwarding house or agency, transporting agency, shipping agency, shipping-out agency or steamer agency or air-cargo agency or courier agency engaged in the business of transporting taxable goods in the State shall, - (a) get itself or himself registered in such manner as may be prescribed; and (b) submit to the authority prescribed in this behalf, return as may be prescribed of all taxable goods cleared, forwarded, transported or shipped by it or him. (2) The authority prescribed in this behalf, shall have the power to call for and examine the books of account or other documents in the possession of such person or agency with a view to verify the correctness of the return submitted. (3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any State Government or the Central Government.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 54--> The prescribed authority may require any bank or any officer thereof to furnish such information, document or statement for the purpose of any proceedings under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 55--> (1) The State Government may appoint a Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and as many Additional Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Joint Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, a State Representative and Commercial Tax Officers, as they think fit for the purpose of performing the functions, respectively conferred on them by or under this Act or by or under any other law for the time being in force. (2) The Commissioner may, empower an officer not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes or an Advocate or a Chartered Accountant or a Sales Tax Practitioner enrolled in the prescribed manner to perform the functions of a State Representative. (3) In proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal, the State Representative shall be competent, - (a) to prepare and sign applications, appeals and other documents; (b) to appear, represent, act and plead; (c) to receive notices and other processes; and (d) to do all other Acts connected with such proceedings, on behalf of the State Government or any officer appointed under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 56--> (1) The State Government and the Commissioner may from time to time, issue such orders, instructions and directions to all officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act as they may deem fit for the administration of this Act, and all such officers and persons shall observe and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the State Government and the Commissioner. (2) No such orders, instructions, or directions shall be issued under sub-section (1) so as to interfere with the discretion of any appellate authority in the exercise of its appellate functions. (3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Commissioner may, on his own motion or on an application by a registered dealer liable to pay tax under the Act, if he considers it necessary or expedient so to do, for the purpose of maintaining uniformity in the work of assessments and collection of revenue, clarify the rate of tax payable under this Act in respect of goods liable to tax under the Act, and all officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow such clarification. (4) No such application under sub-section (3) shall be entertained unless it is accompanied by proof of payment of such fee, paid in such manner, as may be prescribed. (5) All officers and persons employed in the execution of this Act, shall observe and follow such administrative instructions as may be issued to him for his guidance by the Joint Commissioner within whose jurisdiction he performs his functions.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 57--> (1)(a) The Additional Commissioners shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or of such dealers or classes of dealers or of such cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may direct. (b) The Joint Commissioners shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or of such dealers or classes of dealers or of such cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may direct. (c) Where any directions issued under clause (b) have assigned to two or more Joint Commissioners, the same area or the same dealers or classes of dealers, or the same cases or classes of cases, they shall perform their functions in accordance with any orders which the Commissioner may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed. (2)(a) The Deputy Commissioners shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or of such dealers or classes of dealers or of such cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may direct (b) Where any directions issued under clause (a) have assigned to two or more Deputy Commissioners, the same area or the same dealers or classes of dealers or the same cases or classes of cases, they shall perform their functions in accordance with any orders the Commissioner may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed. (3)(a) The Commercial Tax Officers and the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes shall perform their functions in respect of such areas or of such dealers or classes of dealers or such cases or classes of cases as the Commissioner may direct. (b) Where any directions issued under clause (a) have assigned to two or more Commercial Tax Officers or Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, as the case may be, the same area or the same dealers or classes of dealers or the same cases or classes of cases, they shall perform their functions in accordance with any order which the Commissioner may make for the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed. (4)(a) The Commissioner may, by general or special order in writing, direct that the powers conferred on the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes by or under this Act, shall in respect of any specified case or classes of cases, or any specified dealers or classes of dealers be exercised by the Deputy Commissioner. (b) Where an order under clause (a) is issued, then for the purposes of any case or dealer in respect of which any such order applies, reference in this Act or in any rule made thereunder to the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes or prescribed authority shall be deemed to be references to the Deputy Commissioner. (5) In this section, the word "case" in relation to any dealers specified in any order or direction issued thereunder means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which may be pending on the date of such order or direction or which may have been completed on or before such date, and includes also all proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the date of such order or direction in respect of any year.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 58--> (1) Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act, any prescribed authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by another who has and exercised jurisdiction, the authority or officer so succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which the proceeding was left by his predecessor. (2) The assessee concerned may demand that before the proceeding under sub-section (1) is so continued the previous proceeding or any part thereof be reopened or that before any order of assessment is passed against him, he be reheard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 59--> (1) Any person objecting to any order or proceedings affecting him passed under the provisions of this Act by the prescribed authority may appeal to the appellate authority. (2) The appeal shall be preferred within thirty days, - (a) in respect of an order of assessment, from the date on which the notice of assessment, was served on the appellant, and (b) in respect of any other order, from the date on which the order was communicated to the appellant. (3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal preferred after the period of thirty days aforesaid but within a further period of one hundred and eighty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period. (4)(a) No appeal against an order of assessment shall be entertained by the appellate authority unless it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax and penalty not disputed in the appeal. (b) The tax or other amount shall be paid in accordance with the order against which the appeal has been preferred. (c) The appellate authority may, in its discretion, give such directions as it thinks fit in regard to the payment of tax or other amount payable under clause (b), if the appellant furnishes sufficient security to its satisfaction in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. (d) Where an order staying proceedings of recovery any tax or other amount is made in any proceedings relating to an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate authority shall dispose of the appeal within a period of one hundred twenty days from the date of such order. (e) If such appeal is not so disposed of within the period specified in the second proviso, the order of stay shall stand vacated after the expiry of the said period. (5) The appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner. (6) In disposing of all appeal, the appellate authority may, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, - (a) in the case of an order of assessment of penalty, - (i) confirm, reduce or enhance the assessment including any part thereof whether or not such part is objected to in the appeal; (ii) pass such other orders as it may think fit; and (b) in the case of any other order, confirm, cancel or vary such order. (7) Every order passed on appeal under this section shall, subject to the provisions of sections 60 to 64, be final.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 60--> (1) Any officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf or any other person objecting to an order passed by the appellate authority under section 59 may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within a period of sixty days from the date on which the order was communicated to him. (2) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal preferred after the period of sixty days referred to in sub-section (1), but within a further period of one hundred and eighty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period. (3) The officer authorized under sub-section (1) or the person against whom an appeal has been preferred, as the case may be, on receipt of notice that an appeal against the order of the appellate authority has been preferred under sub-section (1) by the other party, may, notwithstanding that he has not appealed against such order or any part thereof, file, at any time before the appeal is finally heard, a memorandum of cross-objections, verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order of the appellate authority, and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within the time specified in sub-section (1). (4) The appeal, or the memorandum of cross-objections, shall be in the prescribed form, shall be verified in the prescribed manner, and, in the case of an appeal preferred by any person other than an officer empowered by the State Government under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a fee equal to two percent of the amount of assessment objected to, provided that the sum payable in no case be less than two hundred rupees or more than one thousand rupees. (5) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (1), the payment of tax or penalty or any other amount, payable, in accordance with any order passed by the appellate authority under section 59, shall not, pending disposal of the appeal be stayed by the Appellate Tribunal. (6)(a) The Appellate Tribunal shall, after giving both parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit. (b) If the appeal involves a question of law on which the Appellate Tribunal has previously given its decision in another appeal and either a revision petition in the High Court against such decision or an appeal in the Supreme Court against the order of the High Court thereon is pending, the Appellate Tribunal may defer the hearing of the appeal before it till such revision petition in the High Court or the appeal in the Supreme Court is disposed of. (c) If as a result of the appeal any change becomes necessary in the assessment, which is the subject-matter of the appeal, the Appellate Tribunal may authorise the prescribed authority to amend the assessment, and the prescribed authority shall amend the assessment accordingly and thereupon, any amount over paid by the assessee shall be refunded to him without interest, or any additional amount of tax due from him shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of the Act, as the case may be. (7)(a) Notwithstanding that an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (1), tax shall be paid in accordance with the assessment made in the case. (b) The Appellate Tribunal may, except in case of an appeal against an order passed by the appellate authority under section 59, in its discretion, give such directions as it thinks fit, in regard to the payment of tax, if the appellant furnished sufficient security to its satisfaction in such form and manner as may be prescribed. (8)(a) The Appellate Tribunal may, on the application either of the appellant or of the respondent, review any order passed by it under sub-section (6) on the basis of facts which were not before it when it passed the order. (b) No such application under sub-section (1) shall be preferred more than once in respect of the same order. (c) The application for review shall be preferred in the prescribed manner within six months from the date on which the order to which the application relates was communicated to the applicant; and where the application is preferred by any person other than an officer empowered by the State Government under sub-section (1), it shall be accompanied by a fee equal to that which has been paid in respect of the appeal. (d) If the application for review is preferred within ninety days from the date on which the order to which the application relates is communicated to the applicant, the application shall be accompanied by half the fee which had been paid in respect of the appeal. (9)(a) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the Appellate Tribunal may, at any time, within five years from the date of any order passed by it under sub-section (6) or sub-section (8), amend such order. (b) No order under this sub-section shall be made without giving both parties affected by the order a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (10) Except as provided in the rules made under this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall not have powers to award costs to either of the parties to the appeal or review. (11) Every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (6) or sub-section (8) or sub-section (9) shall be communicated to the appellant, the respondent, the appellate authority on whose order the appeal was preferred and the Commissioner. (12) Every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (6) shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (8), sub-section (8) (9), and section 59, be final and every order passed by it under sub-section (8) shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (9) and section 57, be final.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 61--> (1) The Additional Commissioner may on his own motion call for and examine the record of any order passed or proceeding recorded under this Act and if he considers that any order passed therein by any officer, who is not above the rank of a Joint Commissioner, is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interest of the revenue, he may, if necessary, stay the operation of such order for such period as he deems fit and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such order thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including an order enhancing or modifying the assessment, or canceling the assessment or directing a fresh assessment. (2) The Commissioner by on his own motion call for and examine the record of any proceeding under this Act, and if he considers that any order passed therein by any officer subordinate to him is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interest of the revenue, he may if necessary, stay the operation of such order for such period as he deems fit and after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard and after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he deems necessary, pass such order thereon as the circumstances of the case justify, including an order enhancing or modifying the assessment, or canceling the assessment or directing a fresh assessment. (3) The Additional Commissioner or the Commissioner shall not exercise any power under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, if, - (a) the time for appeal against the order has not expired; (b) the matter has been subject to an appeal under section 60 or a revision in the High Court; or (c) more than four years have expired after the passing of the order sought to be revised. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section. (3), the Additional Commissioner or the Commissioner may pass an order under sub-sections (1) or (2), as the case may be, on any point which has not been raised and decided in an appeal or revision referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3), before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of the order in such appeal or revision or before the expiry of a period of four years referred to in clause (c) of that sub-section whichever is later. (5) Every order passed in revision under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of this section, and sections 63 and 64, be final. (6) Every order passed in revision under sub-section (2) shall, subject to the provisions of sections 62 and 63, be final. (7) If the order passed or proceedings recorded by the appropriate authority referred to in sub-sections (1) or (2), involves an issue on which the High Court has given its decision adverse to the revenue in some other proceedings and an appeal to the Supreme Court against such decision of the High Court is pending, the period spent between the date of the decision of the High Court and the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall be excluded in computing the period referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3). (8) In computing the period of limitation for the purpose of sub-section (3), any period during which any proceeding under this section is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be excluded. (9) For the purposes of this section, "record" shall include all records relating to any proceedings under this Act available at the time of examination by the Additional Commissioner or the Commissioner.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 62--> (1) Within one hundred and twenty days from the date on which an order under sub-section (4) or sub-section (8) or sub-section (9) of section 60 was communicated to him, the appellant or the respondent may prefer a petition to the High Court against the order on the ground that the Appellate Tribunal has either failed to decide or decided erroneously any question of law. (2) The High Court may admit a petition preferred after the period of one hundred and twenty days aforesaid if it is satisfied that the petitioner has sufficient cause for not preferring the petition within that period. (3) The petition shall be in the prescribed form, shall be verified in the prescribed manner, and shall, when it is preferred by any person other than an officer empowered by the State Government under sub-section (1) of section 60, be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees. (4) If the High Court, on perusing the petition, considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, it may dismiss the petition summarily. (5) The High Court shall not dismiss any petition unless the petitioner has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard in support thereof. (6)(a) If the High Court does not dismiss the petition summarily, it shall, after giving both the parties to the petition a reasonable opportunity of being heard, determine the question or questions of law raised and either reverse, affirm or amend the order against which the petition was preferred or remit the matter to the Appellate Tribunal with the opinion of the High Court on the question or questions of law raised or pass such other order in relation to the matter as the High Court thinks fit. (b) Where the High Court remits the matter to the Appellate Tribunal under clause (a) with its opinion on questions of law raised, the latter shall amend the order passed by it in conformity with such opinion. (7) Before passing an order under sub-section (4) the High Court may, if it considers necessary so to do remit the petition to the Appellate Tribunal and direct it to return the petition with its finding on any specific question or issue. (8) Notwithstanding that a petition has been preferred under sub-section (1), the tax shall be paid in accordance with the assessment made in the case. (9) If as a result of the Petition, any change becomes necessary in such assessment, the High Court may authorise the prescribed authority to amend the assessment and the prescribed authority shall amend the assessment accordingly and thereupon the amount overpaid by the assessee shall be refunded to him without interest or the additional amount of tax due from him shall be collected in accordance with provisions of this Act, as the case may be. (10)(a) The High Court may, on the application of either party to the petition, review any order passed by it under sub-section (4) on the basis of facts which were not before it when it passed the order. (b) The application for review shall be preferred within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall where it is preferred by any person other than an officer empowered by the State Government under sub-section (1) of section 60 be accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees. (11)(a) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the High Court may, at any time, within five years from the date of the order passed by it under sub-section (4) amend such order. (b) The High Court shall not pass an order under this sub-section without giving both parties affected by the order a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (12) In respect of every petition preferred under sub-section (1) or (7), the costs shall be in the discretion of the High Court.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 63--> (1) Any assessee objecting to an order passed by the Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner under section 61 may appeal to the High court within sixty days from the date on which the order was accompanied, communicated to him. (2) The High Court may admit an appeal preferred after the period of sixty days aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the assessee had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that period. (3) The appeal shall be in the prescribed form, shall be verified in the prescribed manner, and shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred rupees. (4) The High Court shall, after giving both parties to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit. (5) The provisions of sub-sections (6) to (9) of section 62, shall apply in relation to appeals preferred under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to petitions preferred under sub-section (1) of section 62.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 64--> No objection as to the territorial or pecuniary jurisdiction of any prescribed authority shall be entertained or allowed by any Court, Tribunal or authority in an appeal or revision, unless such objection was taken before the prescribed authority at the earliest possible opportunity.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 65--> Every petition, application or appeal preferred to the High Court under sections 62 or 63 shall be heard by a bench of not less than two Judges, and in respect of such petition, application or appeal, the provisions of section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), shall apply.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 66--> (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the prescribed authority, appellate authority or revising authority, may, at any time within five years from the date of an order passed by it, amend such order. (2) Any amendment which has the effect of enhancing an assessment or otherwise increasing the liability of the assessee shall not be made unless the prescribed authority, appellate authority or revising authority, as the case may be, has given notice to the assessee of its intention to do so and has allowed the assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) Where an order has been considered and decided in any proceedings by way of appeal or revision relating to an order referred to in sub-section (1), the authority passing such order may, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, amend the order under that sub-section in relation to any matter other than the matter which has been so considered and decided. (4) An order passed under sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be an order passed under the same provision of law under which the original order, the mistake in which was rectified, has been passed.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 67--> (1) For the purposes of payment or assessment of tax under this Act, the burden of proving that any transaction or any turnover of a dealer is not liable to tax shall lie on such dealer. (2) Where a dealer knowingly issues or produces a false bill, voucher, declaration, certificate or other document with a view to support or make any claim that a transaction of sale or purchase effected by him or any other dealer, is not liable to be taxed, or liable to tax at a lower rate, the prescribed authority shall, on detecting such issue or production, direct the dealer issuing or producing such document to pay as penalty, - (a) in the case of first such detection, three times the tax due in respect of such transaction; and (b) in the case of second or subsequent detection, five times the tax due in respect of such transaction. (3) Before issuing any direction for the payment of the penalty under this section, the prescribed authority shall give to the dealer an opportunity of making representation against the levy of such penalty.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 68--> (1) A dealer who, without reasonable cause, fails to apply for registration within the time prescribed in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 21, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000 in addition to the interest chargeable on the tax payable at the rate provided under section 36. (2) A dealer who fails to report to the prescribed authority a change in circumstances as required by section 27, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 69--> (1) A dealer who fails to furnish a return or who fails to pay the tax due on any return furnished as required under section 34, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 200 for each day of default in addition to any tax or interest due. (2) A dealer who for any prescribed tax period furnishes a return which understates his liability to tax or overstates his entitlement to a tax credit by more than 15% of his actual liability to tax, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty equal to 25% of the amount of such tax under or overstated.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 70--> If any dealer, not being registered under this Act, collects any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax under this Act, he shall be liable to remit to the prescribed authority such amount, whether or not that amount would be payable under the provisions of this Act, and also to a penalty of an amount equal to the amount so collected, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 71--> (1) Any dealer who fails to keep and maintain proper records, in accordance with section 30 or by order of the prescribed authority, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000 and, in addition, rupees 200 per day for so long as the failure continues. (2) Any dealer who fails to retain records and accounts accordance with sections 31 and 32, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 10,000.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 72--> Any dealer or person who on demand by the prescribed authority fails to produce any records or furnish any information in accordance with the requirements of this Act, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000 and, in addition, rupees 200 per day for so as long as the failure continues.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 73--> A registered dealer who, - (1) fails to provide a tax invoice as required by sub-section (1) of section 28 or a credit or debit note as required by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 29; or (2) provides a tax invoice otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 28 or a credit or a debit note as provided in section 29 shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 74--> Any person who removes, or in any way tampers with, a seal attached under the provisions of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 48, and sub-section (7) of section 50, after being given a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall be liable to a penalty of rupees 5,000.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 75--> Any person who obstructs, hinders, molests or assaults an authorised officer in the performance of his duties under this Act, or does anything which is likely to prevent or obstruct any search or production of evidence, shall be liable on conviction to a fine of not less than rupees 5,000 but not exceeding rupees 50,000 and imprisonment for a period not less than fifteen days but not exceeding one year.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 76--> If any person is knowingly concerned in, or in the taking of steps with a view to, the fraudulent evasion of tax by him or any other person, he shall be liable to a penalty of (?) or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding (?) years, or to both.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 77--> (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 76 except with the previous sanction of the Joint Commissioner, and no Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), all offences punishable under section 76 shall be cognizable and bailable.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 78--> (1) All particulars contained in any statement made, returns furnished or accounts or documents produced in accordance with this Act, other than proceedings before a criminal court, shall, save as provided in sub-section (2) be treated as confidential and notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 , no court shall save as aforesaid be entitled to statement, return, account, document or record or any part thereof to give evidence before it in respect thereof. (2) The Commissioner may furnish or cause to be furnished, in the prescribed manner, to, - (a) any officer, authority or body performing any function under any law relating to the imposition of any tax, duty, cess or fee; or (b) any such officer, authority or body performing any function under any other law as the State Government, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do on the public interest, specify by notification in this behalf; any such information relating to any assessee in respect of any assessment made under this Act as may, in the opinion of the Commissioner be necessary for the purpose of enabling the officer, authority or body to perform his or its function under that law. (3) If the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to publish names of any assessee along with his photograph or any other particulars relating to any proceeding under this Act, in respect of such assessees, it may cause to be published such names along with their photograph and particulars in such manner as it thinks fit. (4) No publication under this section shall be made relating to any penalty imposed or any conviction for any offence connected with any proceeding under this Act, until the time for presenting an appeal to the appellate authority has expired without any appeal having been presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 79--> (1) Where any dealer has committed an offence under section 76 above, the prescribed authority may, on admission by such dealer in writing and upon his option to compound at any time prior to the commencement of the court proceedings relating thereto, compound such offence and order the dealer to pay such sum of money as specified by the prescribed authority, provided it does not exceed the amount of the fine prescribed for the offence in addition to any tax and interest due. (2) Furnishing of cheque or any other instrument towards payment of a sum by any such dealer shall be deemed to be an application for compounding the offence. (3) Where the prescribed authority compounds an offence under this section, the order referred to in sub-section (1), - (a) shall be in writing and specify the offence committed, the sum of money to be paid and the due date for the payment; and (b) shall be served on the dealer who committed the offence; and (c) shall be final and not subject to any appeal; and (d) may be enforced in the same manner as a decree of a court for the payment of the amount stated in the order. (3) When the prescribed authority compounds an offence under this section, the dealer concerned shall not be liable to prosecution in respect of such offence or to any further penalty under this section and such dealer shall not appeal against the said proceedings.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 80--> The validity of the assessment of any tax or of the levy of any fee or other amount, made under this Act, or the liability of any person to pay any tax, fee or other amount so assessed or levied shall not be questioned in any Criminal Court in any prosecution or other proceeding, whether under this Act or otherwise.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 81--> (1) No suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie against any officer or servant of the State Government, for any act done or purported to be done under this Act without the previous sanction of the State Government. (2) No officer or servant of the State Government shall be liable in respect of any such act in any civil or criminal proceeding if the act was done in good faith in the course of the execution of duties or the discharge of the functions imposed by or under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 82--> No suit shall be instituted against the State Government and no suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted against any officer or any servant of the State Government in respect of any Act done or purporting to be done under this Act, unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding is instituted within six months from the date of the Act complained of.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 83--> No suit or other proceeding shall except as expressly provided in this Act, be instituted in any Court to set aside or modify any assessment made under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 84--> Any person who is entitled to appear before any authority other than the High Court in connection with any proceeding under this Act, may be represented before such authority, - (a) by his relative or a person regularly employed by him if such relative or person is duly authorised by him in writing in this behalf; or (b) by a legal practitioner; or (c) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, by an accountant or by a person enrolled in the prescribed manner as a Sales Tax Practitioner by the Commissioner, and duly authorised by the person whom he represents.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 85--> (1) The officers empowered by rules made in this behalf shall have all the powers conferred on a Court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), for the purpose of securing attendance of persons or the production of documents in any enquiry under this Act. (2) The Commissioner or the assessing, appellate or revising authority shall, in securing the attendance of any dealer as a witness before the Tribunal or High Court or for production of any document for the purposes of this Act at such proceedings, have the same powers as those conferred on a civil court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908). (3) No suit or other proceedings shall be entertained by any court, except as expressly provided for under this Act, to set aside or modify any assessment or other proceedings commenced by virtue of the provisions of this Act, and no such court shall question the validity of any assessment, levy of penalty or interest nor grant any stay of proceedings or allow recovery of any amount due under this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 86--> (1) The State Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules, by notification, to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for, - (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) estimation of turnover for purposes of registration on the basis of inventory of goods found at the time of inspection or during survey; (c) the assessment to tax under this Act of business which are discontinued or the ownership of which has changed; (d) the procedure for assessment of Central and State Government Departments, Statutory Bodies and Local Authorities; (e) the assessment to tax under this Act of business owned by minors and other incapacitated persons or by persons residing outside the State; (f) the assessment of a business owned by any person whose estate or any portion of whose estate is under the control of the court of Wards, the Administrator-General, the Official trustee or any receiver or manager, including any person whatever his designation who in fact manages property on behalf of another, appointed by or under any order of a Court; (g) the administration of the check-posts set up and the barriers erected under this Act and the regulation of work therein; (h) the assessment to tax under this Act of any turnover which has escaped assessment; (i) compelling the submission of returns and the production of documents and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath or affirmation; (j) specifying the classes of dealers who need not furnish returns under section 34; (k) securing that returns furnished or accounts or documents produced or evidence of any kind given under this Act before any prescribed authority or an appeal or revision from any decision of such authority are kept confidential; (l) the procedure to be followed and the powers exercisable in proceedings for recovery under section 40; (m) the duties and powers of officers appointed for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Act; (n) the term of office and conditions of service of the members of the Appellate Tribunal; (o) the fees payable for the grant of duplicate certificates of registration or licences or copies of such certificates and licences or of any other document; (p) the maintenance of purchase bills or accounts of purchase and sales by dealers and the time for which they should be preserved; (q) the issue of delivery notes or way bills in respect of goods delivered or transferred to retail dealers in pursuance of sales effected to them, the form and manner of their issue and the time for which they should be preserved; (r) the extent of liability of commission agent, broker, del credere agent, auctioneer or any other mercantile agent, who carries on the business of buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods on behalf of any principal; (s) the qualifications and disqualifications of Sales Tax Practitioners, the procedures for their enrolment, the fees payable for enrolment and the fees payable for annual renewal of such enrolment; (t) generally regulating the procedure to be followed and the forms to be adopted in proceeding under this Act; (u) any other matter for which there is no provision or no sufficient provision in this Act and for which provision is, in the opinion of the State Government, necessary, for giving effect to the purpose of this Act. (3) In making a rule under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Government may provided that a person guilty of breach thereof shall, on conviction by a Magistrate of the first class, be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and where the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the breach continues. (4) Any rule under this Act may be made to have retrospectively and when any such rule is made, a statement specifying the reasons for making such a rule shall be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature along with the rule under section 88. All rules made under this Act, shall, subject to any modification made under section 88, have effect as if enacted in this Act.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 87--> Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued under section 86 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is published before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section 88--> (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act in consequence of the transition to the said provisions of this Act in consequence of the transition to the said provisions from the provisions of the Acts in force immediately before the commencement of this Act, the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette make such provision as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing difficulty. (2) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, otherwise than in relation to the transition from the provisions of the Acts in force before the commencement of this Act, the State Government may, by notification, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section Sch.1--> THE FIRST SCHEDULE Exemptions Section 3(3) Index to exempt sale of goods A. B. (1) Petrol including special boiling spirit. (2) Diesel. (3) Aviation turbine fuel. (4) Sugarcane. (5) Lottery tickets.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section Sch.2--> THE SECOND SCHEDULE Special Rates of Tax Section 4(2) A. List of goods to be taxed at the rate of 1%. B. List of goods to be taxed at the rate of 4%. C. List of goods to be taxed at the rate of 20%.
Value Added Tax Act, 2002_Section Sch.3-->  THE THIRD SCHEDULE Input tax blocked goods 
