Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> A BILL further to amend the Vice-President's Pension Act, 1997. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-- Statement of Object Vice-President's Pension Act, 1997, inter alia, provides for pension to retiring Vice-Presidents. Section 3 of the Act provides for medical attendance and treatment, free of charge, to the spouse of a retired Vice-President for the remainder of her life. At present, the spouse is not entitled to any other pensionary benefits. It would be just and proper that a provision be made for suitable pension and accommodation for the surviving spouse of an ex-Vice-President who dies while holding office or after retirement. 2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. New Delhi; The 4th March, 2002. . L. K. ADVANI.
Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> In Section 2 of the Vice-President's Pension Act, 1997 (30 of 1997) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after Sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-- "(1A) The spouse of a person who dies-- (a) while holding the office of Vice-President, or (b) after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President either by the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, shall be paid a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent, of pension as is admissible to a retiring Vice-president, for the remainder of her life.".
Vice-President's Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> After Section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-- "3A. Free accommodation to spouse of Vice-President.-- Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies-- (a) while holding the office of Vice-President, or (b) after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President either by the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, shall be entitled to the use of unfurnished residence without payment of licence fee, for the remainder of her life. 
