Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section Preamble--> A Bill to provide for equal compensation to victims of accidents by the Government and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Act, 2016. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "accident" means an unexpected and undesirable incident resulting in injury or death of a person during travel by road, railway or air or due to natural disasters, or terrorist or extremists activities or stampede; (b) "victim," means a person killed or injured in any accident; (c) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that State and in all other cases the Central Government; (d) "compensation" means financial assistance provided by the Central Government to the victim or his dependent; (e) "dependent" means the parents, spouse, children or siblings of the victim; (f) "Fund" means the Victims of Accident Compensation Fund constituted under section 4; (g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and (h) "qualified medical practitioner" means any person declared by the Central or State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a qualified medical practitioner for the purposes of this Act.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 3--> (1) The Central Government shall after taking into consideration the loss or injury sustained, pay equal amount of compensation to every victim. (2) The amount of compensation shall be as follows:- (i) where death results from the accident, the dependents of the victim shall be paid rupees twenty lakh; (ii) where permanent disability results from the accident, the victim shall be paid rupees ten lakh; (iii) where temporary disability results from the accident, the victim shall be paid rupees four lakh; and (iv) where ordinary injury results from the accident, the victim shall be paid rupees one lakh. (3) The nature of injury suffered by a victim shall be examined and reported by a qualified medical practitioner, in such manner as may be prescribed. (4) The compensation amount shall be disbursed to the victim or to his dependent within one week from the date of receipt of report of the qualified medical practitioner.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 4--> (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Victims of Accident Compensation Fund for the purposes of this Act. (2) The State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in such proportion as may be prescribed. (3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation or contribution both from domestic and international institutions shall also be credited to the Fund. (4) The Fund shall be administered by a Board to be known as the Victims of Accident Compensation Board, consisting of:- (i) the Prime Minister-ex-officio Chairperson; (ii) the Chief Ministers of every State and Lieutenant Governor or Chief Administrators of Union territories; and (iii) ten retired judges of High Court to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 5--> The Central Government may require a State Government to furnish such statistical and other information as may be necessary for implementation of the provisions of this Act, in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 6--> (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Special Team to effectively implement the provisions of this Act within their jurisdiction. (2) The Special Team shall consist of ten members of which five shall be appointed by the Central Government and five by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) The Special Team shall- (i) visit the accident site and collect information relating to the victims; (ii) submit the accident related information to the Victims of Accident Compensation Board; (iii) ensure that the victims receive the compensation within the time limit prescribed under this Act; and (iv) undertake any other work that may be assigned by the Victims of Accident Compensation Board.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 7--> The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 8--> The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt within this Act.
Victims of Accident (Equal Compensation) Bill, 2016_Section 9--> (1) The Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making and modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
