Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the erection and management of the Victoria Memorial at Calcutta. WHEREAS it is intended to erect at Calcutta a building as a memorial of the life and reign of Her late Majesty Victoria of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Queen, Empress of India, and for this purpose large sums of money have been subscribed by the princes and people of India ;AND WHEREAS at a meeting of subscribers held in Calcutta certain persons were appointed a Provisional Executive Committee to take the custody of the said moneys ;AND WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the erection, maintenance and management of the memorial and for the appointment of a permanent body of Trustees;It is hereby enacted as follows :--
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called The Victoria Memorial Act, 1903; 1 2 [...]. 3 [...] For Statement of Objects and Reasons, 1903, Part V, p. 164. Word "and" sub-section (2) repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (10 of 1914), Section 3 and Schedule II. Word "and" sub-section (2) repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (10 of 1914), Section 3 and Schedule II.
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section 2--> The trustees of the Victoria Memorial (hereinafter called the Trustees) shall be the following, namely :-- 1 ["(1) The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial (hereinafter called the trustees ) shall be the following, namely:- (a) the Government of West Bengal, ex officio Chairman; (b) the Chief Justice of the High Court of West Bengal ex officio: (c) three persons to be nominated by the Central Government one of whom shall be a representative of commerce and industry, chosen in consultation with the State Government of West Bengal and two others chosen from among persons who, in the opinion of the Central Government, have expert knowledge of the exhibits in the Victoria Memorial or are musicologists, historians or art historians; (d) a representative of the Central Government in the Ministry concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, ex officio; (e) a representative of the Central Government in the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, concerned with matters relating to the Victoria Memorial, ex officio; (f) the Mayor of the Corporation of Calcutta and where the Corporation of Calcutta is superseded, the Administrator of that Corporation, ex officio; (g) an officer, not below the rank of the Accountant-General, nominated by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, ex officio; (h) the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal in the Department of Education, ex officio; (i) four persons (of whom one at least shall be from the general body of subscribers), to the nominated by the Trustees, from among persons, who, in the opinion of the Trustees from among persons, who, in the opinion of the Victoria Memorial or are museologists, historians or art historians, with the approval of the Central Government] (2) The Trustees shall be a body corporate, with perpetual succession by the name of "The Trustees of the Victoria Memorial" and a common seal, and in that name shall sue and be sued, and shall have power to acquire and hold property, to enter into contracts, and to do all acts necessary for and consistent with the purposes of this Act. [(3) All acts done by a majority of those present and voting at a meeting of the Trustees, and all acts done in pursuance of a majority decision of the Trustees obtained by circulation to the Trustees of the matter requiring decision, shall be deemed to be acts of the Trustees.] 2 [(3A) If any of the Trustees referred to in clauses (b), (d), (e), (f), (g) and (h) of sub-section (1) is unable to attend any meeting of the Trustees, he may, with the previous approval of the Chairman, authorise in writing a person to do so.] (4) No act of the Trustees shall be deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in or defect in the constitution of, the body of the Trustees. (5) In the case of ex-officio Trustees the person for the time being performing the duties of any of the offices mentioned in sub-section (1) shall act as a Trustee. (6) The Trustees may appoint a person to act as their Secretary. (7) Orders for the payment of money on behalf of the Trustees shall be deemed to be sufficiently authenticated if signed by two Trustees and countersigned by the Secretary. Substituted by the Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1981 (32 of 1981) Inserted by the Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1981 (40 of 1981),
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section 3--> All sums of money now in the custody of the said Provisional Executive Committee and all other property, whether moveable or immoveable, which have been or may hereafter be given, bequeathed or otherwise transferred for the purposes of the said Memorial or acquired for the said purposes by the Trustees shall vest in the Trustees.
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section 4--> All officers and servants employed by the Trustees shall be deemed to be public servants, within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code : Provided that this section shall not apply to persons in the service of any contractor employed by the Trustees.
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903_Section 5--> 1 (1) The 2 [Central Government] may3 [by notification in the Official Gazette] make rules 4 to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generally of the forgoing power, such rules may provide- (a) for the manner in which Trustees, other than ex-officio Trustees, shall be appointed, and for the periods of time for which such Trustees shall hold office, (b) for the manner in which meetings of the Trustees shall he convened, the quorum necessary for the transaction of business, and the procedure at such meetings; 5 [(bb) for the manner in which a majority decision of the Trustees shall be obtained by circulation to the Trustees of the matter requiring decision;] (c) for the appointment of Committees of the Trustees, and the powers of expenditure and control which may be delegated to such Committees; (d) for the erection, maintenance and management of the Memorial, the care and custody of the objects deposited therein, and the conditions under which the public shall have access thereto;6 [(da) for the fees to be levied for admission to the Victoria Memorial.] (e) for the form of accounts to be kept by the Trustees, and for the audit and publication of such accounts; 7 8 [...] Inserted by Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act. 1981 Substituted for the words "Governor-General in Council" by A. L. O. 1950. Inserted by Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act. 1981 For rules, see General Rules and Orders, Vol. III, pp. 381 to 383. Inserted by the Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1943 (25 of 1943), Section 3. Inserted by Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1981 Omitted by Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1981 Omitted by Victoria Memorial (Amendment) Act, 1981 
