Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to provide for contribution by local authorities of a portion of the expenses to be incurred in connection with the taking of census and. for certain other purposes. Whereas it is expedient to provide for contribution by local authorities of a portion of the expenses to be incurred in connection with the taking of census and for certain other purposes. Amending Act M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958 Received the assent of the Governor on 16-3-1949; assent first published in the "Central Provinces and Berar Gazette" on 25-3-1949.
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be cited as the 1 [Madhya Pradesh] Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949. (2) It extends to the whole of 2 [Madhya Pradesh.] Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958 (w.e.f. 1-1-1959). Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958 (w.e.f. 1-1-1959).
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) "Census" means a census taken in accordance with the provisions of the Census Act, 1948; (b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment in regard to the funds of any local authority, the State Government may direct that such portion of any expenses, as may be prescribed, incurred for anything done in accordance with the Census Act, 1948, or the rules made thereunder may be charged to the funds of any local authority constituted for and on behalf of the area within which such expenses were incurred.
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Every local authority shall be bound to give such assistance in connection with a census as it may be called upon to give by an order made under Section 6 of the Census Act, 1948.
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh If the State Government after receiving a report from the District Magistrate or the Superintendent of Census is satisfied that a local authority has made default in performing any duty imposed on it by or under this Act or the Census Act, 1948, or has failed to make payment of expenses or cost as required by or under Section 3 of this Act or Section 16 of the Census Act, 1948, the State Government may make such orders and take such steps as it may consider expedient for securing performance of such duties or the payment of such expenses or costs as the case may be.
Madhya Pradesh Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1949_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :- (a) the portion of the expenses incurred in connection with the taking of census which may be charged under this Act to the fund of any local authority; (b) the manner in which sums charged under this Act shall be computed and paid; (c) the manner in which and the extent to which any duty connected with census may be performed by a local authority. 
