Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Madhya Pradesh Gazette.
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 16 of the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (No. 17 of 1961) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), in the second proviso, for full stop, the colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided also that an order for the winding up or an order sanctioning a scheme of compromise or arrangement or of amalgamation or reconstruction, of a Co-operative Bank shall be made only with the previous sanction in writing of the Reserve Bank.".
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 69-A of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "69A. Winding up of Co-operative Bank. - Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the Registrar shall forthwith Make an order for winding up of a Co-operative Bank, if so required by the Reserve Bank of India in the circumstances mentioned in Section 13-D of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (No. 47 of 1961) or otherwise.".
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 69-B of the principal Act,- (i) in the marginal heading, for the words "insured bank", the words "insured bank or transferee bank" shall be substituted; (ii) in the provision, for the words "insured bank" occurring twice, the words "insured bank or transferee bank" shall be substituted. 
