Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act to amend the Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Adhiniyam, 2004. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017.
Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 2 of the Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Adhiniyam, 2004 (No. 20 of 2004) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(ia) "plastic carry bags" means bags made from any plastic material used for the purpose of carrying or dispensing commodities, but do not include bags that constitute or form an integral part of the packaging in which goods are sealed prior to use: Provided that the bag which is used for packaging shall be treated as plastic carry bag, if it is re-cycled;".
Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 3 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted namely:- "3. Prohibition on usage of plastic carry bags. - The State Government may, if it consider necessary so to do in the public interest, notify the thickness of plastic carry bags or containers, for the production, storage, transportation, sale and use thereof, or by a notification, completely ban the production, storage, transportation, sale and use of plastic carry bags in the entire State or any part of the State.".
Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Jaiv Anaashya Apashishta (Niyantran) Sanshodhan Adhyadesh, 2017 (No. 1 of 2017) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed or deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
