Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1972. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016. (2) It shall come into force from 1st April, 2016.
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha _Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1972 (No. 25 of 1972) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "rupees thirty thousand", the words "rupees fifty thousand", for the words "rupees twenty seven thousand", the words "rupees forty five thousand", for the words "rupees twenty five thousand", the words "rupees forty thousand" and for the words "rupees twenty thousand", the words "rupees thirty five thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 4 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "4. Sumptuary allowance, constituency allowance and daily allowance. - (1) There shall be paid to the Chief Minister a sumptuary allowance of fifty five thousand rupees, to each Minister forty five thousand rupees, to each Minister of State thirty four thousand rupees and to each Deputy Minister and Parliamentary Secretary twenty five thousand rupees per mensem. (2) There shall be paid to the Chief Minister a constituency allowance of fifty thousand rupees, to each Minister thirty five thousand rupees, to each Minister of State thirty one thousand rupees and to each Deputy Minister and Parliamentary Secretary twenty five thousand rupees per mensem. (3) There shall be paid to the Chief Minister and to each Minister, Minister of State, Deputy Minister and Parliamentary, Secretary a daily allowance of forty five thousand rupees per month within the State and two thousand five hundred rupees outside the State per day during the term of office.". 
