Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 and the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017.
Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 (No. 23 of 1956), in section 301, after sub-section (4), the following new sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(5) In respect of cases, where building permission has been granted as per the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 294, by the registered and authorised architect or structural engineer, such architect or structural engineer shall be empowered to issue completion certificate and permission to occupy for such building after ensuring the compliance of statutory provisions and conditions of building permission. The copy of completion certificate and permission to occupy issued under this sub-section shall be provided to the Commissioner at his office within seven days.".
Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 (No. 37 of 1961), in section. 191, after sub-section (2), the following new sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(3) In respect of cases, where building permission has been granted as per the provisions of sub-section (3A) of section 187, by the registered and authorised architect or structural engineer, such architect or structural engineer shall be empowered to issue completion certificate and permission to occupy for such building after ensuring the compliance of statutory provisions and conditions of building permission. The copy of completion certificate and permission to occupy issued under this sub-section shall be provided to Council at his office within seven days.".
Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Nagarpalik Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhyadesh, 2017 (No. 6 of 2017) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act. 
