Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1972. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017. (2) It shall come into force from the date of its publication in the Madhya Pradesh Gazette.
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 2 of the Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 2017 (No. 25 of 1972) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "2. Definitions. - In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Minister" includes Chief Minister; (b) "Ex-Chief Minister" means the Ex-Chief Minister of the successor State of Madhya Pradesh and includes such Ex-Chief Minister of existing State of Madhya Pradesh who was elected from the Vidhan Sabha constituency of the successor State of Madhya Pradesh; (c) "Existing State of Madhya Pradesh" and "successor State of Madhya Pradesh" shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in clause (e) and clause (j) of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (No. 28 of 2000).
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 3 of the principal Act, for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following provisos shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister" shall be entitled to an honorariun which shall be equivalent to the salary of a Minister: Provided further that if a Ex-Chief Minister holds any post of Minister in the Central Government or State Government, then he shall not be entitled to such honorarium during that period.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 4 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1), shall full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister shall be entitled to a sumptuary allowance equivalent to a Minister, but he shall not be entitled to the sumptuary allowance as a Member of Parliament or Member of Legislative Assembly,";. (ii) in sub-section (3), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister shall be entitled to a daily allowance equivalent to a Minister, but he shall not be entitled to the daily allowance as a Member of Parliament or Member of Legislative Assembly.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 5 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister shall be entitled throughout his life, without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence equivalent to a Minister."; (ii) in sub-section (4), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall apply to a Ex-Chief Minister as it apply to a Minister."; (iii) in sub-section (5), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall apply to a Ex-Chief Minister as it apply to a Minister.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 6 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall apply to a Ex-Chief Minister as it apply to a Minister."; (ii) in sub-section (2), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the provision of this sub-section shall apply to a Ex-Chief Minister as it apply to a Minister.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister shall be entitled to the facilities provided under this sub-section.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that a Ex-Chief Minister shall be entitled, without payment of any charge, to accommodation in and provision of electricity at, circuit houses and rest houses maintained by the State Government.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 9-A of the principal Act, for full stop occurring at the last place, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the provision of this section shall also apply to a Ex-Chief Minister.".
Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2017_Section 10--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Mantri (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Sanshodhan Adhyadesh, 2017 (No. 2 of 2017) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act. 
