Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1991. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016.
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1991 (No. 25 of 1991), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following new sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) In addition to tax payable under sub-section (1), on every motor vehicle being kept for use in the State of Madhya Pradesh, "Green Tax" shall be payable at the rate specified in the First Schedule, for the purpose of implementation of various measures to control air pollution. (4) In addition to tax payable under sub-section (1) and (3), "transfer tax" shall be payable at the rate specified in the First Schedule on every transfer of ownership of motor vehicle.".
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 5 of the Principal Act, in sub-section (2), first, second and third provision shall be omitted.
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for full stop, colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that such vehicle which is registered in the State of Madhya Pradesh and has paid life time tax at the rate specified in the Second Schedule, the owner of the vehicle shall be liable to deposit 25 percent of the life time tax as a penalty.".
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In the First Schedule to the principal Act,- (i) in item V,- (a) in sub-item (1), for the figure "5000", the figure "12000" shall be substituted; (b) for sub-item (2), the following sub-item shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) On goods vehicle which was registered in the Madhya Pradesh prior to 1st October, 2014 and having registered laden weight more than 12000 kg the tax shall be as follows:- (a) Exceeds 12000 kg. but does not exceed 13000 kg. Rs. 3250 per quarter (b) Thereafter for each 1000 kg. or part thereof Rs. 250 per quarter Provided that the owner of the vehicle shall have option to pay lifetime tax in accordance with item 7 of the Second Schedule."; (c) in sub-item (3), explanations 3 and 4 shall be omitted; (ii) in item VI, in column (2), for the figure "480", the figure "600" shall be substituted; (iii) after item VIII, the following new items shall be inserted, namely:- "IX TRANSFER TAX At the time of transfer of ownership, the following transfer tax shall be payable:- (i) non-transport vehicle 1 percent of the standard price of the vehicle at the time of registration (ii) transport vehicle 0.5 percent of the standard price of the vehicle at the time of registration. Explanation.-In case of transfer of ownership on death of vehicle owner or on transfer by public auction by the Government under sub-section (2) of Section 50 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (No. 59 of 1988), additional motor vehicle tax shall not be payable as specified in this Schedule. X. GREEN TAX (1) On an application submitted in the office at the time of renewal of registration or after expiration of the term of registration, the following Green tax shall be payable on the non-transport vehicle- (a) On two wheeler Rs. 500 (for five years) (b) On vehicle other than two wheeler Rs. 1000 (for five years) (2) At the time of fitness certificate of eight years old transport vehicle from the manufacture year, the following Green tax shall be payable- (a) Two wheeler, light motor vehicle and medium motor vehicle Rs. 500 (b) Heavy motor vehicle Rs. 1000".
Madhya Pradesh Motoryan Karadhan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In the Second Schedule to the principal Act,- (i) items 1, 2 and 3 shall be omitted; (ii) after item 4, the following new items shall be inserted, namely:- "4A. Motor cycle and non-transport/transport vehicle having seating capacity up to 12+1, having standard price up to Rs. 10 lakh- (a) Driven by Diesel 8 percent of the standard price of vehicle (b) Driven by Petrol 7 percent of the standard price of vehicle (c) Driven by Hybrid/ CNG/ LPG 6 percent of the standard price of vehicle (d) Driven by Battery 5 percent of the standard price of vehicle. 4B. Motor cycle and non-transport/transport vehicle having seating capacity up to 12+1, having standard price exceeding Rs. 10 Lakh- (a) Driven by Diesel 9 percent of the standard price of vehicle. (b) Driven by Petrol 8 percent of the standard price of vehicle. (c) Driven by Hybrid/ CNG/ LPG 7 percent of the standard price of vehicle. (d) Driven by Battery 6 percent of the standard price of vehicle. 4C. On such two wheeler and non-transport/transport vehicle having seating capacity up to 12+1 which are brought into the State of Madhya Pradesh from other State obtaining on objection certificate, such vehicle owner shall pay tax in. the following percentage of rates mentioned in items 4A and 4B- (a) Up to three years old registered vehicle from the date of registration, on the date of issue of no objection certificate 80 percent (b) More than three years old registered vehicle from the date of registration, on the date of issue of no objection certificate. 60 percent"; (iii) item 5 shall be omitted; (iv) in item 7, the words and figure "having registered laden weight 5000 kg. or less and" shall be omitted and after sub-item (b), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that such Goods Carriage having laden weight more than 12000 kg., the owner of the vehicle shall have option to make payment of tax in accordance with item V (2) of the First Schedule."; (v) after item 7, the following item shall be inserted, namely:- "7A. Such Goods Carriage or such motor vehicle which are not covered in any of the category of vehicles specified in this Schedule which are brought for registration in the State of Madhya Pradesh after obtaining no objection certificate from other state, the rate of life time tax shall be as follows:- (a) Up to three years old Goods Carriage / Motor vehicle from the date of registration, on the date of issue of no objection certificate. 5 percent of the standard price of the vehicle (b) More than three years old Goods Carriage / Motor vehicle from the date of registration, on the date of issue of no objection certificate. 4 percent of the standard price of the vehicle.". 
