Madhya Bharat Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration (Adoption) Act, 1953_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to provide for the voluntary registration of certain birth and deaths, for the establishment of General Registry Offices for keeping Registers of certain births, deaths and marriages and for certain other purposes in Madhya Bharat. Be it enacted as follows :- Received the assent of H.H. the Rajpramukh on 10th October, 1953.
Madhya Bharat Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration (Adoption) Act, 1953_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The Madhya Bharat Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, (Adoption Act), 1953. (2) It shall extend to the whole of 1 [Madhya Bharat region]. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may notify in this behalf. Subs. by M.P. Adoption of Laws Order, 1956.
Madhya Bharat Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration (Adoption) Act, 1953_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886 (No. VI of 1886) as amended up to the date of the said commencement is for the purposes of this Act adopted mutatis mutandis as the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act of Madhya Bharat. All the modifications which may, in future, be effected, from time to time, in the said Act shall mutatis mutandis be deemed to have been automatically and simultaneously affected in the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act of Madhya Bharat also : Provided that in case where a corresponding law exists in Madhya Bharat all the references to any Indian Law in the Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act, 1886, shall be deemed to be references to that corresponding law of Madhya Bharat.
Madhya Bharat Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration (Adoption) Act, 1953_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh As soon as this Act comes into force all laws and other provisions having the force of law relating to registration of births, deaths and marriages, for the time being in force in any part of Madhya Bharat, shall stand repealed : Provided that all actions taken and orders passed under them shall be deemed to have been taken or passed under this Act. 
