Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Adhiniyam, 2007. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016.
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 8 of the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Adhiniyam, 2007 (No. 17 of 2007), sub-section (5) shall be omitted.
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words "and inspection report of the University Grants Commission, if any" shall be omitted.
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh After Section 9-A of the principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted in Chapter II, namely:- "9-B. Submission of application by private university for inspection. - The Private University shall submit an application in the prescribed format to the Regulatory Commission for inspection before starting any classes or courses, and after inspection, the Regulatory Commission may indicate to the said university, any deficiency found and shall give it a reasonable opportunity to rectify the same. The Regulatory Commission shall not grant permission to run such classes or courses till the deficiency is rectified.".
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following paragraph shall be inserted at the beginning, namely:- "After incorporation of the private university, but within six months of the commencement of first course, it shall be mandatory for the private university to submit an application to the University Grants Commission for inspection, in such manner as prescribed by the University Grants Commission.".
Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Niji Vishwavidyalaya (Sthapana Avam Sanchalan) Dwitiya Sanshodhan Adhiniyam, 2016 (No. 1 of 2016), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
