Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension Adhiniyam, 1972. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension Adhiniyam, 1972 (No. 7 of 1973) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "ten thousand", the words "thirty thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 4 of the principal Act, for the words "twenty five thousand", the words "thirty five thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 4-C of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "4-C. Computer Operator/Orderly allowance. - There shall be paid to every member a Computer Operator / Orderly allowance of fifteen thousand rupees per mensem.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Section 5 of the principal Act, shall be deleted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 5-A of the Principal Act:- (i) in sub-section (1), for the figure and word "6,000 kilometers", the figure and word "10,000 kilo meters" shall be substituted; l (ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "three thousand", the words "four thousand "shall be substituted.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 6-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (i) in the first paragraph, for the words "fifteen thousand", the words "twenty thousand" shall be substituted; (ii) in first proviso, for full stop, the colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be inserted namely:- "Provided further that eight hundred rupees per month shall be added per year in pension.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 6-B of the principal Act, for the words "ten thousand", the words "eighteen thousand". shall be substituted and for full stop, the colon shall be substituted and thereafter the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that five hundred rupees per month shall be added per year in family pension.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 6-C of the principal Act, for the words "ten thousand", the words "fifteen thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 10--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "five thousand", the words "ten thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Sadasya Vetan, Bhatta Tatha Pension (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 11--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh After Section 7 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be inserted, namely:- "7-A. Ex-gratia. - "There shall be paid ex-gratia of rupees five lakh to the dependant of deceased member.". 
