Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1972 and the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Neta Pratipaksha (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1980. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 2 of the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1972 (No. 27 of 1972) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "2. Salary of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. - There shall be paid a salary per mensem of rupees forty seven thousand to the Speaker and rupees forty five thousand to the Deputy Speaker.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For Section 3 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, namely:- "3. Sumptuary allowance, constituency allowance and daily allowance to Speaker and Deputy Speaker. - There shall be paid to the Speaker a sumptuary allowance of forty eight thousand rupees per mensem and to the Deputy Speaker a sumptuary allowance of forty five thousand rupees per mensem. (2) There shall be paid to the Speaker a constituency allowance of forty five thousand rupees per mensem and to the Deputy Speaker a constituency allowance of thirty five thousand rupees per mensem. (3) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker a daily allowance of one thousand five hundred rupees per day.".
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Neta Pratipaksha (Vetan Tatha Bhatta) Adhiniyam, 1980 (No. 8 of 1980) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "twenty seven thousand", the words "forty five thousand" shall be substituted.
Madhya Pradesh Vidhan Sabha Adhyaksha Tatha Upadhyaksha Evam Neta Pratipaksha Vetan Tatha Bhatta Vidhi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 4 of the principal Act,- (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "thirty thousand", the words, "forty five thousand" shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "twenty seven thousand", the words "thirty five thousand" shall be substituted; (iii) in sub-section (3), for the words "one thousand two hundred", the words "one thousand five hundred" shall be substituted. 
