Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act to provide for the conversion of refuse into manure within the limits of any 1 [municipal corporation or municipality] in 2 [Madhya Pradesh]. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the conversion of refuse into manure within the limits of any 3 [municipal corporation or municipality] in 4 [Madhya Pradesh], it is hereby enacted as follows : Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The 1 [Madhya Pradesh] Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007. 2 3 4 [(2) It shall extend to the whole of 5 [Madhya Pradesh). (3) It shall apply to all municipal corporations and municipalities in Madhya Pradesh to which it has been applied immediately before the commencement of the Madhya Pradesh Second Extension of Laws Act, 1961 (40 of 1961), and shall apply on the commencement of the said Act to the municipalities to which any enactment repealed by Section 6 of the said Act was applicable and may be applied to any other municipal corporation or municipalities, on such dates as the State Government may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different corporations or municipalities.] Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Received the assent of H.H. the Raj-Pramukh on 17-5-1950. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context : 1 [(a) "Municipality" means a municipality constituted under a Municipal Law. (1-a) "Municipal Corporation" means a municipal corporation constituted under a Municipal Law. (1-b) "Municipal Law" means a law for the time being in force for the organisation and administration of municipal corporations or municipalities or notified areas in the State, as the case may be.] (b) "Refuse" includes sweepings, night-soil, sewage, sludge and other waste material; (c) 2 [x x x] Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961. Omitted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in any Municipal Law or any other law for the time being in force, every municipality to which this Act applies, shall, if so required by an order in writing of the Government or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Government, take steps to convert, in accordance with such directions as the Government may from time to time issue, all refuse into compost manure.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Every such 1 [municipal corporation or municipality] shall deal with or dispose of the compost manure referred to in Section 3 in such manner as the Government may, from time to time, direct. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Where, in the opinion of the Government, a municipal corporation or municipality has failed to comply with an order under Section 3, the Government may appoint a person to give effect to such order and may direct that the reasonable expense of giving effect to the order together with a reasonable remuneration payable to such person shall forthwith be paid by the 1 [municipal corporation or municipality]. (2) If any such expense and remuneration are not so paid, the Government may make an order, directing the deduction of such sums from grants-in-aid payable to such municipality by the Government or by directing any person, who for the time being has custody of any moneys on behalf of municipality as its officer; treasurer, banker or otherwise, to pay such expense and remuneration from such moneys as he may have in his hands or may from time to time receive, and such person shall be bound to obey such order. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 40 of 1961.
Madhya Pradesh Municipal Refuse (Conversion into Manure) Act, Samvat 2007_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh As soon as this Act comes into force all Acts, rules, regulations relating to municipal refuse, in force in any part of Madhya Bharat 1 [Region] which may be repugnant or inconsistent with the provisions of this Act shall, to the extent of such repugnancy or inconsistency, stand repealed : Provided that all actions taken and orders passed under them shall be deemed to have been taken or passed under this Act. Inserted by M.P.A.L.O. 1956. 
