Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to make provision for laying down syllabi up to the standard of secondary education, for the prescription of text books according to such syllabi and generally to provide for matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Amending Act M.P. Act No. 3 of 1978. Received the assent of the Governor on the 23rd March, 1973, assent first published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette" (Extraordinary), dated the 23rd March, 1973
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Adhiniyam, 1973. (2) It extends to whole of Madhya Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "appointed day" means the date appointed under sub-section (3) of Section 1; (b) "Board" means the Board of Secondary Education, Madhya Pradesh established under the Madhya Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Adhiniyam, 1965 (No. 23 of 1965); (c) "examination" includes other methods of evaluation, test or assessment; (d) "Syllabi" means a document containing courses of instructions for each standard of primary education, middle school education and secondary education; (e) "text book"- (i) in relation to a final examination means any book approved by the State Government in accordance with the syllabi prescribed under this Act, for use for any final examination conducted under the authority of the State Government or by the Board; and (ii) in relation to any other examination held in an approved school or a school recognised by the Board means any book approved by the State Government in accordance with the syllabi prescribed under this Act, for use for such examination, and includes other books of study or instructional material such as maps, designs and material of like nature approved by the State Government for any standard of primary education, middle school education or secondary education in accordance with the syllabi laid down under this Act; (f) the expressions "primary education" and "approved school" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to those expressions in the Madhya Pradesh Primary Education Act, 1961 (No. 33 of 1961) and the expressions "middle school education", "recognised" and "secondary education" shall have the meaning respectively assigned to those expressions in the Madhya Pradesh Madhyamik Shiksha Adhiniyam, 1965 (No. 23 of 1965).
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) the State Government may, from time to time, in relation to primary education and middle school education and the Board may, from time to time, in relation to secondary education lay down syllabi and publish the same in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) The syllabi laid down under the authority of the State Government in the case of primary education and middle school education and by the Board, in the case of the secondary education and in force immediately before the appointed day shall be the syllabi laid down and published for the purpose of sub-section (1).
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may, by order, prescribe the text books according to syllabi laid down under Section 3 : Provided that text books for secondary education shall not be prescribed without prior consultation with the Board. (2) The text books prescribed by the State Government or the Board according to the syllabi referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 3 and in force immediately before the appointed day shall, till they are changed in accordance with the provisions of this Act, be the text books prescribed for the purpose of sub-section (1). (3) As from the appointed day, no books other that the text books prescribed under sub-section (1) or referred to in sub-section (2) shall be used in any approved school or recognised school for imparting instructions in accordance with syllabi in primary education, middle school education or secondary education.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may, if it considers it necessary so to do, undertake the preparation, printing or distribution of text books itself or cause the text books to be prepared, printed or distributed through such agency as it may deem fit on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment for the time being in force, text books prescribed by the State Government under Section 3 for any standard of secondary education shall be the text books prescribed for such standard of secondary education in accordance with the syllabi and the Board shall be bound to accept the same when so prescribed by the State Government.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may, by order, delegate any of its powers and duties under this Act, except the power to make rules, to any officer subordinate to it not below the rank of Director of Public Instruction.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 7-A--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh If the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do for implementation of an educational experimentation programme sponsored by the Central Government or the State Government or any agency managed, controlled or approved by the Central Government or the State Government, the State Government may, by notification, subject to such restrictions and conditions and for such period as may be specified therein exempt any approved school or recognised school for all or any of the provisions of this Act. Ins. by M.P. Act. No. 3 of 1978.
Madhya Pradesh Prathamik, Middle School Tatha Madhyamik Shiksha (Pathya Pustakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Act, 1973_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may make rules for carrying out all or any of the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly. 
