Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to provide for compulsory registration and movement of refugees. Whereas with a view to maintaining order, public health and sanitation, avoiding further shortage of accommodation, affording relief to the poor and relieving unemployment, it is necessary to provide for powers for the compulsory registration and movement of refugees : It is hereby enacted as follows :- Amending Act M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958. Received the assent of the Governor on the 30th October, 1947, assent first published in the Central Provinces and Berar Gazette Extra-ordinary on the 3rd November, 1947.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be cited as the 1 [Madhya Pradesh] Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947. 2 [(2) It extends to and shall be in force in the whole of Madhya Pradesh]. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "refugee" means a person who has migrated into 1 [this State] for reasons of safety in consequence of disturbances or apprehension thereof endangering person or property in his usual place of residence; (b) "registration centre" means any place specified as such for any particular area by the District Magistrate of the district by a general or special order or in the absence of any such order the nearest police station. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Every refugee in 1 [this State] shall get himself registered at the appropriate registration centre and in such manner as the District Magistrate may direct within 15 days from the commencement of this Act or within 7 days of his arrival in 2 [this State] whichever be later and shall furnish to the officer-in-charge of such registration centre such information as may be specified by the District Magistrate : Provided that where the refugee is the head of a family, he shall be responsible for the registration of all members of his family with him for the time being : Provided further that where the refugee is a female, a minor, a lunatic, an idiot or person in capable of attending the registration centre by reason of any physical infirmity, the person who may for the time being be looking after such refugee shall, in like manner, attend such registration centre and furnish on his behalf the information specified in this section. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh On registration the Officer-in-charge of the registration centre shall issue an identity card to the refugee. The refugee shall be responsible for the safe custody of the identity card and shall produce it on demand by a Magistrate, a police officer, an official of the rationing department, or such other public servant as may be authorised in this behalf by the District Magistrate.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Every refugee who wishes to change his residence from the jurisdiction of one registration centre to another shall, before departing, surrender his identity card to the Officer-in-charge of the registration centre from which he departs and get himself registered in the registration centre of the place where he wishes to reside.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may, by order in writing, require any refugee or class of refugees to reside within any area or to migrate from one area to another in 1 [Madhya Pradesh] within a period specified in such order. If such refugee fails to leave the area in accordance with the order, he may, without prejudice to anything contained in Section 7 be removed from such area by any police officer or any person authorised by the State Government in this behalf. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 23 of 1958.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or any rule made thereunder or any order made in pursuance of this Act or knowingly furnishes false information under Section 3 shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine not exceeding Rs. 500 or with both.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may, by order direct that any power or duty, which is conferred or imposed on the State Government under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised or discharged by any officer or authority, not being an officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government.
Madhya Pradesh Refugees Registration and Movement Act, 1947_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may make rules to give effect to the purposes of this Act. 
