Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to constitute a State Commission for Scheduled Castes and to provided for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Forty Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Received the assent of the Governor on the 24th May, 1995; assent firs) published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette (Extraordinary)" dated 29th June, 1995.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Madhya Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires :- (a) "Commission" means the Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog constituted under Section 3; (b) "Member" means a member of the Commission and includes the chairperson; (c) "Scheduled Castes" means such castes, races or tribes or parts of, or groups within such castes, races or tribes specified as Scheduled Castes with respect to the State of Madhya Pradesh under Article 341 of the Constitution of India.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government shall constitute a body to be known as the Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. (2) The Commission shall consist of the following members :- (a) Three non official members who have special knowledge in the matters relating to Scheduled Castes of whom one shall be the Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government: Provided that at least two members shall be from amongst the Scheduled Castes. (b) Director, Scheduled Castes Welfare, Madhya Pradesh.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Every non-official member of the Commission shall hold office for a term of three years from the date he assumes charge of his office. (2) A member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the State Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or as the case may be, of member at any time. (3) The State Government shall remove a person from the office of member if that person- (a) becomes an undischarged insolvent; (b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; (c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; (d) refuses to act or become incapable of acting; (e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three consecutive meetings of the Commission; or (f) has, in the opinion of the State Government, so abused the position of Chairperson or Member as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the interests of Scheduled Castes or the public interest: Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause unless he has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. (4) A vacancy caused under sub-section (2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh nomination and the person so nominated shall hold office for the remainder term of his predecessor. (5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Commission and provide the Commission with such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Commission. (2) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and the administrative expenses including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Secretary, officers and other employees referred to in Section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 11.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Commission shall meet as and when necessary at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit. (2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure. (3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Secretary in this behalf.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) It shall be the function of the Commission,- (a) to act as watch-dog Commission for the protection afforded to the members of the Scheduled Castes under the Constitution and under any other law for the time being in force; (b) to recommend to the State Government to take steps to add particular castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950; (c) to watch the proper and timely implementation of programmes meant for welfare of Scheduled Castes and to suggest improvement in such programmes of the State Government or any other body or authority responsible for such programmes; (d) to tender advice regarding reservation for Scheduled Castes in public services and admission in educational institutions; (e) to perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State Government. (2) The advice of the Commission shall, ordinarily be binding upon the State Government, where, however, the Government does not accept the advice, it shall record its reasons therefor.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 10--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Commission shall, while performing its functions under sub-section (1) of Section 9, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely :- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of the State and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any Court or office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and (f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 11--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government shall, after due appropriation made by Legislative Assembly by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1).
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 12--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government. (2) The Accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Accountant General of Madhya Pradesh at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Accountant General.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 13--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the State Government.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 14--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government shall cause the annual report, together with a memorandum of action taken on the advice tendered by the Commission under Section 9 and the reason for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such advice, and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after they are received before the Legislative Assembly.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 15--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Chairperson, Members, Officers and employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 16--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any member, officer or employee of the Commission for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 17--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely- (a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members under subsection (5) of Section 4 and the Secretary, officers and other employees under sub-section (2) of Section 5; (b) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared under sub-section (1) of Section 12; (c) the form in and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under Section 13; (d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be prescribed. (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made on the table of the Legislative Assembly.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 18--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient, for removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under this section shall as soon as may be after it is made, be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly.
Madhya Pradesh Rajya Anusuchit Jati Ayog Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 19--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati, Anusuchit Jan Jati Tatha Pichhada Varg Ayog Adhiniyam, 1983 (No. 31 of 1983) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken in respect of Scheduled Castes by the Commission constituted under the repealed Act or by the State Government in pursuance of its recommendation shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
