Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita (Nirsan) Adhiniyam, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act to repeal the Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita Adhiniyam, 1999. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the sixty-third year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita (Nirsan) Adhiniyam, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita (Nirsan) Adhiniyam, 2012.1 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on 4th February, 2013 and was published in the Madhya Pradesh Gazette, Extra-ordinary, dated 5th February, 2013.
Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita (Nirsan) Adhiniyam, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this Act under sub-section (2) of Section 1. (b) "repealed Act" means the Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita Adhiniyam, 1999 (No.2 of 2000).
Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita (Nirsan) Adhiniyam, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) On the appointed day, the Madhya Pradesh Swayatta Sahakarita Adhiniyam, 1999 (No.2 of 2000) shall stand repealed. (2) The repeal shall not affect,- (a) any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to; or (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act so repealed; or (c) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or consequences of any thing already done or suffered thereunder; or (d) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the Act so repealed; or (e) any legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation or liability as aforesaid and any such legal proceedings or remedy may be continued or enforced as if this Act had not been passed. (3) Notwithstanding the repeal or anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract, on and from the appointed day, the cooperatives registered under the repealed Act shall be deemed to registered under the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (No. 17 of 1961) and the provisions of the said Act shall be applicable for regulation of such cooperatives. (4) Notwithstanding the repeal, all contracts, bonds, deeds, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect on the appointed day and wherein the co-operative registered under the repealed Act is a party shall from such date of full force and effect. (5) Notwithstanding the repeal, the bye-laws and regulations made by the Board of Directors of the Cooperative under the repealed Act shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (NO. 17 of 1961) and the rules made thereunder, continue in force until altered or rescinded under the Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Ad, 1960 (No. 17 of 1961). 
