Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to provide for the prevention of defacement of property. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Received the assent of the President on the 22nd May, 1995, assent first published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette (Extraordinary)" dated the 27th May, 1995.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994. (2) It extends to the whole of Madhya Pradesh.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "defacement" includes impairing or interfering with the appearance or beauty, damaging, disfiguring, spoiling or injuring in any other way whatsoever and the word "deface" shall be construed accordingly; (b) "Property" includes any building, hut structure, wall, tree, fence, post, pole or any other erection; (c) "Writing" includes decoration, lettering, ornamentation, etc. produced by stencil.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Whoever defaces any property in public view by writing or making with ink, chalk, paint or any other material, without the written permission of the owner of the property shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 3, it shall be competent for the State Government to take such steps as may be necessary for erasing any writing, freeing any defacement or removing any mark from any property and the expenses incurred thereon shall be recoverable from the person found guilty for such writing defacement or mark as arrears of land revenue.
Madhya Pradesh Sampatti Virupan Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1994_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force. 
