Adjudication of Certain Claims of Cultivators Act, 1932_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act to provide for the better adjudication of certain claims of cultivators. Where as it is expedient to provide for the better adjudication of claims for possession of lands by persons who were not in possession when leases (pattas) were granted to them at the last settlement and by persons who were ejected from their lands by Revenue Officer during settlement operations and whose land were settled others by the Settlement Officer; it is hereby enacted as follows:-
Adjudication of Certain Claims of Cultivators Act, 1932_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The Adjudication of Certain Claims of Cultivators Act, 1932. (2) It extends to the whole of the 1 [Bhopal region]. (3) It shall come into force at once. Subs. by M.P.A.L.O. 1956.
Adjudication of Certain Claims of Cultivators Act, 1932_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment for the time being in force a suit- (a) for possession of land by a person who was not in possession when a lease (patta) was granted to him at the last settlement, or (b) for declaration of right by a person who was ejected from his land by a Revenue Officer during settlement operations and whose land was settled with another person by the Settlement Officer, may be instituted in a competent Civil Court, whether or not such matter has before the commencement of this Act been disposed of by a Revenue Officer : Provided that no such suit shall be instituted after six months from the commencement of this Act : Provided further that the Government or any officer of the Revenue Department shall not be made a party of such suit. (2) All applications and proceedings in such matters pending before Revenue Officers when this Act comes into force shall be transferred to the proper Civil Court for disposal. (3) The decisions of the Civil Court under this Act shall be binding on all Revenue Officers and entries in the village papers shall be altered accordingly.
Adjudication of Certain Claims of Cultivators Act, 1932_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In Section 57 of the Bhopal State Land Revenue Act (No. VII of 1936 Muhammadi), for the words "Revenue Court" the words "Civil Court" shall be substituted. 
