Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act further to amend the Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata Adhiniyam, 1967 and to validate certain decisions and orders. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Received the assent of the Governor on the 30th May, 1984; assent first published in the M.P. Rajpatra (Ext.) dated 12-6-1984.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh This Act may be called The Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Amendment to the Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata Adhiniyam, 1967 (No. 12 of 1967) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), as effected by Sections 3 and 4 of this Act, shall be deemed and shall always be deemed to have been made- (a) in relation to scheduled areas and as regards debt owed by any member of Scheduled Tribe. with effect from the date on which the Madhya Pradesh Scheduled Tribes Debt Relief Regulations, 1962 were repealed; (b) in relation to other areas of the State and as regards debt owed by any member of Scheduled Tribes. with effect from 3rd May, 1967. (c) in relation to whole of Madhya Pradesh and as regards debts pawned by a member of Scheduled Castes. with effect from 15th August, 1973. Explanation.- The words and expressions "debt", "Member of Scheduled Castes" and "Member of Scheduled Tribes" used in this Act, shall have the meaning assigned to them in the Principal Act.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Amendments made are incorporated in the principal Act.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Amendments made are incorporated in the principal Act.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh All legal proceedings held, decisions made or orders passed for redelivery of possession of immovable property mortgaged or charged or for return of movable property pawned or pledged in relation to secured debts owed by debtors under Section 8 or under Section 14 of the Principal Act by the Debt Relief Court or by the Collector in revision under Section 22 of the Principal Act, shall be deemed for all purposes to have been validly held, made or passed, as the case may be, under the Principal Act, and no such legal proceeding, decision or order, as aforesaid, shall be called in question before the Debt Relief Court, Collector or before any other Court or authority merely on the ground that the Debt Relief Court had no power under sub-section (4) or sub-section (6) of Section 8 or under sub-section (8) of Section 14 of the Principal Act, to order re-delivery of possession of immovable property to debtor or under sub-section (4) or sub-section (6) of Section 8 of the Principal Act to order return of movable property pawned or pledged.
Madhya Pradesh Anusuchit Jati Tatha Anusuchit Jan Jati Rini Sahayata (Sanshodhan Tatha Vidhimanya Karan) Adhiniyam, 1984_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Amendment made are incorporated in the Principal Act. 
