Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to constitute the District Planning Committees for the purposes of Article 243-ZD of the Constitution of India and for matters ancillary thereto Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Forty-sixth year of the Republic of India as follows :- Substituted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2004.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995.1 (2) It extends to the whole of Madhya Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th May, 1995.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise, requires :- (a) "Committee" means the District Planning Committee constituted under Section 3; 1 [(b) "District" means a district as construed in the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (No. 20 of 1959) and includes one more such revenue districts, or parts thereof, as are comprised within the Zila Panchayat constituted for the district]; (c) "Panchayat" means a Panchayat constituted under the Madhya Pradesh Panchayat Raj Adhiniyam, 1993 (No. 1 of 1994); (d) "Population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which relevant figures have been published; (e) "Municipalities" means Municipal Corporations, Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats constituted under the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporations Act, 1956 (No. 23 of 1956) or the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 (No. 37 of 1961). Substituted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2000.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 [(1) There shall be constituted for a revenue district or a group of revenue districts and parts thereof having a common Zila Panchayat, a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.] (2) Every Committee shall, preparing the draft development plan :- (a) have regard to :- (i) Matters of common interest between the Panchayats and Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; (ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise; (b) Consult such institutions and organisations as the State Government may, by order, specify. 2 [(3) Where the term of the existing members of the Municipality/Zila Panchayat has expired and the elected members cease to be members of the committee then the committee with remaining members shall continue to discharge the functions till new elections are held.] Substituted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2004. Inserted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2000.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Committee shall consist of 10, 15 or 20 members in different districts, as specified in the Schedule. (2) (i) Four-fifths of the total number of members of the Committee shall be elected in the prescribed manner by and from amongst the elected members of the Zila Panchayat and of the Municipalities in the district or group of revenue districts, as the case may be. (ii) The number of members to be elected from the rural and urban areas shall be as nearly as is possible, in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural and urban areas of the district or group of revenue districts, as the case may be. (3) The remaining members of the committee shall be :- (a) a Minister of the State of Madhya Pradesh to be nominated by the State Government, who shall be the Chairperson of the Committee; (b) the District Collector who shall be the member-secretary; (c) where the number of members of the committee, as specified in the Schedule is :- (i) fifteen then one member; or (ii) twenty then two members, to be nominated by the State Government : Provided that the Collector of the district by which the Zila Panchayat is described shall be the member-secretary of the District Planning Committee. (4) The members nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (3) shall hold office for such term as may be notified by the State Government.] Substituted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2000.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) (a) Members of the House of the People and members of the State Legislative Assembly representing constituencies which are comprised wholly or partly in the district shall be permanent special invitees to the meetings of the Committee; (b) Members of the Council of State representing the State shall also be the permanent special invitees to the meetings of the Committee of a district of their choice. (2) Invitees who are Ministers and Members of Parliament may nominate a representative to attend a meeting of the Committee on their behalf. 1 [(3) The President of the Zila Panchayat and the Mayor of the Municipal Corporation in the district shall also be permanent special invitees, in case they are not elected members of the Committee.] Inserted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2000.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) An elected member of the Committee shall cease to be member thereof if he ceases to be a member of the Municipality on Zila Panchayat as the case may be. (2) A vacancy arising under sub-section (1) or by reason of death or resignation of a member shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Committee shall perform the following functions :- (1) Identification of local needs and objectives within the frame work of national and state level objectives; (2) Collection, compilation and updation of information relating to natural and human resources of the district to create a sound data base for decentralised planning, preparation of district and block resource profiles; (3) Listing and mapping of amenities at village, block and district levels; (4) Determination of policies, programmes and priorities for development of the district, in order to ensure maximum and judicious utilisation and exploitation of available natural and human resources; (5) Formulation of draft Five-year and Annual Development plans of the district in their Socio-economic, temporal and spatial dimensions, consolidating the plans prepared by the Panchayats and Urban bodies and submission thereof to the State Government for incorporation in the State Plan; (6) Preparation of an employment plan for the district; (7) Estimation of financial resources for financing the district plan; (8) Allocation of sectorial and sub-sectorial outlays within the overall framework of the district development plan; (9) Monitoring, evaluation and review of progress under the schemes and programmes being implemented in the district under the decentralised planning framework including central sector and centrally-sponsored schemes, and the Local Area Development Schemes of Parliamentary Constituencies and Assembly Constituencies. (10) Submission of regular progress reports to the State Government in respect of schemes included in the District Plans; (11) Identifying schemes and programmes which require institutional finance, devising appropriate linkages with the district plans and ensuring requisite How of such investment; (12) Ensuring participation of voluntary organisations in the overall development process; (13) Making suggestions to the State Government with regard to the State Sector Schemes having significant bearing on the process of development of the district; (14) Any other functions which may be entrusted by the State Government.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 7-A--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 [xxx] Omitted by M.P. Act No. 3 of 2004.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Collector of the district shall be the Secretary of the Committee and shall be responsible for maintaining the record of the Committee, preparing the record of discussions and communication of decisions and all other incidental ancillary matters.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 [(1) The Committee may constitute such committees consisting of members of the committee and the permanent special invitees to discharge one or more of the functions entrusted to it under this Act]. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions, contained in sub-section (1), sub-committees shall in particular be constituted in the prescribed manner to :- (i) Monitor creation of employment and co-ordinate implementation of employment generation, including self-employment schemes in the district. (ii) Plan and co-ordinate specific schemes for Welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and other Weaker sections. Substituted by M.P. Act No. 30 of 2000.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 10--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The meetings of the Committee shall be held atleast once in every quarter of the financial year. (2) The meetings of the Committee shall be held on the scheduled date and time at the District Headquarter. (3) The Chairperson or in his absence a member elected by the members present shall preside over the meeting of the Committee. (4) The Committee may invite experts to attend its meeting. (5) The non-official members experts shall be paid such travelling and other allowances as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings. (6) Subject to any rules framed or guidelines issued by the State Government, the committee shall regulate its own procedure.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 11--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may make rules to carry out the purpose of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section 12--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh If any difficulty arises in giving affect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions thereof which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purposes of removing the difficulty : Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act.
Madhya Pradesh Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995_Section Sch.--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh [See Section 4 (1)] S.No. Name of the Committee Number of Members (1) (2) (3) 1. District Planning Committee of the District of 10 1. Sheopur  2. Datia  3. Umaria  4. Nimuch  5. Harda  6. Dindori 2. District Planning Committee of the District of 15 1. Panna  2. Damoh  3. Barwani  4. Hoshangabad  5. Katni  6. Narsinmhapur  7. Ashok Nagar  8. Anuppur  9. Burhanpur 3. District Planning Committee of the District of 20 1. Morena  2. Bhind  3. Gwalior  4. Guna  5. Shivpuri  6. Chhatarpur  7. Mandsaur  8. Satna 
