Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An act to provide for the establishment and maintenance of the Contingency Fund of the State of Madhya Pradesh. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Received the assent of the Governor on the 23rd January, 1957; assent first published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette" Extraordinary, on the 25th January, 1957.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be cited as The Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957. (2) It shall come into force immediately on its publication in the official Gazette of the State.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless there is any thing repugnant in the subject or context, "the Fund" means the Contingency Fund of the State of Madhya Pradesh established under Section 3.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh There shall be established a Fund in the nature of an imprest entitled "The Contingency Fund of the State of Madhya Pradesh" into which shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of Madhya Pradesh a sum of 2 [forty crores] of rupees. Subs, by M.P. Act No. 17 of 1971. Subs. by M.P. Act No. 12 of 1980.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The Fund shall be held on behalf of the Governor by the Secretary of Government in the Finance Department, and no advances shall be made out of the Fund, except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State under appropriation made by Law.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh For the purpose of carrying out the objects to this Act, the State Government may make rules regulating all matters connected with or ancillary to the custody of, payment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of money from, the Fund.
Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Act, 1957_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The Madhya Pradesh Contingency Fund Ordinance, 1956 (V of 1956) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this were in force on the date on which such thing was done or action was taken. 
