Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to provide for prevention of adulteration of cement with any other cementitious material not conforming to the I.S.I, standard and for matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Thirty second year of the Republic of India as follows :- Received the assent of the Governor on the 30th October, 1981; assent first published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette" (Extraordinary), dated the 3rd November, 1981.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981. (2) It extends to the whole of Madhya Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force at once.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "adulterate" means mixing of any other cementitious material with the cement, whatever be the proportion : (b) "cement" means any variety of cement manufactured in India and includes blast furnace slag cement, portland pozzolana cement, rapid hardening portland cement, white portland cement, hydrophobic portland cement, ordinary portland cement, low heat portland cement, high strength ordinary portland cement, cement used for the manufacture of railway sleepers, masonry cement, oil well cement, super sulphated cement or any other variety of cement which the Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette, specify under any enactment relating to the control of the quality of cement with reference to the standard prescribed by I.S.I.; (c) "cementitious material" means any material (by whatever name called) other than cement, such as sagol or other similar material which is, or may be used for joining two bodies but shall not include lime or hydrated lime; (d) "dealer" shall include a manufacturer of cementitious material.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No dealer shall sell or expose for sale of cementitious material, unless,- 1 [(a) it is duly coloured dark red;] (b) it is packed in a container other than a gunny bag usually used for the packing of cement; and (c) a bag contains not more than 35 kilograms of cementitious material. Subs, by M.P. Act No. 27 of 1982.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No dealer shall in any form whatsoever, exhibit on the packing of the cementitious material the word "cement" singly or in combination with other words.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No dealer shall store, expose for sale or sell cementitious material in the premises where cement is stored, exposed for sale or sold.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No dealer shall adulterate cement or mix cementitious material with cement.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Any officer, duly notified by the State Government in this behalf, shall have a right to enter into any premises where cement or cementitious material is stored or exhibited for sale or sold and take samples for purposes of investigation of offences under, or enforcement of the provisions of this Act.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Any contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine. (2) A prosecution under this Section shall be instituted only on the complaint of such officer as the State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 9--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) The State Government may make rules generally or carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing power, the State Government may make rules providing for,- (i) the setting up of a laboratory or testing samples; (ii) forms in which reports shall be submitted by an analyst; (iii) the attribution of presumptive correctness to the report of an analyst; and (iv) specifying the manner in which samples shall be taken and dispatched to an analyst for testing. (3) All rules made-under this Act shall be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly.
Madhya Pradesh Cement Apmishran Nivaran Adhiniyam, 1981_Section 10--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The provisions of this Act shall be in addition, and not in derogation of the provisions of any Act or order issued thereunder relating to the quality control of cement. 
