Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An Act to provide for prohibition of conversion from one religion to another by the use of force or allurement or by fraudulent means and for matters incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows.-
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968.1 (2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Madhya Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor on the 19th October, 1968; assent first published in the "Madhya Pradesh Gazette" Extraordinary, dated the 21st October, 1968.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act unless the context otherwise requires- (a) "allurement" means offer of any temptation in the form of- (i) any gift or gratification either in cash or kind. (ii) grant of any material benefit either monetary or otherwise; (b) "conversion" means renouncing one religion and adopting another; (c) "force" shall include a show of force or a threat of injury of any kind including threat of divine displeasure or social ex-communication; (d) "fraud' shall include misrepresentation or any other fraudulent contrivance; (e) "minor" means a person under eighteen years of age.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No person shall convert or attempt to convert, either directly or otherwise, any person from one religious faith to another by the use of force or by allurement or by any fraudulent means nor shall any person abet any such conversion.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh Any person contravening the provisions contained in Section 3 shall, without prejudice to any civil liability, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both : Provided that in case the offence is committed in respect of a minor, a women or a person belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes the punishment shall be imprisonment to the extent of two years and fine up to ten thousand rupees.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) Whoever converts any person from one religious faith to another either by performing himself the ceremony necessary for such conversion as a religious priest or by taking part directly or indirectly in such ceremony shall, within such period after the ceremony as may be prescribed, send an intimation to the District Magistrate of the district in which the ceremony has taken place of the fact of such conversion in such form as may be prescribed. (2) If any person fails with sufficient cause of comply with the provisions contained in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 6--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh An offence under this Act shall be cognizable and shall not be investigated by an officer below the rank of an Inspector of Police.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 7--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted except by, or with the previous sanction of, the District Magistrate or such other authority, not below the rank of Sub-Divisional Officer, as may be authorised by him in that behalf.
Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantrya Adhiniyam, 1968_Section 8--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The State Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
