Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh 1 An Act to repeal the Madhya Bharat Gangajali Fund Trust Act, 1954 Be it enacted by the Madhya Pradesh Legislature in the Fifty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows :- Received the assent of the Governor on the 24-4-2003; assent first published in the Madhya Pradesh Gazette (Extraordinary), dated the 29-4-2003.
Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Appointed day" means the date of commencement of this Act under sub-section (2) of Section 1; (b) "Trust" means the trust established under Section 3 of the Madhya Bharat Gangajali Fund Trust Act, 1954 (No. 11 of 1954).
Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh On the appointed day the Madhya Bharat Gangajali Fund Trust Act, 1954 (No. 11 of 1954) shall stand repealed and the trust shall stand dissolved.
Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh The repeal shall not affect, (a) any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to; or (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the Act, so repealed; or (c) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or consequences of anything already done or suffered thereunder; or (d) any pending investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation or liability as aforesaid and any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced as if this Act had not been passed.
Madhya Pradesh Gangajali Fund Trust (Repeal) Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Madhya Pradesh (1) On the appointed day all property which constitute the Gangajali Fund and any income therefrom shall stand vested in the State Government. (2) The State Government shall discharge the liability of the trust established under the repealed Act and after discharging the liability, the residue fund shall be equally allocated to the following institution :- (i) The Scindhia School, Gwalior. (ii) The Scindhia Kanya Vidyalaya. (iii) The Madhav Institute of Technology and Science, Gwalior. 
