Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Mizoram An Act to provide for the removal of certain disqualifications for being chosen as and for being a member of the Mizoram Legislative Assembly. Whereas it is expedient to provide in accordance with the provisions of article 191 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India that the holders of the offices hereinafter mentioned shall not be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Mizoram Legislative Assembly: It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-fifth (25th) Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Mizoram (1) This Act may be called the Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members' (Removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1975. (2) It extends to the whole of Mizoram. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10th May, 1972.
Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Mizoram A person shall not be and shall be deemed never to have been disqualified or being chosen as or for being, a member of the Mizoram Legislative by reason of the fact that he holds any of the offices specified in the Schedule appended hereto.
Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1975_Section Sch.--> State(s): Mizoram 1. Any office held by a Minister of State or Deputy Minister for the Union or for any State specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution of India. 2. The office of the Parliamentary Secretary to the Government of India or to the Government of Mizoram. 3. The office of the Chief Whip, Deputy Chief Whip or Whip in Parliament or in the Mizoram Legislative Assembly. 4. The 1 [office of the Chief Executive Member, Executive Member, Chairman], Vice-Chairman or Member of any Autonomous District Councils and the President, Vice-President or member of any Village Council constituted in Mizoran under any existing law or Regulation. 5. The office of the Government Pleader or Public Prosecutor. 6. The office of the part-time, Professor, Lecturer, Instructor or teacher in Government Educational Institutions. 7. Medical practitioner rendering part-time service to Government. 8. The office of Chairman, Vice-Chairman, or Member of any Committee, Board or Authority appointed by the Government of India or the Government of any State or Union territory specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution of India. 9. Any office under the Government which is not a whole-time office remunerated either by salary or fees. 10. Any office held in the Territorial Army or National Cadet Corps. 11. Any office held in Auxiliary Air Force or Air Defence Reserve. Substituted by the Mizoram Union Territory Legislature Members' (Removal of Disqualifications) Amendment Act, 1986 (Mizoram Act 5 of 1986), Section 2. 
