Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> Act Objective: An Act to make the carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in contravention of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the rules made thereunder and matters connected therewith. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act, 2000. (2) It extends to the whole of India.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 2--> (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "carrier" means a person who is engaged in the business of transporting passengers by water or air and includes any association of persons, whether incorporated or not, by whom the aircraft or the ship is owned or chartered; (b) "Competent Authority" means the civil authority appointed undersub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 2 of the Foreigners Order, 1948 madeunder the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or any other officernotified by the Central Government in this behalf; (c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. (2) Words and expressions not defined in this Act but defined in the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or The Passport (Entry into India)Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) shall have the meanings respectively assignedto them in those Acts.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 3--> Where thecompetent authority is of the opinion that any carrier has brought aperson in contravention of the provisions of The Passport (Entry intoIndia) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) and rules made thereunder into India, hemay by order impose a penalty of rupees one lakh on such carrier: Provided that no order shall be passed without giving the carrier anopportunity of being heard in the matter.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 3A--> (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920ThePassportEntryintoIndiaAct1920_9919201_34.xml (34 of 1920) and the rules made thereunder, if the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the interest of the general public or to fulfil the international obligation, it may, by order notified in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order, exempt any carrier or class of carriers from the operations of all or any of the provisions of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such order. (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. Inserted by the Immigration (Carriers Liability) Amendment Act, 2005.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 4--> (1) An appeal shall lie against the order made undersection 3 of this Act to the Joint Secretary to the Government ofIndia in the Ministry of Home Affairs authorised in this behalf bythat Government. (2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within thirty days from thedate of the order appealed against: Provided that the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that theappellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appealwithin the said period of thirty days, permit the appellant to preferthe appeal within a further period of thi ty days. (3) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority shall,after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard andafter making such inquiry as it deems proper, make such order, as itmay think fit, confirming, modifying or reversin the order appealedagainst. (4) Every appeal shall be preferred on payment of such fees as may beprescribed.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 5--> Where any penalty imposedunder this Act is not paid, the competent authority may recover thepenalty so payable by seizing, detaining or selling- (a) the aircraft or the ship; or (b) any goods on the ship or aircraft, belonging to the carrier.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 6--> No suit, prosecution or other legalproceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the competentauthority or any officer of the Central Government or any other personexercising any powers or discharging any functions or performing anyduty under this Act for anything in good faith done or intended to bedone under this Act or any rule made thereunder.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 7--> The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shallbe in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Registration ofForeigners Act, 1939 , The Passport (Entry into Indi ) Act, 1920 andthe Foreigners Act, 1946 or the rules or orders made thereunder.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 8--> (1) The Central Government may, bynotification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out thepurposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of theforegoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) the fees which shall be paid for appeals under sub-section (4) ofsection 4; (b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 9--> Every rule made under this Actshall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each Houseof Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirtydays which may be comprised in one session or i two or more successivesessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediatelyfollowing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, bothHouses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Housesagree that the rule should not be m de, the rule shall thereafter haveeffect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case maybe; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall bewithout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done underthat rule.
Immigration (Carrier's Liability) Act, 2000_Section 10--> (1) If any difficulty arises ingiving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Governmentmay, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions forthe purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of twoyears from the commencement of this Act. (2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may beafter it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
