Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 2--> Sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Indian Red Cross Society Act, 1920 (15 of 1920) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), shall be omitted.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 3--> In section 5 of the principal Act,- (a) for the words "shall, within six months from the commencement of this Act and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for the management, control" the words "may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for the management, functions, control" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (e), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted; (c) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely.- "(ee) the powers exercisable by the Managing Body in supervising the activities of Branch Committees;".
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 4--> In section 8 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1),- (i) the words "or in any part of Pakistan" shall be omitted; (ii) after the expression "clause (a) of section 7", the expression "and section 13" shall be inserted; (b) in sub-section (2),- (i) the words "or Pakistan" occurring in both the places shall be omitted; (ii) for the words "third column", the words "second column" shall be substituted; (c) in sub-section (4), the words "or any part of Pakistan" shall be omitted.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 5--> In section 9 of the principal Act, after the words "or body" where they occur for the first time, the words "whether constituted in India or in any other country" shall be inserted.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 6--> In section 11 of the principal Act, the expression "for which the corpus or income of the property vested in it under clause (b) of section 6 may be applied under the provisions of section 7" shall be omitted.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 7--> In section 12 of the principal Act, after the expression "rules made under section 5", the words "and the powers of supervision exercisable by the Managing Body thereunder" shall be inserted.
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 8--> After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely- "13.Transfer of property to Pakistan.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Managing Body may, from out of the funds specified column 1 of the Third schedule, transfer to the Pakistan Red Cross Society the amounts specified in that Schedule as being the share of the Pakistan Red Cross Society which that Society has agreed to receive for being applied to the purposes for which they were held by the Society. (2) Upon the transfer of such amounts to the Pakistan Red Cross Society under sub-section (1), the Society shall be freed and discharged from all obligations imposed upon it by or under this Act as in force before the commencement of the Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956, or under any trust or other document in respect of anything to be done in Pakistan or in any part thereof."
Indian Red Cross Society (Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 9--> For the Schedules to the principal Act, the following Schedules shall be substituted, namely:- THE FIRST SCHEDULE (See section 7) Objects to which the funds of the Society may be applied. (1) Aid to the sick and wounded members of the Armed Forces of the Union in accordance with the terms and spirit of the Geneva Conventions of 12th August, 1949, and discharge of other obligations devolving upon the Society under the Conventions as the recognized auxiliary of the Armed Forces Medical Services. (2) Aid to the demobilized sick and wounded members of the Armed Forces of the Union. (3) Maternity and Child Welfare. (4) Junior Red Cross. (5) Nursing and ambulance work. (6) Provision of relief for the mitigation of suffering caused by epidemics, earthquakes, famines, floods and other disasters, whether in India or outside. (7) The establishment and maintenance of peace among all nations in accordance with the decisions of the International Red Cross Organization. (8) Work parties to provide comforts and necessary garments, etc., for hospitals and health institutions. (9) The expenses of management of the Society and its branches and affiliated societies and bodies. (10) The representation of the Society on or at International or other Committees formed for furthering objects similar to those of the Society. (11) The improvement of health, prevention of disease and mitigation of suffering and such other cognate objects as may be approved by the Society from time to time. THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See section 8) Statement showing the approximate percentage of the claim of the States to the income of the property vested in the Society under clause (b) of section. Name of States Approximate percentage of claim on the income of the property vested in the Society under clause (b) of section 6 PART A STATES Andhra 3.18 Assam 1.49 Bihar 6.48 Bombay 10.88 Madhya Pradesh 5.98 Madras 5.53 Orissa 2.02 Punjab 6.03 Uttar Pradesh 23.69 West Bengal 5.61 PART B STATES Hyderabad 4.76 Jammu and Kashmir 1.35 Madhya Bharat 4.43 Mysore 2.00 Patiala and East Punjab States Union 2.55 Rajasthan 5.26 Saurashtra 3.93 Travancore-Cochin .25 PART C STATES Ajmer 81 Bhopal .43 Coorg .14 Delhi .68 Himachal Pradesh .56 Tripura .06 Vindhya Pradesh 1.87 
