Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section Preamble--> An Act to consolidate the law relating to Judicial Oaths, and for other purposes. WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate the law relating to judicial oaths, affirmations and declarations, and to repeal the law relating to official oaths, affirmations and declarations; It is hereby enacted as follows :-
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Indian Oaths Act, 1873. 1 It extends to the whole of India 2 except the States of Manipur and Jammu and Kashmir. 3 Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for the former para. Substituted by Act 3 of 1951 , Section 3 and Schedule , for " except Part B States ". The commencement Clause Repealed by Act 12 of 1876 .
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 2--> Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873).
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 3--> Nothing herein contained applies to proceedings before Courts Martial, or to oaths, affirmations or declarations prescribed 1 by the Central Government with respect to members of the Armed Forces of the Union. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for certain words.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 4--> The following Courts and persons are authorized to administer, by themselves or by an officer empowered by them in this behalf, oaths and affirmations in discharge of the duties or in exercise of the powers imposed or conferred upon them respectively by law :- (a) all Courts and persons having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence ; (b) the Commanding Officer of any military, 1 naval, 2 or air force station 3 or ship occupied by troops in the service of Government : Provided- (1) that the oath or affirmation be administered within the limits of the station, and (2) that the oath or affirmation be such as a Justice of the Peace is competent to administer 4 . Inserted by Act 35 of 1934 , Section 2 and Schedule Inserted by Act 10 of 1927 , Section 2 and Schedule I. Inserted by Act 35 of 1934 , Section 2 and Schedule The words " in Part A States and Part C States " omitted by Act 3 of 1951 , Section 3 and Schedule
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 5--> Oaths or affirmations shall be made by the following persons:- (a) all witnesses, that is to say, all persons who may lawfully be examined, or give, or be required to give, evidence by or before any Court or person having by law or consent of parties authority to examine such persons or to receive evidence ; (b) interpreters of questions put to, and evidence given by, witnesses ; and (c) jurors. 1 Provided that where the witness is a child under twelve years of age, and the Court or person having authority to examine such witness is of opinion that, though he understands the duty of speaking the truth, he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation, the foregoing provisions of this section and the provisions of section 6 shall not apply to such witness, but in any such case the absence of an oath or affirmation shall not render inadmissible any evidence given by such witness nor effect the obligation of the witness to state the truth. Nothing herein contained shall render it lawful to administer, in a criminal proceeding, an oath or affirmation to the accused person, 2 unless he is examined as a witness for the defence or necessary to administer to the official interpreter of any Court, after he has entered on the execution of the duties of his office, an oath or affirmation that he will faithfully discharge those duties. Inserted by Act 39 of 1939 , Section 2. Inserted by Act 26 of 1955 , Section 117 and Schedule.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 6--> Where the witness, interpreter or juror is a Hindu or Muhammadan, or has an objection to making an oath, he shall, instead of making an oath, make an affirmation. In every other case the witness, interpreter or juror shall make an oath.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 7--> All oaths and affirmations made under section 5 shall be administered according to such forms as the High Court may from a time to time prescribe. And until any such forms are prescribed by the High Court, such oaths and affirmations shall be administered according to the forms now in use. 1 The Explanation to Section 7 Repealed by Act 6 of 1900 , Section 48 and Schedule II.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 8--> If any party to, or witness in, any judicial proceeding offers to give evidence on oath or solemn affirmation in any form common amongst, or held binding by, persons of the race or persuasion to which he belongs, and not repugnant to justice or decency, and not purporting to affect any third person, the Court may, if it thinks fit, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, tender such oath or affirmation to him.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 9--> If any party to any judicial proceeding offers to be bound by any such oath or solemn affirmation as is mentioned in section 8, if such oath or affirmation is made by the other party to, or by any witness in, such proceeding, the Court may, if it thinks fit, ask such, party or witness, or cause him to be asked, whether or not he will make the oath or affirmation : Provided that no party or witness shall be compelled to attend personally in Court solely for the purpose of answering such question.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 10--> If such party or witness agrees to make such oath or affirmation, the Court may proceed to administer it, or, if it is of such a nature that it may be more conveniently made out of Court, the Court may issue a commission to any person to administer it, and authorize him to take the evidence of the person to be sworn or affirmed and return it to the Court.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 11--> The evidence so given shall, as against the person who offered to be bound as aforesaid, be conclusive proof of the matter stated.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 12--> If the party or witness refuses to make the oath or solemn affirmation referred to in section 8, he shall not be compelled to make it, but the Court shall record, as part of the proceedings, the nature of the oath or affirmation proposed, the facts that he was asked whether he would make it, and that he refused it, together with any reason which he may assign for his refusal.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 13--> No omission to take any oath or make any affirmation, no substitution of any one for any other of them, and no irregularity whatever in the form in which any one of them is administered, shall invalidate any proceeding or render inadmissible any evidence whatever, in or in respect of which such omission, substitution or irregularity took place, or shall affect the obligation of a witness to state the truth.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 14--> Every person giving evidence on any subject before any Court or person hereby authorized to administer oaths and affirmations shall be bound to state the truth on such subject. 1 Cf. the Indian Penal Code (Act 45 of 1860), Section 191.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 15--> Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), s.2 and Sch.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section 16--> Subject to the provisions of sections 3 and 5, no person appointed to any office shall, before entering on the execution of the duties of his office, be required to make any oath, or to make or subscribe any affirmation or declaration whatever.
Indian Oaths Act, 1873_Section Sch.1--> Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1873 (12 of 1873). 
