Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> An act to provide for the reconstitution of the medical council of India and the maintenance of a medical register for India and for matters connected therewith. Be it enacted by Parliament in the seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council Act, 19561 . (2) It extends to the whole of India2 [...] . (3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. This Act has been extended to Pondicherry, with modifications, by Region 7 of 1963, section 3 and Schedule I (w.e.f. 1-10-1963) to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Region 6 of 1963, section 2 and Schedule 1 (w.e.f. 1-7-1965), to Goa, Daman and Diu by Region 11 of 1963, section 3 and Schedule Omitted by Section 2 of Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964 w.e.f. 16-6-1964. Came into force on 01-11-1958, 1958, vide S.O. 2254, dated 28th October, 1958, Published in the Gazette of India, Part II, Section 3(ii), p. 2080.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (a) "approved institution" means a hospital, health centre or other such institution recognised (b) by a university as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if any, required by his course of study before the award of any medical qualification to him. (c)1 [...] (d)2 [...] (e) "Indian Medical Register" means the medical register maintained by the Council. (f) "Medical Institution" means any institution, within or without India, which grants degrees, diplomas or licences in medicine. (g) "medicine" means modern scientific medicine in all its branches and includes surgery and obstetrics, but does not include veterinary medicine and surgery; (h) "Prescribed" means prescribed by regulations. (i) "recognised medical qualification" means any of the medical qualifications included in the Schedules. (j) "regulation" means a regulation made under section 33; (k) "State Medical Council" means a medical council constituted under any law for the time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of medicine. (l) "State Medical Register" means a register maintained under any law for the time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of medicine. (m) "University" means any University in India established by law and having a medical faculty. Omitted by section 3 of Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964 w.e.f. 16-6-1964. Omitted by Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 3--> (1) The Central Government shall cause to be constituted a council consisting of the following members, namely:- (a) One member from each State other than a Union Territory to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government concerned. (b) One member from each University to be elected from amongst the members of the medical faculty of the University by members of the Senate of the University or in case the University has no Senate, by members of the Court. (c) One member from each State in which a State Medical Register is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on such register who possess the medical qualifications included in the First or the Second Schedule or in Part II of the Third Schedule. (d) Seven members to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on any of the State Medical Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of the Third Schedule. (e) Eight members to be nominated by the Central Govt. (2) The President and Vice-President of the Council shall be elected by the members of the Council from amongst themselves. (3) No act done by the Council shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Council.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 3A--> (1) On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010, the Council shall stand superseded and the President, Vice-President and other members of the Council shall vacate their offices and shall have no claim for any compensation, whatsoever. (2) The Council shall be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of section 3 within a period of 2 [three years] from the date of supersession of the Council under sub-section (1). (3) Upon the supersession of the Council under sub-section (1) and until a new Council is constituted in accordance with section 3, the Board of Governors constituted under sub-section (4) shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Council under this Act. (4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute the Board of Governors which shall consist of not more than seven persons as its members, who shall be persons of eminence and of unimpeachable integrity in the fields of medicine and medical education, and who may be either nominated members or members, ex officio, to be appointed by the Central Government, one of whom shall be named by the Central Government as the Chairperson of the Board of Governors. (5) The Chairperson and the other members, other than the members, ex officio, shall be entitled to such sitting fee and travelling and other allowances as may be determined by the Central Government. (6) The Board of Governors shall meet at such time and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as is applicable to the Council. (7) Two-third of the members of the Board of Governors shall constitute the quorum for its meetings. (8) No act or proceedings of the Board of Governors shall be invalid merely by reason of- (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board of Governors; or (b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board of Governors not affecting the merits of the case. (9) A member having any financial or other interest in any matter coming before the Board of Governors for decision shall disclose his interest in the matter before he may, if allowed by the Board of Governors, participate in such proceedings. (10) The Chairperson and the other members of the Board of Governors shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. Inserted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 w.e.f. 15-05-2010. Substituted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2012,w.e.f.15-05-2012, for the words "two years"
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 3B--> During the period when the Council stands superseded,- (a) the provisions of this Act shall be construed as if for the word "Council", the words "Board of Governors" were substituted; (b) the Board of Governors shall- (i) exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the Council under this Act and for this purpose, the provisions of this Act shall have effect subject to the modification that references therein to the Council shall be construed as references to the Board of Governors; (ii) grant independently permission for establishment of new medical colleges or opening a new or higher course of study or training or increase in admission capacity in any course of study or training referred to in section 10A or giving the person or college concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard as provided under section 10A without prior permission of the Central Government under that section, including exercise of the power to finally approve or disapprove the same; and (iii) dispose of the matters pending with the Central Government under section 1OA upon receipt of the same from it. final. Inserted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 w.e.f. 15-05-2010.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 3C--> (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the Board of Governors or the Council after its reconstitution shall, in exercise of its powers and in the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those relating to technical and administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time: Provided that the Board of Governors or the Council after its reconstitution shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section. (2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is a matter of policy or not shall be Inserted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 w.e.f. 15-05-2010.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 4--> (1) (a) An election under clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this behalf, and any rules so made may provide that pending the preparation of the Indian Medical Register in accordance with provisions of this Act, the members referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 3 may be nominated by the Central Government instead of being elected as provided therein. (2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Council, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 5--> (1) No person shall be eligible for nomination under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications included in the First and Second Schedules, resides in the State concerned, and where a State Medical Register is maintained in that State, is enrolled on that Register. (2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 6--> The Council so constituted shall be a body corporate by the name of the Medical Council of India, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 7--> (1) The President or Vice-President of the Council shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years and not extending beyond the expiry of his term as member of the Council. (2) Subject to the provisions of this section, a member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his nomination or election or until his successor shall have been duly nominated or elected, whichever is longer. (3) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Council, or in the case of a member elected under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3, if he ceases to be a member of the medical faculty of the university concerned, or in the case of a member elected under clause (c) or clause (d) of that sub-section, if he ceases to be a person enrolled on the State Medical Register concerned. (4) A casual vacancy in the Council shall be filled by nomination or election, as the case may be, and the person nominated or elected to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was nominated or elected. (5) Members of the Council shall be eligible for re-nomination or re-election. (6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be nominated or elected at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 8--> (1) The Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Council. (2) Unless otherwise provided by regulations fifteen members of the Council shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 9--> The Council Shall:- (1) constitute from amongst its members an Executive Committee and such other committees for general or special purposes as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as Treasurer. (3) employ such other persons, as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act. (4) require and take from the Registrar, or from any other employee, such security for the due performance of his duties as the Council deems necessary and (5) With the previous sanction of the Central Government fix the remuneration and allowances to be paid to the President, Vice-President and members of the Council and determine the conditions of service of the employees of the Council.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 10--> (1) The Executive Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee shall consist of the President and Vice-President, who shall be members ex-officio and not less than seven and not more than ten other members who shall be elected by the Council from amongst its members. (2) The President and Vice-President shall be the President and Vice-President respectively of the Committee. (3) In addition to the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, the Committee shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Council may confer or impose upon it by any regulations which may be made in this behalf.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 10A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force:- (a) no person shall establish a medical college or (b) no medical college shall :- (i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including a postgraduate course of study or training) which would enable a student of such course or training to qualify himself for the award of any recognised medical qualification; or (ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including a postgraduate course of study or training), except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Explanation 1-.For the purposes of this section, "person" includes any University or a trust but does not include the Central Government. Explanation 2 -For the purposes of this section "admission capacity" in relation to any course of study or training (including postgraduate course of study or training) in a medical college, means the maximum number of students that may be fixed by the Council from time to time for being admitted to such course or training. (2) (a) Every person or medical college shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of clause (b) and the central Government shall refer the scheme to the Council for its recommendations. (b) The Scheme referred to in clause (a) shall be in such form and contain such particulars and be preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. (3) On receipt of a scheme by the Council under sub-section (2) the Council may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the medical college concerned, and thereafter, it may - (a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any necessary particulars, give a reasonable opportunity to the person or college concerned for making a written representation and it shall be open to such person or medical college to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the Council. (b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (7) and submit the scheme together with its recommendations thereon to the Central Government. (4) The Central Govt. may after considering the scheme and the recommendations of the Council under sub-section (3) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or college concerned, and having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (7), either approve (with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary ) or disapprove the scheme, and any such approval shall be a permission under sub-section (1): Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the person or college concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard; Provided further that nothing in this sub section shall prevent any person or medical college whose scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provisions of this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme has been submitted for the first time under sub-section (1) (5) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central Government under sub-section (1), no order passed by the Central Government has been communicated to the person or college submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the Central Government in the form in which it had been submitted, and accordingly, the permission of the Central Government required under sub-section (1) shall also be deemed to have been granted. (6) In computing the time-limit specified in sub-section (5), the time taken by the person or college concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Council, or by the Central Government, shall be excluded. (7) The Council, while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub-section (3) and the Central Government, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under sub-section (4), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:- (a) whether the proposed medical college or the existing medical college seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of medical education as prescribed by the Council under section 19A or, as the case may be under section 20 in the case of postgraduate medical education. (b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical college or the existing medical college seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase it admission capacity has adequate financial resources; (c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical college or conducting the new course or study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the time- limit specified in the scheme. (d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number or students likely to attend such medical college or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to students likely to attend such medical college or course of study or training by persons having the recognised medical qualifications; (f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of medicine; and (g) any other factors as may be prescribed. (8) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or college concerned.] Inserted by Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 Act 31 of 1993, Section 2 w.r.e.f. 27-08-1992.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 10B--> (1) Where any medical college is established except with the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A, no medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college shall a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (2) Where any medical college opens a new or higher course of study or training (including a postgraduate course of study or training) except with the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A, no medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college on the basis of such study or training shall be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (3) Where any medical college increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training except with the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A, no medical qualification granted to any student of such medical college on the basis of the increase in its admission capacity shall be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the criteria for identifying a student who has been granted a medical qualification on the basis of such increase in the admission capacity shall be such as may be prescribed.] Inserted by Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 Act 31 of 1993, Section 2 w.r.e.f. 27-08-1992.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 10C--> (1) If, after, the 1st day of June, 1992 and on and before the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 any person has established a medical college or any medical college has opened a new or higher course of study or training or increased the admission capacity, such person or medical college, as the case may be, shall seek, within a period of one year from the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 the permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 10A. (2) If any person or medical college, as the case may be fails to seek the permission under sub section (1) the provisions of section 10B shall apply, so far as may be as if, permission of the Central Government under section 10A has been refused; Inserted by Act 31 of 1993, section 2 w.e.f 27-08-1992.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 10D--> There shall be conducted a uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post-graduate level through such designated authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in such manner as may be prescribed and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of uniform entrance examination in the aforesaid manner: Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of this section shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at the undergraduate level for the academic year 2016-17 conducted in accordance with any regulations made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (whether in Government Medical College or in a private Medical College) where such State has not opted for such examination. Inserted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016 w.e.f. 24-5-2016.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 11--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by any university or medical Institution in India which are included in the first Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) Any university or medical Institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in the First Schedule may apply to the Central Govt., to have such qualification recognised, and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the First Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 12--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Council may enter into negotiations with the Authority in any 1 [...] country outside India which by the law of such 2 [...] country is entrusted with the maintenance of a register of medical practitioners, for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include therein the medical qualification which the Council has decided should be recognised and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date. (3) The Central Government, after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule by directing that an entry be made therein in respect of any medical qualification declaring that it shall be recognised medical qualification only when granted before a specified date. (4) Where the Council has refused to recommend any medical qualification which has been proposed for recognition by any Authority referred to in sub-section (2) and that Authority applies to the Central Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after obtaining from the council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and the provisions of sub section (2) shall apply to such notification. The word "state or" omitted by Act 24 of 1964 , Section 4, w.e.f. 16-06-1964. The word "state or" omitted by Act 24 of 1964 , Section 4, w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 13--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in India which are not included in the First Schedule and which are included in Part I of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) The medical qualifications granted to a citizen of India:- (a) before the 15th day of August, 1947, by medical institutions in the territories now forming part of Pakistan, and, (b) before the 1st day of April, 1937, by medical institutions in the territories now forming part of Burma, which are included in part 1 of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (3) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India, 1 [before such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify] which are included in Part IInd of the Third Schedule shall also be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act, but no person possessing any such qualification shall be entitled to enrolment on any State Medical Register unless he is a citizen of India and has undergone such practical training after obtaining that qualification as may be required by the rules or regulations in force in the country 2 [...] granting the qualification, or if he has not undergone any practical training in that country 3 [...] he has undergone such practical training as may be prescribed. (4) The Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend Part II of the Third Schedule so as to include therein any qualification granted by a medical institution outside India, which is not included in the Second Schedule: 4 [ Provided that after the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001 , no such amendment shall be made in Part II of the Third Schedule to include any primary medical qualification granted by any medical institution outside India; Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply to inclusion in Part II of the Third Schedule any primary medical qualification granted by any medical institution outside India to any person whose name is entered in the Indian Medical Register. Explanation- For the purposes of this sub-section, "primary medical qualification" means any minimum qualification sufficient for enrolment on any State Medical Register or for entering the name in the Indian Medical Register.] 5 [(4A) A person who is a citizen of India and obtains medical qualification granted by any medical institution in any country outside India recognised for enrolment as medical practitioner in that country after such date as may be specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), shall not be entitled to be enrolled on any Medical Register maintained by a State Medical Council or to have his name entered in the Indian Medical Register unless he qualified the screening test in India prescribed for such purpose and such foreign medical qualification after such person qualifies that said screening test shall be deemed to be the recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act for that person. (4B) A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such date as may be specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), be eligible to get admission to obtain medical qualification granted by any medical institution in any foreign country without obtaining an eligibility certificate issued to him by the Council and in case any such person obtains such qualification without obtaining such eligibility certificate, he shall not be eligible to appear in the screening test referred to in sub-section (4A): Provided that an Indian citizen who has acquired the medical qualification from foreign medical institution or has obtained admission in foreign medical institution before the commencement of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001 shall not be required to obtain eligibility certificate under this sub-section but, if he is qualified for admission to any medical course for recognised medical qualification in any medical institution in India, he shall be required to qualify only the screening test prescribed for enrolment on any State Medical Register or for entering his name in the Indian Medical Register. (4C) Nothing contained in sub-sections (4A) and (4B) shall apply to the medical qualifications referred to in section 14 for the purposes of that section. ] (5) Any medical institution in India which is desirous of getting a medical qualification granted by it included in Part I of the Third Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may by notification in the Official Gazette, amend Part I of the Third Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of Part-I of the Third Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date. Inserted by Indian Medical Council Amendment Act 2001 (Act 34 of 2001), Section 2 w.e.f. 03-09-2001. The words "or state" omitted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. (Act 24 of 1964), section 5 w.e.f. 16-06-1964. The words "or state" omitted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. (Act 24 of 1964), section 5 w.e.f. 16-06-1964. Inserted by Indian Medical Council Amendment Act 2001 (Act 34 of 2001) , Section 2 w.e.f.03-09-2001. Inserted by Indian Medical Council Amendment Act 2001 (Act 34 of 2001) , Section 2 w.e.f.03-09-2001.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 14--> (1) The Central Government after consultation with the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that medical qualifications granted by medical institutions in 1 [...] any country out-side India in respect of which a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications is not in force, shall be recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act or shall be so only when granted after a specified date: 2 [Provided that medical practice by persons possessing such qualifications: - (a) shall be permitted only if such persons are enrolled as medical practitioners in accordance with the law regulating the registration of medical practitioners for the time being in force in that country; (b) shall be limited to the institution to which they are attached for the time being for the purposes of teaching, research or charitable work ; and (c) shall be limited to the period specified in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special order.] (2) In respect of any such medical qualification the Central Government, after consultation with the Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette direct that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted before a specified date. The words State or" omitted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964 (Act 24 of 1964), section 6 w.e.f. 16-16-1964. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. (Act 24 of 1964), section 6 for the provisio (w.e.f. 16-06-1694).
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 15--> 1 [(1)] Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, the medical qualifications included in the Schedules shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any State Medical Register. 2 [(2) Save as provided in section 25, no person other than a medical practitioner enrolled on a State Medical Register:- (a) shall hold office as physician or surgeon or any other office (by whatever designation called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority; (b) shall practice medicine in any State; (c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner: (d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 on any matter relating to medicine. (3) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub-section (2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both]; Section 15 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 7 w.e.f. 16-06-1964. Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 7 w.e.f.16-16-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 16--> Every University or medical institution in India which grants a recognised medical qualification shall furnish such information as the Council may, from time to time, require as to the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are required to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtaining such qualification.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 17--> 1 [(1) The Committee shall appoint such number of medical inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical institution, college, hospital or other institution where medical education is given, or to attend any examination held by any University or medical institution for the propose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical qualifications granted by the University or medical institution. (2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the committee on the adequacy of the standards of medical education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.] (3) The Committee shall forward a copy of any such report to the university or medical institution concerned and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University or institution thereon, to the Central Government. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 8, for sub-sections (1) and (2) w.e.f.16-16-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 18--> 1 (1) The Council may appoint such number of visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical institution, college, hospital or other institution where medical education is given, or to attend any examination held by any University or medical institution for the purpose of granting recognised medical qualifications. (2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Council or not may be appointed as a visitor under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 17 for any 2 [inspection or examination] shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same 3 [inspection or examination]. 4 (3)[ The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination but shall report to the President of the Council on the adequacy of the standards of medical education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving medical education or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend.] (4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of the Council otherwise directs: Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Council shall furnish the same. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 9, for sub-section (1) w.e.f. 16-16-1964. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 9, for the word "examination", w.e.f. 16-06-1964. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 9, for the word "examination", w.e.f. 16-06-1964. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 9, for sub-section (3) w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 19--> 1 (1) When upon report by the Committee or the visitor it appear to the Council:- (a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination held by any University or medical institution, (b) that the staff, equipment accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and training provided in such University or medical institution or in any college or other institution affiliated to that University, do not conform to the standards prescribed by the Council, the Council shall make a representation to that effect to the Central Government. (2) After considering such representation, the Central Govt. may send it to the State Government of the State in which the University or medical Institution is situated and the State Government shall forward it alongwith such remarks as it may choose to make to the University or Medical Institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University or medical institution may submit its explanation to the State Government. (3) On the receipt of the explanation or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central Government (4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may by notification in the official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification, only when granted before a specified date 2 [or that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified college or institution affiliated to any university shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medical qualification shall be a recognised medical qualification in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University only when granted after a specified date.] Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964 .Act 24 of 1964, Section 10 for sub-section (1) w.e.f. 16-16-1964. Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 10. w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 19A--> (1) The Council may prescribe the minimum standards of medical education required for granting recognised medical qualifications (other than postgraduate medical qualifications) by universities or medical institutions in India. (2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Council to all State Governments and the Council shall before submitting the regulations or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction, take into consideration the comments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid. (3) The Committee shall from time to time report to the Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.] Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act,1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 11 w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 20--> (1) The Council may prescribe standards of Postgraduate Medical Education for the guidance of Universities, and may advise Universities in the matter of securing uniform standards for Postgraduate Medical Education through out India, and for this purpose the Central Govt. may constitute from among the members of the Council a Postgraduate Medical Education Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Post-graduate Committee) (2) The Postgraduate Committee shall consist of nine members all of whom shall be persons possessing postgraduate medical qualifications and experience of teaching or examining postgraduate students of medicine. (3) Six of the members of the Postgraduate Committee shall be nominated by the Central Government and the remaining three members shall be elected by the Council from amongst its members. (4) For the purpose of considering postgraduate studies in a subject, the Postgraduate Committee may co-opt, as and when necessary, one or more members qualified to assist it in that subject. (5) The views and recommendations of the Postgraduate Committee on all matters shall be placed before the Council and if the Council does not agree with the views expressed or the recommendations made by the Postgraduate Committee on any matter, the Council shall forward them together with its observations to the Central Government for decision.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 20A--> (1) The Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for medical practitioners. (2) Regulations made by the Council under sub-section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such provisions shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.] Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 12 w.e.f. 16-16-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 21--> (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner a register of medical practitioners to be known as the Indian Medical Register, which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Medical Register and who possess any of the recognised medical qualifications. (2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Council to keep the Indian Medical Register in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be prescribed. (3) Such register shall be deemed to be public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 22--> Each State Medical Council shall supply to the Council 1 [six] printed copies of the State Medical Register as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and each Registrar of a State Medical Council shall inform the Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State Medical Register made from time to time. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 13, for the word "three", w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 23--> The Registrar of the Council, may, on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State Medical Register or on application made in the prescribed manner by any such person, enter his name in the Indian Medical Register: Provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned possesses a recognised medical qualification.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 24--> (1) If the name of any person enrolled on a State Medical Register is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power conferred by or under any law relating to medical practitioners for the time being in force in any State, the Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Indian Medical Register. (2) Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Medical Register 1 [on the ground of professional misconduct or any other ground except that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications] or where any application made by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Medical Register has been rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions including conditions as to the payment of a fee as may be laid down in rules made by the Central Government in this behalf, to the Central Government, whose decision, which shall be given after consulting the Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Medical Register. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964 .Act 24 of 1964, Section 14, for certain words, w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 25--> (1) A citizen of India possessing a medical qualification granted by a medical institution outside India included in part II of the Third Schedule, who is required to undergo practical training as prescribed under sub section (3) of Section 13, shall, on production of proper evidence that he has been selected for such practical training in an approved institution be entitled to be registered provisionally in a State Medical Register and shall be entitled to practise medicine in the approved institution for the purposes of such training and for no other purpose. (2) A person who has passed the qualifying examination of any university or Medical Institution in India for the grant of a recognized medical qualification shall be entitled to be registered provisionally in a State Medical Register for the purpose of enabling him to be engaged in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved institution, or in the Medical Service of the Armed Forces of the Union, and for no other purpose, on production of proper evidence that he has been selected for such employment. (3) The names of all persons provisionally registered under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in the State Medical Register shall be entered therein separately from the names of other persons registered therein. (4) A person registered provisionally as aforesaid who has completed practical training referred to in sub section (1) or who has been engaged for the prescribed period in employment in a resident medical capacity in any approved institution or in the Medical service of the Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be, shall be entitled to registration in the State Medical Register under Section 15. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 15, for Section 25, w.e.f. 16-06-1964.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 26--> (1) If any person whose name is entered in the Indian Medical Register obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in sanitary science, public health or medicine which is a recognized medical qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in the prescribed manner be entitled to have any entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his name in the Indian Medical Register either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously made. (2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State Medical Register shall be altered in accordance with the alterations made in the Indian Medical Register.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 27--> Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act, regarding medical practice by persons possessing certain recognised medical qualifications, every person whose name is for the time being borne on the Indian Medical Register shall be entitled according to his qualifications to practice as a medical practitioner in any part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances, or any fees to which he may be entitled.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 28--> Every person registered in the Indian Medical Register shall notify any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Council and to the State Medical Council concerned, within thirty days of such transfer failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the Council or a State Medical Council shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 29--> (1) The Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the Central Government as that Government may require. (2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract or other information furnished to it under this section or under sections 17 and 18.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 30--> (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the particulars of the complaint to a Commission of Inquiry consisting of three persons two of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High Court and one by the Council, and such Commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of default or of improper action being found by the commission to have been established, the Commission shall recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary. (2) The Central Government may require the Council to adopt the remedies so recommended within such time as, having regard to the report of the Commission, it may think fit, and if the Council fails to comply with any such requirement, the Central Government may amend the regulations of the Council, or make such provision or order or take such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the Commission. (3) A Commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 .
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 31--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Council or a State Medical Council or any Committee thereof, or any Officer or servant of the Government or Councils aforesaid for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 32--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 1 [(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule]. Substituted by Act 4 of 2005, section 2 and Schedule.
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 33--> The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for:- (a) the management of the property of the Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts; (b) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Council, the times and places where such meetings are to be held, the conduct of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum; (c) the resignation of members of the Council; (d) the powers and duties of the President and Vice-President (e) the mode of appointment of the Executive Committee and other Committees, the summoning and holding of meetings and the conduct of business of such Committees; (f) the tenure office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants of the Council; 1 [(fa) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the scheme is to be preferred and the fee payable with the scheme under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10A; (fb) any other factors under clause (g) of sub-section (7) of section 10A; (fc) the criteria for identifying a student who has been granted a medical qualification referred to in the Explanation to sub-section (3) of section 10B; ] (g) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for registration under this Act; (h) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act; (i) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of medical inspectors and visitors; 2 [...] 3 (j) the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in Universities or medical institutions for grant of recognized medical qualifications; (k) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for medical education; (l) the conduct of professional examination; qualifications of examiners and the conditions of admissions to such examinations; (m) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by medical practitioners; and 4 [(ma) the modalities for conducting screening tests under sub-section (4A), and under the proviso to sub-section (4B), and for issuing eligibility certificate under sub-section (4B), of section 13,] 5 [(mb) the designated authority, other languages and the manner of conducting of uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post-graduate level;] 6 [(n)] any matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations. Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1993 Act 31 of 1993, with effect from 27.8.1992. The word "and" omitted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 16. Inserted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 16. Inserted by Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2001 Act 34 of 2001. Section 3 w.e.f. 03-09-2001. Inserted by the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016 w.e.f. 24-5-2016. Clause (j) re-lettered as clause (n) by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964. Act 24 of 1964, Section 16 ,w.e.f. 16-06-1964).
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 34--> (1) The Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, until the Council is constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act:- (a) the Medical Council of India as constituted immediately before the commencement of this Act under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933 , with the addition of seven members nominated thereto by the Central Government from among persons enrolled on any of the State Medical Registers who possess the medical qualifications included in Part I of the 3rd Schedule to this Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Medical Council) shall be deemed to be the Council constituted under this Act and may exercise any of the powers conferred or perform any of the duties imposed on the Council; and any vacancy occurring in the said Medical Council may be filled up in such manner as Central Govt. may think fit; and (b) the Executive Committee and other Committees of the said Medical Council as constituted immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be the Executive Committee and the Committees constituted under this Act. Substituted by The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1958 Act 36 of 1958, Section 2, for Section 34 (retrospectively).
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956_Section 35--> (1) The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
