Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the constitution of a Central Council of Indian Medicine and the maintenance of a Central Register of Indian Medicine and for matter connected therewith. BE it enacted by Parliament in the twenty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such State, and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act. Provisions of Sections 2, 13, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36 came into force in the whole of India and provisions of Sections 3, 5 to 12 (both inclusive) and 14 to 16 (both inclusive) came into force in all the States (except the State of Nagaland) and in the Union territory of Delhi on the 15th. August, 1971, see Notification NO. S.O. 2994, dated 10th August, 1971, GOI, Ext., Part II, Section 3(ii), p.2571. Provisions of Sections 17 and 23 to 31 (both inclusive) came into force in the whole of India w.e.f. 1st.October, 1976, set Notification No. S.O. 626(E), dated 10th September 1976, GOI, Ext., Part II, Section 3(ii), p. 1845. Provisions of Section 4 came into force in the whole of India w.e.f. 7th November, 1983, see Notification No. S.O. 816(E), dated 17th November, 1983, GOI, Ext., Part II, Section 3(ii).
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 2--> (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, (a) "approved institution" means a teaching institution, health centre or hospital recognized by a University or Board as an institution in which a person may undergo the training, if any, required by his course of study before the award of any medical qualification to him; (b) "Board" means a Board, Council, Examining Body or Faculty of Indian Medicine (by the whatever name called) constituted by the State Government under any law for the time of being in force regulating the award of medical qualifications in, and registration of practitioners of, Indian medicine; (c) "Central Council" means the Central Council of Indian Medicine constituted under section 3; (d) "Central Register of Indian Medicine" means the register maintained by the Central Council under this Act (e) "Indian Medicine" means the system of Indian medicine commonly known as Ashtang Ayurveda, Siddha 1 [, Unani Tibb or Sowa-Rigpa] whether supplemented or not by such modern advances as the Central Council may declare by notification from time to time; (f) "medical institution" means any institution within or without India which grants degrees, diplomas or licenses, in Indian medicine; (g) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations; (h) "recognized medical qualification" means any of the medical qualification, including post-graduate medical qualification, of Indian medicine included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule; (i) "regulation" means a regulation made under section 36; (j) "State Register of Indian Medicine" means a register or registers maintained under any law for the time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of Indian medicine; (k) "University" means any University in India established by law and having a Faculty of Indian Medicine and includes a University in India established by law in which instruction, teaching, training or research in Indian medicine is provided. (2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "or Unani Tibb"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 3--> (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute for the purposes of this Act a Central Council consisting of the following members, namely:- (a) such number of members not exceeding five as may be determined by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha 1 [, Unani and Sowa- Rigpa] systems of medicine from each State in which a State Register of Indian Medicine is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on that Register as practitioners of Ayurveda, Siddha 2 [, Unani or Sowa-Rigpa], as the case may be; (b) one member for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha 3 [, Unani and Sowa- Rigpa] systems of medicine from each University to be elected from amongst themselves by the members of the Faculty or Department (by whatever name called) of the respective system of medicine of that University; (c) such number of members, not exceeding thirty per cent. of the total number of members elected under clauses (a) and (b), as may be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Indian medicine: Provided that until members are elected under clause (a) or clause (b) in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Central Government shall nominate such number of members, being persons qualified to be chosen as such under the said clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be, as that Government thinks fit; and references to elected members in this Act shall be construed as including references to members so nominated. (2) The President of the Central Council shall be elected by the members, of the Central Council, from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) There shall be a Vice-President for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha 4 [, Unani and Sowa- Rigpa] systems of medicine who shall be elected from amongst themselves by members representing that system of medicine, elected under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or nominated under clause (c)of that sub-section. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "and Unani" Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "or Unani " Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "and Unani" Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "and Unani"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 4--> (1) An election under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this behalf. (2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Central Council, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 5--> (1) No person shall be eligible for election to the Central Council unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule, is enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and resides in the State concerned. (2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 6--> The Central Council shall be a body corporate by the name of Central Council of Indian Medicine having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable, and immovable and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 7--> (1) The President, a Vice-President or a member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his election or nomination, as the case may be, or until his successor shall have been duly elected or nominated, whichever is longer. (2) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without-excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Central Council, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Central Council or, in the case of a member elected under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3, if he ceases to be enrolled on the concerned State Register of Indian Medicine, or in the case of a member elected under clause (b) of that sub-section, if he ceases to be a member of the Faculty or Department (by whatever name called) of Indian Medicine of the University concerned. (3) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by election or nomination, as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or nominated (4) Members of the Central Council shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination. (5) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be elected or nominated at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 8--> (1) The Central Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council. (2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of the total number of members of the Central Council shall form a quorum and all the acts of the Central Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting ; Provided that no decision of the Central Council in relation to any Indian medicine shall be effective unless three members representing Ayurveda, Siddha 1 [, Unani or Sowa-Rigpa] system of medicine, as the case may be, are present at the meeting and support the decision. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "or Unani"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 9--> 1 [(1) The Central Council shall constitute from amongst its members,- (a) a committee for Ayurveda; (b) a committee for Siddha; (c) a committee for Unani; and (d) a committee for Sowa-Rigpa, and each such committee shall consist of members elected under clause (a) or clause (b) or nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 3 representing the Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani or Sowa-Rigpa system of medicine, as the case may be.] (2) The Vice-President for each of the Ayurveda, Siddha 2 [, Unani and Sowa-Rigpa] systems of medicine elected under sub-section (3) of section 3 shall be, respectively, the Chairman of the committees referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section.(1). (3) Subject to such general or special directions as the Central Council may from time to time give, each such committee shall be competent to deal with any matter relating to Ayurveda, Siddha 3 [, Unani or Sowa- Rigpa] system of medicine, as the case may be, within the competence of the Central Council. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010.for the words "and Unani" Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "or Unani"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 10--> The Central Council may constitute from amongst its members such other committees for general or special purposes as the Central Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 11--> (1) The committees constituted under section 9 and 10 shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council. (2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of the total number of members of a committee shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 12--> The Central Council shall- (a) appoint a Registrar who shall act as Secretary and who may also, if deemed expedient, act as Treasurer; (b) employ such other persons as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act; (c) require and take from the Registrar, or from any other employee, such security for the due performance of his duties as the Central Council deems necessary; and (d) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the remuneration and allowances to be paid to the President, Vice-President and members of the Central Council and to the Members of the committees thereof and determine the conditions of service of the employees of the Central Council.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 13--> No act or proceeding of the Central Council or any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Council or the committee, as the case may be.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 13-A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force,- (a) no person shall establish a medical institution; or (b) no medical institution shall- (i) open a new or higher course of study or training, including a post-graduate course of study or training, which would enable students of such course or training to qualify himself for the award of any recognised medical qualification; or (ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training including a post-graduate course of study or training, except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Explanation 1.For the purposes of this section, "person" includes any University or a trust, but does not include the Central Government. Explanation 2.For the purposes of this section, "admission capacity", in relation to any course of study or training, including post-graduate course of study or training, in a medical institution, means the maximum number of students as may be fixed by the Central Council from time to time for being admitted to such course or training. (2) Every person or medical institution shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) and the Central Government shall refer the scheme to the Central Council for its recommendations. (3) The scheme referred to in sub-section (2), shall be in such form and contain such particulars and be preferred in such manner and accompanied with such fees, as may be prescribed. (4) On receipt of a scheme from the Central Government under sub-section (2), the Central Council may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or medical institution concerned, and thereafter, it may,- (a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain necessary particulars, give a reasonable opportunity to the person or medical institution concerned for making a written representation and it shall be open to such person or medical institution to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the Central Council; (b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (8) and submit it to the Central Government together with its recommendations thereon within a period not exceeding six months from the date of receipt of the reference from the Central Government. (5) The Central Government may, after considering the scheme and recommendation of the Central Council under sub-section (4) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or institution concerned and having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (8), either approve the scheme with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary or disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall constitute as a permission under sub-section (1) : Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the person or medical institution concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard: Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any person or medical institution whose scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provision of this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme had been submitted for the first time under sub-section (2). (6) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central Government under sub-section (2), no order is communicated by the Central Government to the person or medical institution submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the Central Government in the form in which it was submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the Central Government required under sub-section (1) shall also be deemed to have been granted. (7) In computing the time-limit specified in sub-section (6), the time taken by the person or medical institution concerned submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Central Council, or by the Central Government shall be excluded. (8) The Central Council while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub-section (4) and the Central Government while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under sub-section (5), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely:- (a) whether the proposed medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under section 22; (b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its admission capacity has adequate financial resources; (c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training, hospital or other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical institution or conducting the new course of study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend such medical institution or course of study or training or the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to students likely to attend such medical institution or the course of study or training by persons having recognised medical qualifications; (f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of Indian medicine in the institution; (g) any other factors as may be prescribed. (9) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or medical institution concerned. Inserted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 13-B--> (1) Where any medical institution is established without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 13 A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (2) Where any medical institution opens a new or higher course of study or training including a post-graduate course of study or training without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 13A, medical qualification granted to any student of such institution on the basis of such study or training shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (3) Where any medical institution increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 13A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution on the basis of the increase in its admission capacity shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.'. Inserted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 14--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by any University, Board or other medical institution in India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) Any University, Board or other medical institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in the Second Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such qualification recognized, and the Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognized medical qualification only when granted after a specified date
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 15--> The medical qualifications included in the Third Schedule granted to a citizen of India before the 15th day of August, 1947, by any medical institution in any area which was comprised before that date within India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, shall also be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 16--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India which are included in the Fourth Schedule shall be recognized medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Central Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any State or country outside India, which, by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a Register of practitioners of Indian medicine, for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications in Indian medicine, and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule so as to include therein any medical qualification which the Central Council has decided should be recognized, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Fourth Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be recognized medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 17--> (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any medical qualification. included in the Second, Third or Fourth Schedule shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any State Register of Indian Medicine. (2) Save as provided in section 28, no person other than a practitioner of Indian medicine who possesses a recognized medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register of Indian Medicine, - (a) shall hold office as Vaid, Siddha, Hakim or 1 [physician or Amchi or] any other office (by whatever designation called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority; (b) shall practice Indian medicine in any State; (c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner; (d) shall be entitled to give evidence at any inquest or in any court of law as an expert under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, l872 (1 of 1872) on any matter relating to Indian medicine. (3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall affect,- (a) the right of a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine to practice Indian medicine in any State merely on the ground that, on the commencement of this Act, he does not possess a recognized medical qualification; (b) the privileges (including the right to practice any system of medicine) conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine for the time being in force in any State on a practitioner of Indian medicine enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine (c) the right of a person to practice Indian medicine in a State in which, on the commencement of this Act, a State Register of Indian Medicine is not maintained if, on such commencement, he has been practicing Indian medicine for not less than five years; (d) the rights conferred by or under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) [including the right to practice medicine as defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the said Act], on persons possessing any qualifications included in the Schedules to the said Act. (4) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub-section (2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010 for the words "physician or"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 18--> Every University, Board or medical institution in India which grants a recognized medical qualification shall furnish such information as the Central Council may, from time to time, require as to the of study and examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages which such courses of study and examinations are required to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtaining such qualification.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 19--> (1) The Central Council shall appoint such number of medical inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in Indian medicine is given, or to attend any examination held by any University, Board or medical institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical qualifications granted by that University, Board or medical Institution. (2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Indian medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. (3) The Central Council shall forward a copy of any such report to the University, Board or medical institution concerned, and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University, Board or medical institution thereon, to the Central Government.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 20--> (1) The Central Council may appoint such number or visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in Indian medicine is given or to attend any examination for the purpose of granting recognized medical qualifications. (2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Central Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 19 for any inspection or examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination. (3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination but shall report to the President of the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Indian medicine or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. (4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of the Central Council otherwise directs: Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Central Council shall furnish the same.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 21--> (1) When upon report by the inspector or the visitor, it appears to the Central Council- (a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination held by, any University, Board or medical institution, or (b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and training provided in such University, Board or medical institution or in any college or other institution affiliated to the University. do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Central Council the Central Council shall make a representation to that effect to the Central Government. (2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the Government of the State in which the University, Board or medical institution is situated and the State Government shall forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the University, Board or medical institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University, Board or medical institution may submit its explanation to the State Government. (3) On the receipt of the explanation or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then, on the expiry of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central Government. (4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the appropriate Schedule against the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognized medical qualification only when granted before a specified date, or that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified college or institution affiliated to any University shall be recognized medical qualification only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medical qualification shall be recognized medical qualification in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University only when granted after a specified date.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 22--> (1) The Central Council may prescribe the minimum standards of education in Indian medicine, required for granting recognized medical qualifications by Universities, Boards or medical institutions in India. (2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Central Council to all State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the regulations or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction, take into consideration the comments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid. (3) Each of the committees referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9 shall, from time to time, report to the Central Council on the efficacy of the regulations and may recommend to the Central Council such amendments thereof as it may think fit.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 23--> (1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner, a register of practitioners in separate parts for each of the system of Indian medicine to be known as the Central Register of Indian Medicine which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Register of Indian Medicine and who possess any of the recognized medical qualifications. (2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Central Council to keep and maintain the Central Register of Indian Medicine in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Central Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be prescribed. (3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 24--> Each Board shall supply to the Central Council three printed copies of the State Register of Indian Medicine as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and each Board shall inform the Central Council without delay of all additions to and other amendments in the State Register of Indian Medicine made from time to time.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 25--> The Register of the Central Council may on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State Register of Indian Medicine or on application made in the prescribed manner by any person, enter his name in the Central Register of Indian Medicine, provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned is eligible under this Act for such registration.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 26--> (1) The Central Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for practitioners of Indian medicine. (2) Regulations made by the Central Council under sub-section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such provision shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 27--> (1) If the name of any person enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine is removed there from in pursuance of any power conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Indian medicine for the time being in force in any State, the Central Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Central Register of Indian Medicine. (2) Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Register of Indian Medicine on any ground other than that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Register of Indian Medicine has been rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions, including conditions as to the payment of a fee, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government whose decision, which shall be given after consulting the Central Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Register of Indian Medicine.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 28--> If the course of study to be undergone for obtaining a recognized medical qualification in Indian Medicine include a period of training after a person has passed the qualifying examination and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on application made by him in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a State Register of Indian Medicine by the Board concerned in order to enable him to practice Indian Medicine in an approved institution for the purpose of such training and for no other purpose for the period aforesaid.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 29--> Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act regarding practice of Indian medicine by persons possessing certain recognized medical qualifications, every person whose name is for the time being borne on the Central Register of Indian Medicine shall be entitled according to his qualification to practice Indian medicine in any part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances or any fees to which he may be entitled.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 30--> (1) If any person whose name is entered in the Central Register of Indian Medicine obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in Indian medicine which is a recognized medical qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in the prescribed manner, be entitled to have an entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his name in the Central Register of Indian Medicine either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously made. (2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State Register of Indian Medicine shall be altered in accordance with the alterations made in the Central Register of Indian Medicine.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 31--> Every person registered in the Central Register of Indian Medicine shall notify any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Central Council and to the Board concerned, within ninety days of such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the Central Council or a Board shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 32--> (1) The Central Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the Central Government as that Government may require. (2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 20.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 33--> (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the Central Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the particulars of the complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High Court, and one by the Central Council, and such commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of default or of improper action being found by the commission to have been established, the commission shall recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary. (2) The Central Government may require the Central Council to adopt the remedies so recommended within such time as, having regard to the report of the commission, it may think fit, and if the Central Council fails to comply with any such requirement, the Central Government may amend the regulations of the Central Council, or make such provision or order or take such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the commission. (3) A commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908).
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 34--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Central Council or a Board or any committee thereof or any officer or servant of the Government or the Central Council or the Board aforesaid for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 35--> (1) The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 1 [in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Substituted by Act No. 20 of 1983, w.e.f. 15th March 1984.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section 36--> 1 [(1) The Central Council, may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 2 [by notification in the Official Gazette,] make regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the generally of this power, such regulations may provide for- (a) the manner of election of the President and the Vice-Presidents of the Central Council; (b) the management of the property of the Central Council and the maintenance and audit of its accounts; (c) the resignation of members of the Central Council; (d) the powers and duties of the President and Vice-President; (e) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Central Council and the committees thereof, the times and places where such meetings are to be held, and the conduct of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum; (f) the functions of the committees constituted under section 9 or section 10, (g) the tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants of the Central Council, 3 [(ga) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the scheme is to be preferred and the fees payable with the scheme under sub-section (3) of section 13A; (gb) any other factor under clause (g) of sub-section (8) of section 13A;] (h) the appointment, powers, duties and procedure of inspectors and visitors; (i) the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in any University, Board or medical institutions for grant of recognized medical qualifications; (j) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for education in Indian medicine; (k) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions of admissions to such examinations; (l) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by practitioners of Indian medicine ; (m) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for registration under this Act; (n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under section 27 may be preferred; (o) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act; and (p) any matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations. 4 [(2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session .or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.] Section 36 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act No. 20 of 1983, w.e.f. 15th March, 1934. Section 36 renumbered as sub-section (1) by Act No. 20 of 1983, w.e.f. 15th March, 1934. Clause (ga) and (gb) Inserted by Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002 (52 of 2002) Sub-section (1) certain words and sub-section (2) inserted by Act No. 20 of 1983, w.e.f. 15th March, 1934.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section Sch.1--> [See section 3 (1)(a)] 1. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of seats allocated in the Central Council to each of the Ayurveda, Siddha 1 [, Unani and Sowa-Rigpa] systems of medicine in each State on the following basis, namely:- (a) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for any of such systems exceeds 100 but does not exceed 10,000 (b) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for any of such systems exceeds 10,000 but does not exceed 20,000 (c) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for any of such systems exceeds 20,000 but does not exceed 30,000 (d) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for any of such systems exceeds 30,000 but does not exceed 40,000 (e) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Indian Medicine for any of such systems exceeds 40,000. . 1 seat 2. For every subsequent election to the Central Council under clause (a) of sub- section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of seats allocated in the Central Council to each of the Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems of medicine on the basis laid down in paragraph 1 above. . 3 seats . 4 seats . 5 seats Substituted by the Indian Medicine Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2010.for the words "and Unani"
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section Sch.2--> (See section 14) RECOGNISED MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS IN INDIAN MEDICINE GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES, BOARDS OR OTHER MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA Name of University, Board or Medical Institution Recognised Medical Qualifications Abbreviation for Registration Remarks 1 2 3 4 PART I- AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA  Andhra  1. Board of Indian Medicine, Hyderabad, A.P. Graduate of the College of Ayurvedic Medicine G.C.A.M. ... Graduate of the College of Integrated Medicine G.C.I.M. ... Ayurveda Visharad Bachelor of V.V.. ... Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B. A.M. & S ... 2. Andhra Pradesh Parishad, Vijaywada (Examining Body). Vaidyavidwan ... ... 3. Shri Venkateswar Ayurved Kalasala, Vijaywada. Ayurvedalankar ... ... Ayurveda-Kalanidhi ... ... Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine D.A.M. ... 4. Shri Rangacharya Rammohan Ayurvedi College, Guntur, A.P. Ayurveda Praveen ... ... 1 [4A. Andhra University Waltair. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1976 to 1977.] 2 [4B. Nagarjuna University, Nagarjuna Nagar. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1977 onwards.] 3 [4C. Kakatiya University, Warangal. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1976 onwards.] 4 [4D. Osmania University, Hyderabad. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1976 onwards. Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1974 onwards.] 5 [4E. S.V. University, Tirupati Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1988 onwards.] 6 [4F. University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1992 onwards. Ayurveda Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1989 onwards.] 7 [4G. N.T.R. University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1998 onwards. Ayurveda Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1998 onwards.] Assam  5. Board of Ayurvedic Medicine, Assam. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery D.A.M.S. ... 8 [5A. Gauhati University, Gauhati. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (Ayurvedacharya) B.A.M.S. From 1979 to 1980.] Bihar  6. State Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Medicines, Patna, Bihar. Graduate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery G.A.M.S. From 1953 onwards. 7. Government Ayurvedic School, Patna, Bihar (Former). Ayurvedacharya ... ... 8. Government Ayurvedic College, Patna, Bihar. Ayurvedacharya ... ... 9 [9. Kameshwar Singh Dharbhanga Sanskrit University, Dharbanga. Pranacharya Ayurvedacharya 10 [B.A.M.S. From 1962 onwards.] (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1981 onwards.] 11 [Praveenacharya (Ayurveda) ... From 1962 to 1979.] 12 [Vidya Varidhi Ph. D. (Ayurved) From 1974 to 1988.] 13 [9A. University of Bihar, Muzaffarpur. Graduate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery G.A.M.S. From 1973 to 1981.] 14 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1981 to 1991.] 15 [9A. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Bihar University, Muzaffarpur Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1992 onwards.] Chhatisgarh  16 [9B. Pt. Ravi Shankar Shukla University, Raipur Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2001 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati (Kayachikitsa) M.D. (Ay.) From 2001 onwards.] Delhi  10. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbia College, Delhi. Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantari ... Up to 1958 Bhishgacharya Dhanwantari ... Up to 1958 Vaidya Dhatri ... Up to 1958 11. Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi Administration. Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantari (Bachelor in Indian Medicine and Surgery) B.I.M.S. From 1958 to 1963. Bhishgacharya Dhanwantari D.I.M.S. From 1956 to 1960. (Diploma in Indian Medicine and Surgery) ... ... 12. All India Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Delhi. Ayurveda-Visharad ... ... Ayurveda-Bhishak ... ... Vaidyacharya ... ... Prajavaidya Pariksha ... ... Vaidya-Visharad ... ... Ayurvedacharya 17 [Ayurveda Shastri ... From 1974 onwards.]   13. Banwarilal Ayurvedic Vidyalaya, Delhi. Vaid-raj ... Up to 1958. Bhishgacharya ... Up to 1958. Ayurvedacharya ... Up to 1958. 14. Examining Body, Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi. Ayurvedacharya Dhanwantari (Bachelor in Indian Medicine and Surgery) B.I.M.S. From 1963 onwards. 18 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1978 onwards.] 19 [Ayurvedacharya (Ayurvedic Bachelor of Indian Medicine and Surgery) A.B.M.S. From 1975 to 1978.] 20 [14A. Delhi University, Delhi. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1979 onwards.] 21 [14B. Sanatan Dharam Premgiri Ayurvedic College (Lahore), Delhi. Ayurvedacharya M.A.M.S. From 1951 to 1957.] Goa  22 [14C. Goa University, Goa. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1998 onwards.] Gujarat  15. University of Gujarat. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. 23 [From 1961 to 1968.] 16. M.S. University, Baroda. Ayurveda-Visharad ... 24 [Up to 1953.] 17. Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Gujarat. Graduate of Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine. G.F.A.M. ... 18. The Committee for Shuddha Ayurvedic Course, Gujarat, Ahmedabad. Ayurveda Pravina D.S.A.C. ... 19. Board of Indian Medicine, Saurashtra. Ayurveda-Visharad ... ... 20. Post-Graduate Training Centre in Ayurveda, Jamnagar. Higher Proficiency in Ayurveda H.P.A. ... 21. Sarvanamasa Dakshina Parikshasmiti, Baroda. Ayurvedauttama ... 25 [Up to 1978.] Ayurveda-Madhyama ... 26 [Up to 1978.] 22. Rajkeeya Sanskrit Mahavidyalaya, Baroda. Ayurveda-Visharad ... ... 23. U.P. Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya, Patan (Baroda State) Grihit Ayurveda Shastra (Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine) D.A.M. ... Grihit Ayurveda Shastra L.A.M. Up to 1942. 24. Gujarat Ayurved University, Jamnagar. Ayurvedacharya B.S.A.M. 27 [1968 to 1982.] Pranacharya M.S.A.M. 28 [Upto July, 1974.] 29 [Doctor of Philosophy (Ayurved) Ph D . (Ayurved) From 1977 onwards.] 30 [Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) M.D. From 1973 onwards. Doctor of Literature (Ayurveda) D.Lit. (Ayurveda) (From 1976 onwards. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1982 onwards.] 31 [Haryana  24A. Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra. 32 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1982 onwards.] 24B. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak. 33 [Ayurvedacharya (Graduate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery)] G.A.M.S. From 1977 to 1983. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1982 onwards.] 34 [24BB. Haryana State Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Chandigarh. Ayurvedacharya (Graduate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) G.A.M.S. From 1971 to 1976.] 35 [Himachal Pradesh  24C. Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla. Graduate of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery G.A.M.S. 36 [Degree obtained by passing examination upto 1986 only.] Ayurvedacharya 37 [Degree obtained by passing examination upto 1986 only.] 38 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. 39 [From 1986 onwards.]] Jammu and Kashmir  25. Jammu and Kashmir University. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. Awarded from 1968. 40 [25A. University of Jammu. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2006 onwards.] Jharkhand  41 [25B. Vinoba Bhave University, Hazaribagh Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2000 onwards.] Kerala  26. University of Kerala. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine B.A.M. 5[From 1958 to 1979.] Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine D.A.M. Till 1962. 42 [Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1979 onwards. Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1976 onwards.] 27. Government of Travancore-Cochin. Vaidyakalanidhi ... ... 28. Government Ayurveda College, Tripunithura (Kerala). Sastra-Bhoosana-Ayurveda ... ... 29. Cochin Government. Vidyabhoosanam ... ... 30. Travancore-Cochin- Government. Ayurveda-Bhoosanam ... ... 31. Travancore Government. Netra Vaidya-Visharada Vaidyakalanidhi ... ... 32. Kerala Government. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine. D.A.M. Still continuing. 33. Travancore Government Vaidya-Shastri Marma Vaidya Visharad ... ... 34. Keraleeya Ayurveda Mahapatasala, Shoranur, (Kerala). Vaidyapadan ... ... 35. Cochin Government. The Certificate-Visha Vaidya Training ... ... 36. Madhava Memorial Ayurvedic College, Cannanore, Kerala. Vaidyavibhusanam ... Up to 1963. 37. Madhav Ayurveda College, Ernakulam. Ayurveda Sastry D.A.S. From 1953 to 1957. Ayurveda Vidwan ... Upto 1957. 38. Ayurvedic College, Kottakkal, Kerala. Arya Vaidyan ... ... 39. Arya Vaidya Patsala, Kottakal. Arya Vidya, Diploma ... ... 40. Government Ayurvedic College, Tripunithura. Ayurveda-Sastra-Bhusan ... ... 41. Board of Public Examinations, Cochin. Ayurveda Bhoosanam ... ... 42. Travancore Government. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine. D.I.M. ... Visha Vaidya Visarad ... ... 43. Travancore Siddha Vaidya Sangham, Munchira. Diploma or Certificate in Siddha Medicine ... May, 1947 43 [43A1. University of Calicut, Calicut. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine B.A.M. From 1977 onwards.] 44 [43A2. Calicut University, Calicut. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1985 onwards.] 45 [43B. Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. 46 [From 1988 onwards.] Madhya Pradesh  44. Jivaji Vishwavidyalaya, Gwalior. 47 [Bachelor of Ayurveda with Modern Medicine and Surgery. B.A.M.S. From 1965 to 1983.] 48 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1984 onwards.] 49 [Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) (Dosh Dhatu Mal Vigyan). M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1982 to 1987.] Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) (Sharir Kriya Vigyan) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1985 to 1987.] 50 [Ayurveda Vachaspati (Kriya Sharir) Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1989 onwards.] 45. Indore Vishwavidyalaya, Indore. Bachelor of Ayurveda with Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1965 to 1982. 51 [45A. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). B.A.M.S. From 1983 onwards.] 46. Vikram Vishwavidyalaya, Ujjain. Bachelor of Ayurved with Modern Medicine and Surgery. B.A.M.S. From 1964 onwards. 47. Ravishanker Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurved with Modern Medicine and Surgery). B.A.M.S. From 1965 to 1982. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1983 to 1991. Doctor of Ayurvedic Medicine D.A.M. From 1977 to 1978. Doctor of Medicine (Ayurved) From 1979 to 1981. Ayurved Vachaspati (Kayachikitsa) M.D. (Ayurved) From 1982 to 1992. 47A. Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University, Raipur Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1992 to 2000. Ayurved Vachaspati (Kayachikitsa) M.D. (Ayurved) From 1993 to 2000. 48. Board of Indian Medicine, Madhya Pradesh (Madhya Bharat Region), Gwalior. Bhishagacharya L.I.M. From 1957 onwards. 49. Mahakoshal Ayurvedic Board, Jabalpur. Bhisagwara L.A.P. ... 50. Board of Indian Medicine, Madhya Pradesh (Madhya Bharat Region), Gwalior. Ayurveda-Vigyanacharya A.V.M.S. From 1958 onwards. 51. Government Ayurvedic Vidyalaya, Gwalior. (Ayurvedic Examination Gwalior State). (i) Vaidyasastri ... From 1916 onwards. (ii) Vaidya-wara ... Up to 1954 (iii) Hindi Vaidya Pariksha ... Now ceased. (iv) Ayurvedic Shastri ... Now eased. 52. Ashtanga Ayurveda Vidyalaya, Ujjain. Vaidyavachaspati L.A.M. Upto 1-5-1956. 53. Board of Indian Medicine, Gwalior. Sahayak-Vaidya From 1954 and ceased afterwards. 52 [53A. Madhya Pradesh Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine and Naturopathy, Bhopal. Licentiate Ayurvedic Practitioner (Bhishagwar) L.A.P. From 1971 to 1973.  53 [From 1969 to 1970.] Ayurved Vigyanacharya (Ayurveda Vigyanacharya with Modern Medicine and Surgery) A.V.M.S. From 1971 to 1976 and from 1978 to 1984. Bhishagacharya L.I.M. 54 [From 1971 to 1974.]] 54. University of Saugor, Saugor. 55 [Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1964 onwards.] 56 [54A. Awadedh Pratap Singh Vishwavidyalaya, Rewa. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1975 onwards. 54B. University of Jabalpur, Jabalpur. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1971 onwards.] 57 [54C. Rani Durgawati Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpur Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of, Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1983 onwards.] 58 [54D. Barakatullah University, Bhopal Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2000 onwards.] 59 [54E. Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vishwavidyalaya, Chitrakoot, Satna. Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1996 to 1999] Maharashtra  55. Nagpur University, Nagpur. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. (Nagpur) From 1964 onwards 60 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 61 [Ayurveda Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1988 onwards. Agadtantra Vyavaharayurved Nishnat D.T.F.A.M. (Ayurveda) From 1988 onwards.] 62 [56. University of Poona, Pune. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1957 to 1976.] 63 [Bachelor of Surgery and Ayurvedic Medicine B.S.A.M. From 1976 to 1979. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1978 onwards.] 64 [Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) 1984 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati M.S. (Ayurved) 1984 onwards.] 57. Vidarbha Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Maharashtra. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. (Vidarbha). ... 58. Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Maharashtra. Ayurveda Visharad A.V.V. (Nanded). ... 59. Committee of Shuddha Ayurvedic Course, Maharashtra. Ayurvedic Praveena D.S.A.C. (Bombay). ... 60. Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Bombay. Graduate of the Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine G.F.A.M. (Bombay). ... Member of Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine M.F.A.M. (Maharashtra). ... Ayurveda Visharad D.A.S.F. (Bombay). ... 65 [Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. (Maharashtra Faculty) From 1975 onwards.] 66 [Fellow of the Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine F.F.A.M. From 1971 to 1983.] 61. Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Poona. Ayurvidya Visharad A.V.V. (Poona). Before 1944. Ayurvidya Parangat A.V.P. (Poona). From 1942 to 1988 62. Aryangal Mahavidyalaya, Satara. Ayurveda Visharad A.V.V. (Satara). Before 1942. 63. Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Ahmednagar. Ayurveda Teerth A.T. (Ahmednagar). Before 1942. 67 [63A. Shivaji University, Kolhapur. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery 4[B.A.M.S. From 1975 to 1982. 68 [Bachelor of Shuddha Ayurvedic Medicine B.S.A.M. From 1977 to 1982.] Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1978 onwards.] 69 [63B. Marathwada University, Aurangabad. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1971 to 1977. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Shuddha Ayurvedic Medicine) B.S.A.M. From 1976 to 1979. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 70 [63C. University of Bombay, Bombay. Ayurvedacharya B.S.A.M. From 1976 to 1983. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 71 [Ayurved Vachaspati (Doctor of Medicine-Ayurved) M.D. (Ayurved) From 1986 onwards.] 72 [63CA. University of Mumbai, Mumbai. Ayurvedachaya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1996 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati (Doctor of Medicine Ayurved) M.D. (Ayurved) From 1996 onwards.] 73 [63D. Amravati University, Amravati. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1989 onwards.] 74 [63E. North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). B.A.M.S. From 1997 onwards.] 75 [63F. Bharati Vidyapeeth (Deemed University), Pune Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery. B.A.M.S. From 2000 onwards.] 76 [63G. Maharashtra University of Health Sciences, Nashik. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery. B.A.M.S. From 2003 onwards.] 77 [Karnataka]  64. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Bangalore. Graduate Course of Indian Medicine G.C.I.M. From 1964 onwards. 65. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Mysore State, Bangalore. Ayurveda-Praveena D.S.A.C. From 1958 onwards. 66. Government Ayurvedic and Unani College, Mysore. Ayurved-Vidwat (Licentiate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). L.A.M.S. From 1928 to 1953. 67. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Mysore State, Bangalore. Ayurved-Vidwat (Licentiate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). Ayurved-Vidwat L.A.M.S. From 1958 onwards. 68. Central Board of Indian Medicine, Mysore. Ayurved-Vidwat (Licentiate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). L.A.M.S. From 1953 to 1958. 69. Taranath Ayurveda Vidyapeeth, Bellary. Ayurved-Vidwat (Licentiate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) L.A.M.S. From 1953 to 1958. Vaidya Praveena Up to 1952 70. Committee or Authority of Mysore Maharaja's Sanskrit College (Ayurvedic Section), Mysore. Ayurved-Vidwat Before 1909 71. Committee or Authority of the Government Ayurvedic College, Mysore. Ayurved-Vidwat From 1909 to 1928. 72. Karnataka Ayurveda Vidyapeetha, Belgaum. Bhishagwar ... ... 73. Prema Vidyapeeth, Thungabhadra. Ayurvedachudamani ... ... Ayurveda Shiromani ... ... Bhibagindu ... ... Vaidyaguru ... ... 74. Government Ayurvedic School, Mysore. ... A.M.S. ... 75. Government Ayurvedic School and College, Mysore. Licentiate of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery L.A.M.S. ... 76. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Mysore State, Bangalore. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine D.A.M. From 1964 onwards. 77. University of Mysore, Mysore. Bachelor of the Systems of Ayurved Medicine B.S.A.M. 78 [From 1967 to 1982.] 79 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1975 to 1996. Doctor of Ayurvedic Medicine D.M. (Ayurveda) From 1975 onwards.] 80 [Ayurved Vachaspati (Doctor of Medicine in Ayurveda) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1979 to 2000.] 81 [78. Bangalore University, Bangalore. Bachelor of the System of Ayurvedic Medicine B.S.A.M. From 1967 onwards. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. Up to 1987. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. 82 [From 1987 onwards.] 83 [Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1977 to 1998.]] 79. Karnataka University, Dharwar. Bachelor of the System of Ayurvedic Medicine B.S.A.M. From 1969 onwards. 84 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1984 onwards.] 85 [79A. Mangalore University, Mangalore. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. 86 [From 1985 to 2002.] 87 [79B. Gulbarga University, Gulbarga. Bachelor of the System of Ayurvedic Medicine B.S.A.M. From 1973 to 2005.] Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1983 onwards]. 88 [79C. Kuvempu University, Shankarghatta. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1995 to 2002.] 89 [79D. Rajiv Gandhi University of Health, Sciences, Bangalore. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2002 to onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1999 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati M.S. (Ayurved) From 1999 onwards.] Orissa  80. Ayurvedic Examination Board, Orissa. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery D.A.M.S. From 1953 to 1962. 81. Orissa Association of Sanskrit Learning and Culture, Puri. Ayurveda Shastri ... From 1933 onwards. Ayurvedacharya ... From 1933 onwards. 82. State of Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine, Orissa. Ayurvedacharya B.S.A.M. From 1969 onwards. 90 [82A. Utkal University, Bhubaneswar. Bachelor in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1974 onwards.] 91 [Ayurveda Vachaspati (Kayachikitsa) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 1981 to 1989.] 92 [82B. Sambalpur University, Burla, Sambalpur. Ayurvedacharya (Graduate of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) G.A.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 93 [82C. Berhampur University, Berhampur. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1983 onwards.] 94 [82D. Shri Jagannath Sanskrit Vishwavidyalaya, Puri. Shastri in Ayurveda ... From 1982 to 1986. Acharya in Ayurveda ... From 1982 to 1986.] 95 [82E. North Orissa University, Baripada. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2003 onwards] Punjab  96 [83. Punjab State Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Chandigarh. Ayurvedacharya (Graduate of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) G.A.M.S. From 1961 to 1982.] 97 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. Batches up to 1968-87.] 98 [84. Sanatan Dharam Premgiri Ayurvedic College (Lahore); Bhiwani/Jind/ Kurukshetra. Ayurvedacharya M.A.M.S. Up to 1957. Kaviraj L.A.M.S. From 1950 to 1956.] 85. D.A.V. Managing Committee, Amritsar/Jullundur. Vaidya-Vachaspati V.V. ... 86. Vedic and Unani Tibbia College, Amritsar. Vaid Kaviraj V.K. Up to 1947. Vaid Rattan V.R. Up to 1947. 99 [Vaidya Shastri V.S. Up to 1947.] 87. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbi College, Amritsar. Vachaspati V. Up to 1947. 88. Government Ayurvedic Vidyalaya (College), Vaidya V. Up to 1956. Patiala. Vaidya Visharad V.V. Up to 1956. Vaidya Shastri V.S. Up to 1956 Ayurvedacharya A.A. 100 [From 1912 to 1961.] 101 [88A. Gurunanak Dev University, Amritsar. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. 102 [From 1982 to 1999.]] 103 [88B. Punjabi University, Patiala. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. 104 [From 1976 to 1999.]] Ayurveda Vachaspati M.D. (Ay.) From 1971 onwards.] 105 [88C. Punjab University, Chandigarh. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1992 onwards.] 106 [88D. Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1999 onwards. Ayurveda Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurveda) From 2000 onwards.] Rajasthan  89. Rajasthan Ayurved Vibhagiya Pariksha Mandal, Ajmer. Bhishagwara ... From 1962 onwards. Bhishagacharya ... From 1962 onwards. 90. Rajputana Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbi College, Jaipur. Bhishagcharya Shiromani ... From 1951 onwards. Bhishagaratna Shastri ... From 1951 onwards. 91. Government Ayurvedic College, Jaipur. Bhishak ... ... Bhishagcharya ... ... Bhish-kala ... ... 107 [91A. Rajasthan University, Jaipur. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 108 [Ayurvedacharya ... From 1972 to 1980. Ayurved Briharpati ... From 1972 to 1982. Ayurvedacharya ... From 1981 to 1984.] 109 [Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1976 onwards.] 92. Maharaja College of Ayurveda, Jaipur. Shastra-Acharya ... ... 110 [92A. Shiksha Vibhagiya Parikshyen, Jaipur State, Rajasthan Sarkar, Jaipur. Ayurveda Shastri ... From 1872 to 1968 Ayurvedacharya ... From 1874 to 1970. Bhishagawara ... From 1936 to 1968. Bhishagacharya ... From 1938 to 1970.] Tamil Nadu  93. Government College of Indian/Indigenous/ Integrated Medicine, Madras. Graduate of the College of Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine G.C.I.M. From 1947 to 1960. Licentiate in Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine L.I.M. From 1924 to 1948. 94. Madras Ayurved College, Madras. Ayurveda Bhushan ... ... Ayurveda Bhishagawara ... ... 95. Venkataramana Ayurvedic College, Mylapore, Madras. Vaidya Visharada ... ... 96. Board of Examiners in Indian/Indigenous/ Integrated Medicine, Madras.   Higher Proficiency in Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine H.P.I.M. Up to 1955. Ayurveda-Shiromani ... 111 [From 1930 to 1977.] 97. University of Madras, Madras. Bachelor of Indian Medicine (Siddha) B.I.M. (Siddha) 112 [From 1965 to 1970.] 113 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1986 onwards.] 114 [98. Madurai Kamaraj University, Madurai. Bachelor of Indian Medicine (Siddha) B.I.M. From 1971 onwards. Doctor of Medicine (Siddha) M.D. (Siddha) From 1975 onwards. Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and Surgery B.S.M. & S. From 1982 onwards.] 115 [98A. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1989 to 1993.] 116 [98B. Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai (Tamil Nadu) Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1994 onwards. Siddha Maruthuva Arignar (Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and Surgery) B.S.M.S. From 1994 onwards. Siddha Maruthuva Perarignar (Doctor of Medicine in Siddha) M.D. (Siddha) From 1992 onwards.] 117 [98C. Shri Chandrashekhrendra Saraswati Viswa Mahavidyalaya, Kanchipuram (Deemed University). Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2001 onwards.] Uttaranchal  118 [98D. Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurgedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2005 onwards Ayurveda Vachaspati (Doctor of Medicine in Ayurveda) M.D. (Ayurveda) From 2002 onwards.] Uttar Pradesh  99. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi. Ayurved Shastracharya From 1925 to 1932. Ayurvedacharya in Medicine and Surgery A.M.S. From 1934 to 1953. Ayurvedacharya with Modern Medicine and Surgery A.M.S. From 1934 to 1953. Doctor of Ayurvedic Medicine D.Ay.M. 119 [From 1963 to 1977.] Ayurvedacharya, Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery A.B.M.S. From 1954 to 1967. 120 [Doctor of Medicine (Ayurved) M.D. (Ay.) From 1977 onwards.] 121 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 2005 onwards.] 100. Lucknow University, Lucknow. Bachelor of Ayurveda with Modern Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.M.S. From 1960 onwards. Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery B.M.B.S From 1955 to 1964. 122 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1982 onwards. Doctor of Medicine (Ayurveda) M.D. (Ay.) From 1974 onwards.] 101. Ayurvedic College, Gurukul University, Kangri (Hardwar). Ayurveda Alankara ... From 1926 to 1956. Ayurveda Vachaspati ... From 1944 to 1967. 102. Gurukul Vidyalaya, Vrindaban. Ayurved Shiromani ... From 1916 to 1967. Ayurveda-Bhushan ... From 1944 to 1967 103. Rishikul Ayurvedic College, Hardwar. Ayurved Visharad ... Up to 1945 Vaidya Visharad ... Up to 1945 Vaidya Shastri ... Up to 1945 Ayurved Shastri ... Up to 1945 Ayurvedacharya ... Up to 1945 104. Lalit Hari Ayurvedic College, Pilibhit. Vaid Bhushan ... Up to 1944. Vaid Raj ... Up to 1944. 105. Hindi Sahitya Sammelan, Prayag. Vaidya Visharad ... From 1931 to 1967. Ayurved-Ratna ... From 1931 to 1967. 106. Jawalapur Mahavidyalaya, Hardwar. Ayurved Bhaskar (Jawalapur Centre only) ... From 1950 to 1967. 107. Board of Indian Medicine, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine D.I.M. From 1932 to 1944. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine and Surgery D.I.M.S. From 1943 to 1946. Bachelor of Indian Medicine and Surgery B.I.M.S. From 1947 to 1956. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery) A.M.B.S. From 1957 to 1966. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurved with Medicine and Surgery) Ayurvedacharya (B.A.M.S.) From 1959 onwards. 123 [107A. Kanpur University, Kanpur. 124 [Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurveda with Modern Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1972 to 1982. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1983 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1991 to 1995.]] 125 [107B. Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, Varanasi. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1970 onwards. 107C. Shri Shahuji Maharaj University, Kanpur. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1995 to 1997. Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1995 to 1997. 107D. Chhatrapati Sahuji Maharaj University, Kanpur. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1997 onwards. Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. (Ayurved) From 1997 onwards.] West Bengal  108. Syamadas Vaidya Shastrapith Parishad, Calcutta. Vaidya Shastri ... From 1926 to 1940. 109. Jamini Bhushan Ashtanga Ayurved Vidyalaya, Calcutta. Bishagcharya (Master in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) M.A.M.S. From 1930 to 1940. 110. Jamini Bhushan Ashtanga Ayurved Vidyalaya, Calcutta. Bhishagaratna (Licentiate in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) L.A.M.S. From 1920 to 1940. 111. General Council and State Faculty of Ayurvedic Medicine, West Bengal (now Paschim Bangal Ayurveda Parishad), Calcutta. Vaidya Shiromani (Member of the Ayurvedic State Faculty) M.A.S.F. From 1940 to 1949. Vaidya Shastri ... From 1940 to 1945. Vaidyabhushan (Licentiate, Ayurvedic State Faculty) L.A.S.F. From 1939 to 1950. Ayurvedtirtha (Member of the Ayurvedic State Faculty) M.A.S.F. From 1947 onwards. Ayurvedatirtha (Ayurvedic State Faculty) A.S.F. From 1946 onwards. Pranacharya F.A.S.F.  126 [Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery D.A.M.S. From 1979 1983. Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery B.A.M.S. From 1979 to 1984.] 112. Ayurvidya Pratisthan, Calcutta. Bhishagratna From 1930 to 1940. Bhishagacharya From 1930 to 1940. 113. Ganga Charan Ayurved Vidyalaya, Calcutta. Ayurvedshastri From 1928 to 1940. Ayurvedacharya From 1928 to 1940. 114. Maharaja Cossimbazar Gobindasundari Ayurvedic College, Calcutta. Ayurvedshastri (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine) A.M.B. From 1927 to 1940. Ayurvedacharya (Master of Ayurvedic Medicine) Doctor A.M.D. From 1927 to 1940. 115. Viswanath Ayurved Mahavidyalaya, Calcutta. Bishagratna (Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery). D.A.M.S. From 1932 to 1940. Vaidyashiromani (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1932 to 1940. Master of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery M.A.M.S. From 1932 to 1940. 127 [116. University of Calcutta, Calcutta. Ayurvedacharya (Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery) B.A.M.S. From 1982 onwards.] 128 [Ayurved Vachaspati M.D. From 1979 onwards.] PART II-UNANI  Andhra Pradesh  129 [1. Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati. Tabib-e-Kamil From 1957 to 1982.] 130 [Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1985 onwards.] 2. Nizamia Tibbi College, Hyderabad. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S.  Tabib-e-Mustanad (Graduate of the College of Unani Medicine) G.C.U.M. 131 [2A. Board of Indian Medicine, Hyderabad. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Medicine and Unani Surgery) B.M.U.S. From 1965 to 1975.] 132 [2B. Osmania University, Hyderabad. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1976 onwards. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1982 onwards. Doctor in Unani Medicine M.D. (Unani) From 1976 onwards.] 133 [2C. University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1992 onwards. Mahir-e-tib M.D. (Unani) From 1989 onwards.] 134 [2D. N.T.R. University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada, Andhra Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1998 onwards. Pradesh. Mahir-e-tib M.D. (Unani) From 1998 onwards.] Bihar  3. State Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Patna, Bihar. Graduate in Unani Medicine and Surgery G.U.M.S. From 1953 onwards. 135 [3A. University of Bihar, Muzaffarpur. Graduate in Unani Medicne and Surgery G.U.M.S. 136 [From 1973 to 1982.]] 137 [Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1982 onwards.] 138 [3B.Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar Bihar University, Muzaffarpur. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1992 onwards.] Delhi  4. Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi. Fazil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor in Indian Medicine and Surgery) B.I.M.S. From 1958 to 1963. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Diploma in Indian Medicine and Surgery) D.I.M.S. From 1956 to 1963. 5. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbia College, Delhi. Fazil-e-tib-o-Jarahat Up to 1958. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat Up to 1958. 6. Jamia Tibbia, Delhi. Akmal-ul-Hukma Up to 1958. Afzal-ul-Hukma Up to 1956. 7. Examining Body, Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Delhi. Fazil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor in Indian Medicine and Surgery) B.I.M.S. From 1963 onwards. 139 [7A. Delhi University, Delhi. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1979 onwards.] 140 [7B. Jamia Hamdard (Deemed University) New Delhi. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1995 to 1996.]  141 [From 1996 onwards.] 142 [Mahir-e-Tib M.D. (Unani) From 1997 onwards.] Jammu and Kashmir  8. Jammu and Kashmir University. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1966 onwards. 143 [8A. Kashmir University, Srinagar. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1969 onwards.] Madhya Pradesh  9. Asipha Tibbia College, Bhopal. Hakim-Kamil  Tibbe-e-Kamil  144 [9A. University of Sagar, Sagar. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1973 onwards. 9B. Mahakoshal Board of Ayurvedic Unani Systems of Medicine, Jabalpur. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1966 to 1970. 9C. Madhya Pradesh Board of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine and Naturopathy, Bhopal. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1971 to 1974.] 145 [9D. Doctor Harisingh Gour Vishwavidyalaya, Sagar. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1983 onwards.] 146 [9E. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1996 onwards.] 147 [9F. Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya, Bhopal. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 2007 onwards]. Maharashtra  10. Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Maharashtra. Mahir-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat D.U.S.F. (Bombay) 11. Board of Examiners in Unani. Mahir-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat M.T.J. (Bombay) From 1942 to 1943. 148 [11A. Maharashtra Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine, Bombay. Diploma in Unani Medicine and Surgery D.U.M.S. From 1973 onwards.] 149 [11B. University of Bombay, Bombay. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1984 onwards.] 150 [11C. Poona University, Pune. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1988 onwards.] 151 [11 D. Nagpur University, Nagpur. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1996 onwards.] 152 [11 E. Maharashtra University of Health Sciences, Nashik. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 2003 onwards.] Karnataka  12. Board of Studies in Indian Medicine, Mysore, Bangalore. Tabib-e-Hasaq (Licentiate in Unani Medicine and Surgery) L.U.M.S. From 1958 onwards. 13. Government Ayurvedic and Unani College (College of Indian Medicine), Mysore. Tabib-e-Hasaq (Licentiate in Unani Medicine and Surgery) L.U.M.S. From 1928 to 1953. 14. Central Board of Indian Medicine, Mysore, Bangalore. Tabib-e-Hasaq (Licentiate in Unani Medicine and Surgery) L.U.M.S. From 1953 to 1958. 15. Government Ayurvedic School, Mysore. U.M.S. 153 [15A. Bangalore University, Bangalore. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1977 onwards.] 154 [15B. Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Bangalore. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 2002 onwards.] Tamil Nadu  16. Government College of Indian/Indigenous/ Integrated Medicine, Madras. Licentiate in Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine L.I.M. ... Graduate of the College of Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine G.C.I.M. ... 17. Board of Examiners in Indian/Indigenous/ Integrated Medicine. Higher Proficiency in Indian/Indigenous/Integrated Medicine H.P.I.M. 155 [17A. University of Madras, Madras. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1979 onwards.] 156 [17B. Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, Chennai. Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1994 onwards.] Punjab  157 [18. Bhupinder Tibbi College, Patiala. Haziq-ul-Hukma H.U.H. From 1927 to 1950. Mahir-e-Tib-o-Jarahat M.T.J. From 1927 to 1950. Tibb-e-Akmal T.A. From 1936 to 1950.] 19. Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbi College, Amritsar Kamil-ul-Tibbi K.U.T. Up to 1947. Vedic and Unani Tibbi College, Amritsar. Fazil-ul-Tibbi F.U.T. Up to 1947. Umdho-Dal-Hukma H.D.H. Up to 1947. 158 [Zabadat-ul-Atibba Up to 1947.] Rajasthan  20. Rajputana Ayurvedic and Unani Tibbia College, Jaipur. 159 [Umedt-ul-Hukma ... From 1930 to 1980. Tabib-Fazil ... From 1930 to 1981.] 160 [20A. Board of Indian Medicine, Rajasthan, Jaipur. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1981 onwards.] 161 [20B. University of Rajasthan, Jaipur. Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1989 onwards.] Uttar Pradesh  21. Muslim University, Aligarh. Diploma in Indian Medicine and Surgery D.I.M.S. From 1927 to 1943. Diploma in Unani Medicine and Surgery D.U.M.S. From 1944 to 1946. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1953 onwards. Bachelor of Unani Tib and Surgery B.U.T.S. From 1947 to 1952. 162 [Doctor of Unani Medicine. D.U.M. From 1974 to 1977.  (M.D.) Unani From 1978 onwards. Bachelor of Unani Medicine with Modern Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.M.S. From 1972 to 1983.] 163 [Kamil-e-tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1980 onwards.] 22. Board of Indian Medicine, Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine D.I.M. From 1932 to 1944. Diploma in Indegenous Medicine and Surgery D.I.M.S. From 1943 to 1946. Bachelor of Indian Medicine and Surgery B.I.M.S. From 1947 to 1956. Fazil-ut-Tib (Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery) F.M.B.S. From 1957 onwards. 164 [22A. Kanpur University, Kanpur. Fazil-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani with Modern Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 1972 to 1994. 22B. Shri Shahuji Maharaj University, Kanpur. Fazil-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat B.U.M.S. From 1995 to 1997. 22C. Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj University, Fazil-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat B.U.M.S. from 1998 to 2001. Kanpur. Kamil-e-Tibb-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery) B.U.M.S. From 2002 onwards.] 165 [23. Board of Arabic and Persian Examinations, U.P., Allahabad. Fazil-e-Tibb From 1936 to 1982. 24. 166 [Jamia Tibbia, Darul- Uloom, Deoband, U.P.] Fazil-e-Tibb D.U.M. From 1964 to 1984.] 167 [25. Jamiatun Naqiba Unani Medical School, Allahabad. Matamidut-Tib-Wal Jarahat. M.U.M.S. From 1908 to 1942.] Inserted by S.O. 638, dated 25th January, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 638, dated 25th January, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 638, dated 25th January, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1910, dated 21st July, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 117(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 378(E), dated 13th April, 2000. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 1017(E), dated 8th October, 2001. Substituted by S.O. 923(E), dated 29th December, 1997. Inserted by S.O. 2323(E), dated 20th August, 1981. Substituted by S.O. 1180(E), dated 7th October, 2003. Inserted by S.O. 1181(E), dated 7th October, 2003. Inserted by S.O. 1018(E), dated 8th October, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 2635, dated 18th September, 1980. Inserted by S.O. 1030, dated 30th March, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 3186, dated 30th October, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 2475, dated 29th May, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 7th February, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 7th February, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 7th February, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 973, dated 20th February, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 973, dated 20th February, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 4068, dated 30th November, 1979. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 5671, dated 5th December, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1946, dated 9th July, 1987 Inserted by S.O. 1697, dated 15th April, 1988. Inserted by S.O. 888, dated 17th February, 1986. Substituted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 1809(E), dated 20th October, 2006. Inserted by S.O. 1679(E), dated 25th November, 2005. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983 and renumbered as serial No. 43A1 by S.O. 3110, dated 11th October, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 3110, dated 11th October, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 3375, dated 18th October, 1996. Substituted by S.O. 1472(E), dated 11th September, 2006. Substituted by S.O. 1758(E), dated 10th December, 2005. Substituted by S.O. 1758(E), dated 10th December, 2005. Inserted by S.O. 2594, dated 21st September, 1989. Substituted by S.O. 1758(E), dated 10th December, 2005. Inserted by S.O. 170(E), dated 6th March, 1998. Inserted by S.O. 462(E), dated 23rd June, 1984. Inserted by S.O. 1910(E), dated 21st July, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 462(E), dated 23rd June, 1984. Substituted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1008(E), dated 9th November, 2000. Inserted by S.O. 1521(E), dated 20th October, 2005. Inserted by S.O. 1175(E), dated 10th July, 2007. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 117(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 3550(E), dated 5th September, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 191(E), dated 8th February, 2005. Inserted by S.O. 4068, dated 30th November, 1979. Added by S.O. 1832, dated 16th April, 1986. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1019(E), dated 9th October, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 1019(E), dated 9th October, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 1435, dated 7th May, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 820 (E), dated 12th September, 2000. Inserted by S.O. 486 (E), dated 30th May, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 131(E), dated 28th January, 2004. Substituted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Substituted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 1135(E), dated 6th July, 2007. Substituted by S.O. 1135(E), dated 6th July, 2007. Substituted by S.O. 1041, dated 6th April, 1989. Substituted by S.O. 2177, dated 14th August, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 534(E), dated 22nd April, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 5671, dated 5th December, 1985. Substituted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 1910, dated 21st July, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 303(E), dated 6th May, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 1180(E), dated 7th October, 2003. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1041, dated 6th April, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 984(E), dated 2nd September, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 33(E), dated 11th January, 2007. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 1504, dated 22nd April, 1988 Inserted by S.O. 2745, dated 29th May, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Substituted by S.O. 7661, dated 2nd February, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 265(E), dated 24th February, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 265(E), dated 24th February, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 403(E), dated 31st May, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 265(E), dated 24th February, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1832, dated 16th April, 1986. Inserted by S.O. 876(E), dated 25th October, 1988. Inserted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1910, dated 21st July, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 630, dated 17th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 516(E), dated 16th May, 2002. Inserted by S.O. 1485(E), dated 12th September, 2006. Substituted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1368(E), dated 23rd August, 2006. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 5671, dated 5th December, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983 and amended by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 4057, dated 14th August, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 1166(E), dated 29th September, 2003. Inserted by S.O. 2314, dated 22nd August, 1981. Inserted by S.O. 760, dated 25th February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983 and amended by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983 and amended by S.O. 3550, dated 5th September, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 378(E), dated 13th April, 2000. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Substituted by S.O. 744(E), dated 29th June, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 744(E), dated 29th June, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 744(E), dated 29th June, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S,.O. 3375, dated 18th October, 1996. Inserted by S.O. 1793(E), dated 28th August, 1998. Inserted by S.O. 2261(E), dated 24th September, 2008. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 2314, dated 22nd August, 1981. Inserted by S.O. 969(E), dated 29th November, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 1700(E), dated 27th September, 2007. Inserted by S.O. 4068, dated 30th November, 1979. Inserted by S.O. 3404, dated 5th July, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 3404, dated 5th July, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 1018(E), dated 8th October, 2001. Inserted by S.O. 131(E), dated 28th January, 2004. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1166(E), dated 29th September, 2003. Inserted by S.O. 354(E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 116(E), dated 17th February, 1999. Inserted by S.O. 1911, dated 17th April, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 627, dated 2nd February, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 1832, dated 16th April, 1986. Inserted by S.O. 3404, dated 5th July, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 214, dated 9th January, 1997. Inserted by S.O. 2314, dated 22nd August, 1981. Inserted by S.O. 354 (E), dated 6th May, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 540(E), dated 13th April, 2006 Inserted by S.O. 2314, dated 22nd August, 1981. Substituted by S.O. 1517(E), dated 23rd June, 2010. Inserted by S.O. 1832, dated 16th April, 1986.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section Sch.3--> (See section 15) QUALIFICATION GRANTED BY CERTAIN MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS BEFORE 15TH AUGUST, 1947 IN AREAS WHICH COMPRISED WITHIN INDIA AS DEFINED IN THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ACT, 1935. Name of University, Board or Medical Institution Recognised Medical Qualifications Abbreviation for Registration Remarks 1 2 3 4 PART I-AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA  1. Dayanand Ayurvedic College Lahore. Vaidya Vachaspati ... Before 1947. Vaidya Kaviraj ... Before 1947. 2. Sanatan Dharma Premgiri Ayurvedic College, Lahore Vaidya Shastri ... Before 1947. Shri Ayurvedacharya ... Before 1947. Shri Vaid Kaviraj ... Before 1947. 3. Manomohan Chatuspati Dacca. Ayurvedshastri ... From 1920 to 1940. Ayurvedratna ... From 1920 to 1940. PART II-UNANI  1. Islamia College, Lahore. Hakim-i-Haziq ...  Zubdatul-Hukma ... ... 2. Tibbia College, Lahore Hasiq-ul-Hukma H.U.H. Up to 1947. Mahir-Tib-o-Jarahat M.T.J. Up to 1947. Hakim-i-Haziq H.H. Up to 1947.
Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970_Section Sch.4--> (See section 16) QUALIFICATION GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THERE IS A SCHEME OF RECIPROCITY Name of University, Board or Medical Institution Recognised Medical Qualifications Abbreviation for Registration Remarks 1 2 3 4 AYURVEDA AND SIDDHA  1. Government College of Indigenous Systems of Medicine, Ceylon. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine and Surgery D.I.M.S. 1 [2. Government College of Indigenous Medicine, Colombo, Sri Lanka. Diploma in Indigenous Medicine and Surgery (Ayurved/Siddha/Unani) D.I.M.S. Up to 1960. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (Ayurved/Siddha/Unani) D.A.M.S. From 1961 to 1976.] 3. Institute of Indigenous Medicine, University of Colombo, Sri Lanka. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (Ayurvedic/Unani) D.A.M.S. From 1977 to 1987. 2 [Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery D.A.M.S. From 1977 to 1984.] 3 [Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (Siddha) B.A.M.S. From 1991 onwards. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery B.U.M.S. From 1991 onwards.] 4 [4. University of Jaffna, Sri Lanka. Diploma in Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (Siddha) D.A.M.S. From 1984 to 1987.] 5 [Bachelor of Siddha Medicine and Surgery. B.S.M.S. From 1989 onwards.] Inserted by S.O. 3246, dated 31st October, 1990. Inserted by S.O. 3246, dated 31st October, 1990. Inserted by S.O. 2669, dated 29th August, 1991. Inserted by S.O. 3246, dated 31st October, 1990. Inserted by S.O. 2669, dated 29th August, 1991. 
