Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on 24th May, 2016.
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> After section 10C of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "10D. Uniform entrance examination for undergraduate and postgraduate level. - There shall be conducted a uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post-graduate level through such designated authority in Hindi, English and such other languages and in such manner as may be prescribed and the designated authority shall ensure the conduct of uniform entrance examination in the aforesaid manner: Provided that notwithstanding any judgment or order of any court, the provisions of this section shall not apply, in relation to the uniform entrance examination at the undergraduate level for the academic year 2016-17 conducted in accordance with any regulations made under this Act, in respect of the State Government seats (whether in Government Medical College or in a private Medical College) where such State has not opted for such examination.".
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> In section 33 of the principal Act, after clause (ma), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(mb) the designated authority, other languages and the manner of conducting of uniform entrance examination to all medical educational institutions at the undergraduate level and post-graduate level;".
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> (1) The Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Ordinance, 2016 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Indian Medical Council Act,1956 as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the said Act, as amended by this Act. Dr. G. Narayana Raju Secretary to the Government of India. 
