Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918_Section Preamble--> An Act to take power to prohibit the alteration, except with the sanction of 1 the Central Government, of articles of association which restrict foreign interests in certain Companies, and to provide for other purposes connected therewith. WHEREAS it is expedient to take power to prohibit the alteration, except with the sanction of 518th Central Government, of articles of association which restrict foreign interests in certain companies, and to provide for other purposes connected therewith; It is hereby enacted as follows:. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for the Governor-General in Council
Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918.
Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918_Section 2--> (1) In this Act- 1 (a) the expression "Commonwealth citizen" has the same meaning as in section 1 of the British Nationality Act, 1948 (11 & ; 12 Geo.6, ch.56.), but shall include any association incorporated in any part of the Commonwealth, including India; (b) the expression "restrictive provision" means any provision in the articles of association of a company which, in the opinion of the Central Government, is designed to restrict or limit or has the effect of restricting or limiting the share or shares or interest which may be held, or the rights, powers or authority which may be conferred upon or exercised by or on behalf of persons other than 2 Commonwealth citizens in the company, or in respect of the control, management or direction of the affairs thereof. (2) All words and expressions used in this Act and defined in the 3 Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 of 1913), shall be deemed to have the meanings respectively attributed to them by that Act. Substituted by British Nationality Act, 1948 for Clause (a). Substituted by British Nationality Act, 1948 for Clause (a). Now see the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).
Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918_Section 3--> This Act shall apply to such companies as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette1 , declare to be companies with restrictive provisions, and any such notification shall specify the restrictive provisions. Substituted by A. O., 1937 for 'G G in Council'
Indian Companies (Foreign Interests) Act, 1918_Section 4--> So long as a notification issued under section 3 is in force in force respect to any company, notwithstanding anything to the contrary inany other Act- (1) no alteration of the articles of association of the company affecting either directly or indirectly any restrictive provision shall be of any effect until it has received the consent in writing of the 1 [Central Government]; (2) a resolution for the voluntary winding up of the company shall be of no effect unless the 2 [Central Government] authorises or ratifies it by a written consent; (3) any Court which has jurisdiction to wind up the company may in its discretion refuse to make a winding up order.In the exercise of its discretion, the Court shall be guided by the consideration whether the winding and is bona fide with a view to the discontinuance of the undertaking, or is with a view to continuing the undertaking freed either wholly or in part from any restrictive provision; (4) the Central Government in giving consent, or the Court in making a winding up order, as the case may be, may impose such terms or conditions for giving effect to the purposes of this Act as 3 it thinks fit. Substituted by A. O., 1937 for 'G G in Council' Substituted by A. O., 1937 for 'G G in Council' Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 for "he or it". 
