Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 2--> In section 1 of the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947 (48 of 1947) (hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act), for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir."
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 3--> In section 2 of the principal Act,- (a) in clause (a), for the words "Indian Council of Nursing", the word "Council" shall be substituted; (b) clause (e) shall be omitted.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 4--> In sub-section (1) of section 3 of the principal Act,- (a) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) two members elected from among themselves by the heads of institutions recognised by the Council for the purpose of this clause in which training is given- (i) for obtaining a University degree in nursing; or (ii) in respect of a post-certificate course in the teaching of nursing and in nursing administration;"; (b) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(g) one midwife or auxiliary nurse-midwife enrolled in a State register, elected by each of the State Councils in the four groups of States mentioned below, each group of States being taken in rotation in the following order, namely:- (i) Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh,(ii) Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Bombay and Rajasthan,(iii) Mysore, Punjab and West Bengal,(iv) Assam, Madras and Orissa;"; (c) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(l) the Chief Administrative Medical Officer (by whatever name called) of each State other than a Union territory, ex officio;"; (d) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(m) the Superintendent of Nursing Services (by whatever name called), ex officio, from each of the States in the two groups mentioned below, each group of States being taken in rotation in the following order, namely:- (i) Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bombay, Madhya Pradesh, Madras, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal; (ii) Bihar, Kerala, Mysore, Orissa, Punjab and Rajasthan;"; (e) for clause (o), the following clause shall be substituted namely:- "(o) three members elected by Parliament, two by the House of the people from among its members and the other by the Council of States from among its members.".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 5--> Sub-section (6) of section 6 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 6--> In section 10 of the principal Act,- (a) In sub-section (1), after the words "For the purposes of this Act, the qualifications included in", the words and figure "Part I of" shall be inserted; (b) in sub-section (2),- (i) after the words "recognised by the State Government", the words "in consultation with the State Council, if any", shall be inserted; (ii) after the word "midwifery", the words "auxiliary nursing-midwifery" shall be inserted; (c) in the second proviso to sub-section (3), for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(ii) any qualification granted by an authority in a territory of India to which this Act did not extend at the date of its commencement, and recognised on the said date by the State Council of a State to which this Act then extended, shall continue to be a recognised qualification for the purpose of registration in that State.".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 7--> (1) Section 11 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and in clause (b) of sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the word "midwife", the words "auxiliary nurse-midwife" shall be inserted. (2) After sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1)- (a) a citizen of India holding a qualification which entitles him or her to be registered with any Council of Nursing or Midwifery (by whatever name called) in any foreign country, may, with the approval of the Council, be enrolled in any State register; and where approval has been accorded by the Council in respect of such qualification in one case, the approval of the Council for enrolment in a State register in the case of any other citizen of India holding the same qualification shall not be necessary; (b) a person not being a citizen of India who is employed as a nurse, midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife, teacher or administrator in any hospital or institution situated in any State for purposes of teaching, research or charitable work may, with the approval of the President of the Council, be enrolled temporarily in the State register for such period as may be specified in this behalf in the order issued by the said President: Provided that practice by such person shall be limited to the hospital or institution to which he or she is attached.".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 8--> In sub-section (1) of section 13 of the principal Act, after the words 'such number of inspectors", the words " whether from among members of the Council or other wise," shall be inserted.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 9--> In clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 14 of the principal Act, after the word "midwives", the words "auxiliary nurse-midwives" shall be inserted.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 10--> Section 15 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule so as to bring it into accord with any declaration under section 10 or section 14."
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 11--> The following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "15A.Indian Nurses Register.- (1) The Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner a register of nurses, midwives, auxiliary nurse-midwives and health visitors to be known as the Indian Nurses Register, which shall contain the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State register.(2) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Council to keep the Indian Nurses Register in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and from time to time, to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be prescribed. (3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 Of 1872) , and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.15B.Supply of copies of State registers.- Each State Council shall supply to the Council twenty printed copies of the State register as soon as may be after the 1st day of April of each year and inform the Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendments in, the State register made from time to time.".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 12--> In sub-section (1) of section 16 of the principal Act, for clause (f), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- "(f) prescribing the tenure of office and the powers and duties of the Secretary and other officers and servants of the Council; (ff) prescribing the powers and duties of inspectors;".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 13--> Section 17 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 14--> For the Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely:- THE SCHEDULE (See sections 10 and 11) PART I Recognised qualifications A-General Nursing- Certificates (including senior and junior certificates), Diplomas or Degrees in Nursing issued by any of the following authorities, namely:- 1.The Examination Board appointed by the Government of Madras. 2.The Bombay Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Council. 3.The Bombay Presidency Nursing Association (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1936). 4.The Bengal Nursing Council (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 5.The Uttar Pradesh State Medical Faculty. 6.The Uttar Pradesh Nurses and Midwives Council. 7.The State Board of Medical Examinations, Uttar Pradesh (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1927). 8.(a) The Punjab Nurses Registration Council (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947 or after the 26th day of January, 1950). (b) The East Punjab Nurses Registration Council (when issued before the 26th day of January, 1950). 9.The Bihar Medical Examination Board (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1938). 10.The Bihar Nurses Registration Council. 11.The Madhya Pradesh Medical Examination Board (when issued before the 1st day of April, 1950). 12.The Assam Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Council. 13.The Orissa Medical Examination Board. 14.The Mid-India (United) Board of Examiners for Nurses (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1947). 15.The Joint Missionary Board for Examination of Nurses (Marathi area) (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1934). 16.The North-India United Board of Examiners for Mission and other Hospitals (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1940). 17.The Examining Board of the Nurses Auxiliary of the Christian Medical Association of India (South India Branch). 18.The Sind Nurses and Midwives Council (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 19.The West Bengal Nursing Council. 20.The university of Delhi. 21.The university of Madras. 22.The Bengal State Medical Faculty (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1942). 23.The Mid-India Board of Examiners of Nurses Auxiliary of Christian Medical Association of India. 24.The Examination Board of Military Medical Services (when issued before the 18th day of August, 1955). 25.The Armed Forces Medical Services Examination Board. 26.The Madhya Pradesh State Nurses Registered Council. 27.The Board of Examiners appointed by the Government of Mysore. 28.The Board of Examiners appointed by the Government of Hyderabad (when issued before the 1st day of November, 1956). 29.The Board of Examiners appointed by the Government of Andhra (when issued before the 1st day of November, 1956) or by the Government of Andhra Pradesh (when issued on or after the 1st day of November, 1956). 30.The Travancore-Cochin Nurses' and Midwives' Council. 31.The Vidarbha Nurses Registration Council. B-Midwifery- Certificates, Diplomas or Degrees in Midwifery issued by any of the following authorities, namely:- 1.Any of the authorities mentioned in section A except the authority at item No.17 thereof. 2.The Punjab Central Midwives Board (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 3.The Mid-India (United) Board of Examiners for Midwifery (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1947). 4.The National Association for supplying female medical aid to the women of India (when issued before the 1st day of October, 1949). 5.The North-West Frontier Province Central Midwives Board (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 6.The Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust. 7.The Health Department, Madras (when issued before the 31st day of December, 1952). C-Auxiliary Nursing-Midwifery- Certificates issued by any of the following authorities, namely:- 1.Any of the authorities mentioned in section A except items Nos.3, 4,7,9,11,14,15,16,18,20,21,22,24 and 25. 2.The Examination Board appointed by the Himachal Pradesh Administration. D-Health Visitors- Health Visitors Certificates or Diplomas issued by any of the following authorities, namely:- 1.The Government Training School for Health Visitors, Madras. 2.The Sir John Anderson Health School, Calcutta. 3.The Uttar Pradesh State Medical Faculty. 4.The Uttar Pradesh Nurses and Midwives Council. 5.The Government Health School, Nagpur. 6.The Assam Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Council. 7.The Lady Reading Health School, Delhi. 8.The Bombay Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors Council. 9.The Bengal Nursing Council (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 10.The Punjab Health School (when issued before the 15th day of August, 1947). 11.The West Bengal Nursing Council. 12.The Punjab State Medical Faculty. 13.The Bengal State Medical Faculty (when issued before the 1st day of January, 1942). 14.The Bihar Nurses Registration Council. Recognised higher qualifications PART II Name of the authority issuing the qualification Qualifications 1.The Examination Board appointed by 1.Diploma in Nursing- the Government of Madras Sister Tutor Course. 2.Diploma in Nursing- Nursing Administration Course. 2.College of Nursing, New Delhi. 1.Post-certificate course in Public Health Nursing (when issued before the 31st day of December, 1953). 2.Combined post-certificate course in Teaching and Nursing Administration (when issued before the 31st day of August, 1957). 3.Certificate of Examination in Ward Sisters course. 4.Certificate of Examination in Nursing Administration course. 5.Certificate of Examination in Sister Tutor Course. 6.Certificate of Examination in Midwife Tutor Course. 3.The (Missionary Christian Medical Diploma in Teaching and Supervision (sister Tutor College, School of Nursing, Vellore. Course). 4.The School of Nursing, Christian Diploma in Teaching and Supervision (Sister- Medical College, Vellore. Tutor Course). 5.The Indian Psychiatric Society Diploma in Psychiatric Nursing. 6.The All India Institute of Mental Health Diploma in Psychiatric Nursing.Bangalore. 7.The All India Institute of Hygienic and Certificate in public health Nursing. 8.The Public Health Department, Madras. Diploma in Public Health Nursing. 9.The Tuberculosis Association of India. Diploma in Tuberculosis Nursing".
Indian Nursing Council (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 15--> The Council to be constituted under section 3 of the principal Act as amended by section 4 of this Act, may be constituted at any time after the passing, and before the coming into force, of this Act, but the Council so constituted shall opt being to function till the coming into force of this Act, and on the coming into force of this Act the term of office of the members of the council then existing shall expire. 
