Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section Preamble--> An Act to establish the Industrial Development Bank of India for providing credit and other facilities for the development of industry and for matters connected therewith and further to amend certain enactments. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :--
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 20-6-1964, vide Notification No.G.S.R.891, dated 20-6-1964, Gazette to India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3(i), p. 493.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 2--> 1 In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- (a) "Board means the Board of Directors of the Development Bank; (b) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under section 3; 2 [(c) “industrial concern” means any concern engaged or to be engaged in,- (i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods; (ii) shipping; 3 [(iii) mining included development of mines;] (iv) the hotel industry; (v) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or 4 [by air or by ropeway or by lift]; 5 [(vi) the generation, storage or distribution of electricity or any other form of energy;] (vii) the maintenance, repair, testing or servicing of 6 [machinery or equivalent] of any description or vehicles or vessels or motor boats or trailers or tractors; (viii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with the aid of machinery or power; 7 [(ix) the setting up of, or development of, an industrial area or an industrial estate;] (x) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or maintenance thereof; (xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other services for the promotion of industrial growth; or 8 [(xii) providing engineering, technical, financial management, marketing or other services or facilities for industry; (xiii) service industry such as altering, ornamenting, polishing, finishing, oiling, washing, cleaning or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view of its use, sale, transport, delivery or disposal; (xiv) providing medical, health or other allied services; (xv) providing services relating to infromation technology, telecommunication or electronics; (xvi) leasing, sub-leasing or giving on hire or hire purchase of industrial plants, equipments, machinery or other assets including vehicles, ships and aircraft; (xvii) such other activity as the Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf; or (xviii) the research and development of any concept, technology design, process or product whether in relation to any of the matters aforesaid, including any activities specified under sub-clause (xvii), or any other matter. Explanation.-The expression "processing of goods" includes any art or process for producing, preparing or making an article by subjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical electrical or any other like operation;] 9 10 [(d) "Industrial Finance Corporation" means the Industrial Finance Corporation of India Limited formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 ;] 11 [(da) “nationalised bank” means a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980);] (e) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Act; (f) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934.); (g) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934.); 12 [(ga) “State Bank” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955); (gb) “subsidiary bank” has the meaning assigned to it in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);](h) "State co-operative bank" has the same meaning as in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934.); (i) "State Financial Corporation" means a financial corporation established under section 3 or section 3A of the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) and includes the 13 [Tamil Nadu]industrial Investment Corporation Limited. [(j) “Unit Trust” means the Unit Trust of India established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963).] Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 3 w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted by the Act 52 of 1975, section 3, for clause (c) w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2 w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2, for "by air" w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2, for sub-clause (vi) w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2, for "machinery" w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2, for sub-clause (ix) w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2, for sub-clause (xii) and Explanation w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 2 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted by Act 5 of 1995, section 2, for clause (d) w.e.f. 12-10-1994. Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 3 and substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 2 w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 3 w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted for the word "Madras" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 2.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 3--> (1) With effect from such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act a corporation to be know as the industrial Development Bank of India. (2) The Development Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue or be sued. (3) The head office of the Development Bank shall be at Bombay or at such other place as the 2 [Central Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. (4) The Development Bank may establish offices, branches or agencies at any other place in or outside India. 1-7-1964, vide Notification No.G.S.R.892, dated 22-6-1964, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3(i), p. 495 Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 4, for "Reserve Bank" w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4--> 2 (1) The authorised capital of the Development Bank shall be two thousand crores of rupees divided into one hundred and fifty crores fully paid, up equity shares of rupees ten each and subject to the provisions of section 4B, fifty crores of fully paid-up redeemable preference shares of rupees ten each. (2) The Development Bank may, from time to time, by a resolution in general meeting, increase the authorised capital to an amount not exceeding five thousand crores of rupees consisting of such number of equity shares and redeemable preference shares is it deems fit.] Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 3 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Sections 4, 4A and 4B substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 5, for section 4 w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4A--> (1) The issued capital of the Development Bank which has been subscribed by the Reserve Bank as on the date immediately preceding the commencement of section 5 of the Public Financial Institutions Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975 (52 of 1975) (hereinafter referred to as the "appointed day"), shall, on such commencement, stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. 2 [...] (2) Any further issue of capital made by the Development Bank after the appointed day shall be wholly subscribed by the Central Government. Sections 4, 4A and 4B substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 5, for section 4 w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 5 of 1995, section 4 w.e.f. 12-10-1994.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4B--> 1 The Reserve Bank shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the issued capital of the Development Bank which has been subscribed by the Reserve Bank, an amount equal to the face value of the said subscribed capital. Sections 4, 4A and 4B substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 5, for section 4 w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4C--> (1) The issued capital of the Development Bank of seven hundred and fifty-three crores of rupees which stands fully vested in and subscribed by the Central Government immediately before the commencement of the Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 shall, on such commencement, stand divided into seventy-five crores and thirty lakhs equity shares of rupees ten each. (2) The Board may, from time to time, increase the issued equity share capital of the Development Bank by allotment of shares to such persons and on such terms and conditions as the Board may determine: Provided that no increase in the issued equity capital shall be made in such a manner that the Central Government holds at any time less than fifty-one per cent.of the issued equity capital of the Development Bank.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 5 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4D--> (1) The Development Bank may, by a resolution passed in a general meeting of the shareholders, reduce its share capital in any way. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the share capital may be reduced by,- (a) extinguishing or reducing the liability on any of its equity shares in respect of share capital not paid-up; (b) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, cancelling any paid-up share capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by available namets; or (c) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, paying off any paid-up share capital which is in excess of the wants of the Development Bank. (3) In any general meeting referred to in sub-section (1), the resolution for reduction of share capital shall be passed by shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed.by proxy, and the votes cast in favour of the resolution are not less than three times the number of the votes, if any, cast against the resolution by shareholders so entitled and voting.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 5,w.e.f.12-10-1994
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 4E--> (1) The Central Government may, at any time after the commencement of the Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 and by notification in the Official Gazette, convert such number of equity shares held by it not exceeding fifty crores as it may decide into redeemable preference shares.(2) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub-section (1) shall- (a) carry such fixed rate of dividend as the Central Government may specify at the time of such conversion, and (b) neither be transferable nor carry any voting rights. (3) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub-section (1) shall be redeemed by the Development Bank within three years from the date of such conversion in such instalments and in such manner as the Board may determine.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 5 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 5--> 1 [(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the Development Bank shall vest in a Board of directors which may exercise all powers and do all such acts and things, as may be exercised or done by the Development Bank and are not by this Act expressly directed or required to be done by the Development Bank in general meeting. (2) The Board may direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall also be exercisable in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified by it, by the chairman, managing director or the whole time director.] (3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions shall act on business principles with due regard to public interest.(4)2 [...] Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 6 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Omitted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 6 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 6--> 1 2 [(1) The Board shall consist of the following namely:- (a) a chairman and a managing director appointed by the Central Government: Provided that the same persons may be appointed to function both as chairman and as managing director; (b) one whole-time director appointed by the Central Government on the recommendation of the Board. (c) two directors who shall officials of the Central Government nominated by the Central Government; (d) three directors from amongst persons having special knowledge of, and professional experience in science, technology, economics, industry, banking, industrial co-operatives, law, industrial finance, investment, accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special knowledge of, and professional experience in, which would, in the opinion of the Central Government, be useful to the Development Bank, nominated by the Central Government; and (e) such number of directors elected, in the prescribed manner, by shareholders other than the Central Government, whose names are entered on the register of shareholders of the Development Bank ninety days before the date of the meeting in which such election takes place on the following basis, namely:- (i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such shareholders is ten per cent.or less of the total issued equity capital, two directors; (ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to such shareholders is more than ten per cent. but less than twenty-five per cent.of the total issued equity capital, three directors; and (iii) where the total equity share capital issued to such shareholders is twenty-five per cent.or more of the total issued equity capital, four directors: Provided that until the assumption of charge by the elected directors under this clause, the Central Government may at any time nominate such number of directors, not exceeding four, from amongst persons having special knowledge of, and professional experience in, science, technology, economics, industry, banking, industrial co-operatives, law, industrial finance, investment, accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special knowledge of, and professional experience in, which would, in the opinion of the Central Government be useful to the Development Bank for carrying out its functions.] (2) The Governor of the Reserve Bank shall be the chairman and a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank nominated by that bank in this behalf shall be the vice-chairman of the Board. 3 (2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government shall have the right to terminate the term of office of the chairman or managing director, as the case may be, at any time before the expiry of the term specified under sub-section (2) by giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months salary and allowances in lieu of such notice; and the chairman or managing director, as the case may be, shall also have the right to relinquish his office at any time before the expiry of the term specified under sub-section (2) by giving to the Central Government notice of not less than three months in writing (3) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. 4 (3A) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the chairman or the managing director, as the case may be, from office: Provided that no person shall be removed from his office, under this sub-section, unless he has been given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal. (4) The chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the vice-chairman or, in the event of both the chairman and the vice-chairman being unable to attend the meeting, any other director nominated by the chairman in this behalf, shall preside at the meeting. 5 [(4A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4)-(a) every director nominated under clause (d) of subsection (1) shall hold office for such term not exceeding three years as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and thereafter until his successor assumes office, and shall be eligible for re-nomination: Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years; and (b) every director elected under clause (e) of sub-section (1) shall hold office for three years and thereafter until his successor assumes office, and shall be eligible for re-election: Provided that no such director shall hold office continuously for a period exceeding six years;] 6 [(4B) The shareholders, other than the Central Government, may, after giving to the director a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the manner as may be prescribed, by resolution passed by majority of the votes of such shareholders holding in the aggregate not less than one-half of the share capital held by such shareholders, remove any director elected under clause (e) of sub-section (1) and elect another director in his place to fill the vacancy so caused.] 7 [(5) (i) A meeting of the Board shall be held at least once every three months and at least four meetings shall be held every year and the meetings may be held at such places as may be prescribed. (ii) Notice of every meeting of the Board shall be given in writing to every director for the time being in India, and at his usual address in India to every other director. (5A) Subject to the provisions contained in this Chapter, the Board may meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of its business including the manner of adoption of resolution as may be prescribed.] (6) The chairman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the managing director or, in the event of both the chairman and the managing director being unable to attend a meeting, any other director nominated by the chairman in this behalf and in the absence of such nomination any director elected by the directors from among themselves, shall preside at the meeting. (7) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman, or in his absence, the managing director, or in the absence of both the chairman and the managing director, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. (8) Save as provided in sub-section (7), every director of the Board shall have one vote.] Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 7, for section 6 w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 7 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Act 73 of 1976, section 5 (w.e.f. 11-6-1976). Inserted by Act 73 of 1976, section 5 (w.e.f. 11-6-1976). Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 7 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 7 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 7 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 6A--> 1 Omitted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 8,w.e.f.12-10-1994 Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 8 w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 6B--> (1) A person shall not be eligible for being elected as a director under clause (e) of sub-sections (1) of section 6, if he- (a) has been found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdiction and the finding is in force; (b) is an undischarged insolvent; (c) has applied to be adjudicated as an insolvent and his application is pending; (d) has been convicted by a court of any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months and a period of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the sentence; or (e) has not paid any call in respect of shares of the Development Bank held by him, whether alone or jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last day fixed for the payment of the call.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 Section 9 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 6C--> (1) The office of a director shall become vacant if he- (a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6B; or (b) resigns his office by giving notice in writing under his hand and the resignation is accepted; or (c) absents himself from three consecutive meetings of the Board without obtaining leave of absence from the Board. (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (a) of sub-section (1), the qualifications referred to in that clause shall not take effect- (a) for thirty days from the date of the adjudication, sentence or order; (b) where any appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days aforesaid against the adjudication, sentence or conviction resulting in the sentence or order until the expiry of seven days from the date on which such appeal or petition is disposed of; or (c) where within the seven days aforesaid, any further appeal or petition is preferred in respect of the adjudication, sentence, conviction or order and the appeal or petition, if allowed, would result in the removal of the disqualification until such further appeal or petition is disposed of.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 9 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 7--> 1 [(1) The Board shall constitute an Executive Committee consisting of the chairman, the managing director, the whole-time director and such other directors as it may deem fit.] (2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to it by the Board. (3) The Board may constitute such other committees whether consisting wholly of directors or wholly of other present for such purpose or purposes as it may think fit. (4) The Executive Committee or any other committee constituted under this section shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed. Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 10 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 8--> The directors and the members of a committee shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted in pursuance of this Act and for attending to any other work of the Development Bank: 1 [Provided that no fees shall be payable to the chairman, if he is appointed whole-time, or to the managing director or to the whole-time director or to any other director who is an official of the Government.] Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 11 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 9--> 1 (1) The Development Bank may carry on and transact any of the following kinds of business, namely :-- (a) granting loans and advances to-- (i) the Industrial Finance Corporation, any State Financial Corporation or any other financial institution2 [which may be approved by the Board in this behalf], by way of refinance of any loans or advances granted to industrial concerns3 [(including concerns engaged or to be engaged in the development of any contiguous area of land as an industrial estate)] by such Corporation or institution which are repayable 4 [within a period not exceeding twenty-five years]; (ii) any scheduled bank or State co-operative bank, by way of refinance of any loans or advances grated to industrial concerns5 [(including concerns engaged or to be engaged in the development of any contiguous area of land as an industrial estate)] by such bank which are repayable 6 [within a period not exceeding twenty-five years]; (iii) any scheduled bank or State co-operative bank or the Industrial Finance Corporation or any State Financial Corporation or any other financial institution which may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, by way of refinance of any loans or advances granted to industrial concerns7 [(including concerns exporting products of industrial concerns)]or group of industrial concerns by such bank or institution which are for the purpose of, or in connection with, the export of capital goods, commodities or merchandise from India and 8 [or the execution of any turnkey project outside India by any industrial concern as aforesaid or by any person in India, and, in any case, are repayable- (i) within any period not exceeding twelve years in the case of persons outside India, and (ii) within a period not exceeding fifteen years in other cases,]; (b) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, accepting discounting or re-discounting bills of exchange and 9 [promissory notices made, drawn, accepted or endorsed by industrial concerns or by any person selling capital goods manufactured by one industrial concern to another industrial concern]; (c) subscribing to or purchasing stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of the Industrial Finance Corporation, any State Financial Corporation or 10 [any other financial institution, whether within or outside India] which may be approved by the Board in this behalf; 11 [(ca) granting letters of credit or loans and advances to the Industrial Finance Corporation, any State Financial Corporation or any other financial institution 2[which may be approved by the Board in this behalf], for the purpose of any business of such Corporation or institution]; (d) grating loans and advances to any industrial concerns or subscribing to, or purchasing, or underwriting the issue of, stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of any industrial concern: Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to preclude the Development Bank from granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an industrial concern,12 [the amounts outstanding thereon may be convertible at the option of the Development Bank] into stocks or shares of that concern within the period the loan, advance or debenture is repayable;13 14 [Explanation.- In this clause, the expression "the amounts outstanding thereon" used in relation to any loan or advance, shall mean the principal, interest and other charges payable on such loan or advance as at the time when the amounts are sought to be converted into stocks or shares;15 [(da) granting loans and advances-(i) to any person exporting products of industrial concerns; or (ii) to any person outside India, in connection with the export of capital goods from India; or (iii) for the execution of turn-key projects outside India by any industrial concern or by any person in India; (db) transferring for consideration any instrument relating to loans and advances granted by it to industrial concerns 16 [(dc) granting loans and advances to any person for purposes of investment in any industrial concern;] (e) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any industrial concern; (f) guaranteeing-- (i) loans raised by industrial concerns which are floated in the public market ; and (ii) loans raised by industrial concerns from any scheduled bank or State co-operative bank or the Industrial Finance Corporation any State Financial Corporation or any other financial institution17 [which may be approved by the Board in this behalf]; (g) guaranteeing the obligations of any scheduled bank or State co-operative bank or the Industrial Finance Corporation or any State Financial Corporation or any other financial institution 18 [which may be approved by the Board in this behalf], arising out of, or in connection with, underwriting the issue of stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of any industrial concern; 19 [(ga) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing letters of credit and negotiating or collecting bills and other documents drawn thereunder gb) providing consultancy and merchant banking services in or outside India; (gc) acting as the trustee for the holders of debentures or other securities; (gd) acquiring, with the approval of the Central Government, the undertaking, including the business, assets and liabilities of any institution the principal object of which is the promotion or development of industry in India, or the grant of financial assistance for such promotion or development;] (h) undertaking research and surveys for evaluating or dealing with marketing or investments and undertaking and carrying on techno-economic studies in connection with the development of industry; (i) providing technical and administrative assistance to any industrial concern or any person for promotion, management or expansion of any industry; (j) planning, promoting and developing industries to fill up gaps in the industrial structure in India; (k) forming or conducting of subsidiaries for carrying out its functions; 20 [(ka) acting as agent of - (i) the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank, or (ii) such other Government or person as the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, may authorise;] (l) performing functions entrusted to, or required of, the Development Bank by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force; (m) doing any other kind of business which the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, may authorise; (n) generally doing such other acts and things as may be incidental to, or consequential upon, the exercise of its powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act or any other law for the time being in force including sale or transfer of any of its assets. (2) The Development Bank may receive in consideration of any of the services mentioned in sub-section (1) such commission, brokerage, interest, remuneration or fees as may be agreed upon. (3) The Development Bank shall not grant any loan or advance or other financial accommodation on the section of its own bonds or debentures. Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 11, for "The Development Bank may" w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted for the words "which may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf"by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 12 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Substituted for the words "on the expiry of not less than three years and not more than twenty-five years" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Substituted for the words "on the expiry of not less than three years and not more than twenty-five years" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Substituted for the words "and are repayable on the expiry of not less than six months and not more than ten years" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section. Substituted for the words "promissory notes of industrial concerns" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Substituted for the words "any other financial institution" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Inserted by Act 35 of 1986, section 7 w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted for the words "which may at the option of the Development Bank be convertible" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Inserted by Act 75 of 1972, section 3. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3. Inserted by Act 35 of 1986, section 7 w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Substituted for the words "which may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf"by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 12 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted for the words "which may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf"by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 12 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Act 35 of 1986, section 7 w.e.f. 14-8-1986. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 Section 3.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 9A--> (1) The Development Bank shall enter into any kind of business with any industrial concern, of which any of the directors of the Development Bank is a proprietor, partner, director, manager, agent, employee or guarantor or in which one or more directors of the Development Bank together hold substantial interest : Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to any industrial concern if any director of the Development Bank - (i) is nominated as a director of the Board of such concern by Government, or a Government Company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956) or by a Corporation established by any other law; or (ii) is elected on the Board of such concern by virtue of shares held in the concern by Government, or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956) or by a Corporation established by any other law, by reason only of such nomination or election, as the case may be. Explanation.- "Substantial interest", in relation to an industrial concern, means the beneficial interest held by one or more of the directors of the Development Bank or by any relative as defined in clause (41) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) of such director, whether singly or taken together, in the shares of the industrial concern, the aggregate amount paid up on which either exceeds five lakhs of rupees or five per cent, of the paid-up share capital of the industrial concern, whichever is the lesser. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) (i) shall not apply to any industrial concern as specified therein if the Development Bank is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest to enter into business with that concern, and entering into any kind of business with such industrial concern shall be in accordance with and subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed; (ii) shall not apply to any transaction relating to the business entered into prior to the commencement of the Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972, and all such business and any transaction in relation thereto may be implemented or continued as if that Act had not come into force; (iii) shall apply only so long as the conditions precedent to such disability as set out in the said sub-section continue. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 ,Section 4.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 10--> The Central Government may, after due appropriation made be Parliament by law in this behalf, advance to the Development Bank -- (a) an interest free loan of ten crores of rupees repayable in fifteen equal annual instalments, commencing on the expiry of a period of fifteen years from the date of the receipt of the loan; and (b) such further sums of money by way of loan on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon: Provided that the Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Development Bank, increase the number of instalments or alter the amount of any instalment or vary the date on which any instalment is payable under clause (a).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 11--> (1) The Development Bank may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act, -- (a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the guarantee of the Central Government; (b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank-- (i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding ninety days from the date on which the money is so borrowed against the security of stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any law for the time being in force in India; (ii) against bills of exchange or promissory notes arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transactions, bearing two or more good signatures and maturing within five years from the date of the borrowing; (iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Terms Operations) Fund established under section 46C of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934.) for any of the purposes specified in that section; (c) borrow money from such other authority, organisation or institution in India as may be generally or specially approved by1 [the Board] ; 2 [(d) accept deposits on such terms as may be approved by the Board] (2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Development Bank, guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by that bank as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by that Government. Substituted for the words "the Central Government"by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 13 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 13 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 11A--> The rights and interest of the Development Bank (including any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance granted, or any amount recoverable, by it may be transferred by the Development Bank, either in whole or in part, by the execution of issue of any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or in any other manner in which the rights and interests in relation to such loan or advance may be lawfully transferred, and the Development Bank may, notwithstanding such transfer, act as the trustee for the transferee.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 ,Section 5.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section [11B--> The Development Bank shall have the right to acquire, by transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any public financial institution as defined in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) (including any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advances granted, or any amount recoverable by such institution, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument or in any other manner.] Inserted by Act 35 of 1986, section 8 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 12--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (7 of 1947.) or in any other enactment for the time being in force relating to foreign exchange, the Development Bank may, for the purpose of granting loans and advances under this Act, borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Government, foreign currency from any bank or financial institution in any foreign country or otherwise. (2) The Central Government may, where necessary, guarantee any loan taken by the Development Bank under sub-section (1) or any part thereof as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest and other incidental charges. 1 (3)[...] 2 (4)[...] Omitted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 14,w.e.f.12-10-1994 Omitted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 14,w.e.f.12-10-1994
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13--> The Development Bank may receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from Government or any other source.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13A--> (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the equity shares of the Development Bank shall be freely transferable. (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall entitle the Central Government to transfer any shares held by it in the Development Bank if such transfer will result in reducing the equity shares held by it to less than fifty-one per cent.of the issued equity capital of the Development Bank.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13B--> (1) The Development Bank shall keep at its head office a register, in one or more books, of the shareholders and shall enter therein the following particulars so far as they may be available namely:- (i) the names addresses and occupation if any, of the share-holders and a statement of the shares held by each shareholder, distinguishing each share by its denoting, number: (ii) the date on which each person is so entered as a shareholder; (iii) the date on which any person ceases to be shareholder; and (iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 2 [Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the shares held with a depository.] (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the Development Bank to keep the register of the shareholders in computer floppies or diskettes subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, a copy of , or extract from, the register of shareholders, certified to be a true copy under the band of an officer of the Development Bank authorised in this behalf, shall, in all legal proceedings, be admissible in evidence.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Act 8 of 1997, section 13 w.e.f. 15-1-1997.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section [13BA--> The register of beneficial owners maintained by a depository under section 11 of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall be deemed to be a register of the shareholders for the purpose of this Act.] Inserted by Act 8 of 1997, section 14 (w.e.f. 15-1-1997).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13C--> Notwithstanding anything contained in section 13B, no notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall be entered on the register of shareholders or be receivable by the Development Bank.] 2 [Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a depository in respect of shares held by it as a registered owner on behalf of a beneficial owner. Explanation.—For the purposes of section 13B, section 13BA and this section, the expression “beneficial owner" ,“depository” and “registered owner” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in clauses (a), (e) and (j) of subsection (1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996).] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Inserted by Act 8 of 1997, section 15 w.e.f. 15-1-1997.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13D--> (1) The Board may refuse to register the transfer of any shares in the name of the transferee on any one or more of the following grounds, and on no other ground, namely:- (a) the transfer of the shares is in contravention of the provisions of this Act or regulations made thereunder or any other law; (b) he transfer of the shares, in the opinion of the Board, is prejudicial to the interests of the Development Bank or to the public interest; (c) the transfer of shares is prohibited by an order of a court, tribunal or any other authority under any law for the time being in force. (2) The Board shall, before the expiry of two months from the date on which the instrument of transfer of shares of Development Bank is lodged with it for the purpose of registration of such transfer, not only form, in good faith, its opinion as to whether such registration ought not or ought to be refused on any of the grounds referred to in sub-section (1) but also,- (a) if it has formed the opinion that such registration ought not be so refused, effect such registration; and (b) if it has formed the opinion that such registration ought to be refused on any of the grounds mentioned in sub-section (1), intimate the transferor and the transferee by notice in writing. (3) An appeal against the order of refusal of the Board under sub-section (2) shall lie to the Central Government and the procedure for filing and hearing of such appeal shall be in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13E--> Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, the shares of the Development Bank shall be deemed to be included among the securities enumerated in section 20 of the said Act.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13F--> (1) The Development Bank shall in each year hold, in addition to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall specify the meeting as such in the notices calling it; and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one annual general meeting and that of the next; Provided that the Development Bank may hold the first annual general meeting within a period of six months from the date on which it allots shares for the first time to public for subscription: Provided further that the Central Government may extend the time within which any annual general meeting, shall be held by a period not exceeding three months.(2) Every annual general meeting shall be called for a time during business hours, on a day that is not a public holiday, and shall be held either at head office or at some other place within the city or town in which the head office is situate. Explanation.- For the purpose of this section, "public holiday" means a pubic holiday within the meaning of be Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881: Provided that no Sunday shall be deemed to be such a noble in relation to any meeting: Provided further that no day declared by the Central Government to be a public holiday shall be deemed to be such a holidays in relation to any meeting, unless the declaration was notified before the issue of the notice convening such meeting. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13G--> Every shareholder of the Development Bank holding, equity shares shall have a right to vote in respect of such shares on every resolution and his voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to is share of the paid-up equity capital of the Development Bank: Provided, however, that no shareholder, other than the Central Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any equity held by him in excess of ten per cent of the issued equity capital. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 13H--> (1) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting shall be entitled to discuss and adopt- (a) the balance sheet and profit and loss account of the Development Bank made up to the date on which its accounts are closed and balanced;(b) the report of working of the Development Bank for the period covered by the accounts; (c) the auditor's report on the balance sheet and accounts; (d) proposals for declaration of dividend and capitalisation of reserves. (2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting may also discuss any other matter to be transacted at such meetings in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (3) The matters relating to- (a) the manner in which annual general meeting or other meetings are held under this Act and the procedure to be followed thereat; (b) the manner in which voting rights may be exercised and resolution may be passed; and (c) the procedure for transaction of business at such meetings and related matters, shall be such as may be prescribed. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 15 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 14--> With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, the Development Bank shall establish a special fund to be called the Development Assistance Fund.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 15--> To the Development Assistance Fund shall be credited-- (a) all amounts received for the purposes of that fund by way of loans, gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from Government or any other source; (b) repayments or recoveries in respect of loans, advances or other facilities granted from the fund; (c) income or profits from investments made from the fund; and (d) income accruing or arising to the fund, by way of interest or otherwise, on account of the application of the fund in accordance with the provisions of section 16.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 16--> (1) Where the Development Bank considers it necessary or desirable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), disburse or spend from the Development Assistance Fund any amount on account or in consequence of the grant of any loan or advance, or on account or in consequence of entering into any arrangement, under clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (f ) or clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 9 : Provided that before granting any such loan or advance to an industrial concern or entering into any such arrangement with or in relation to an industrial concern, the Development Bank shall obtain the prior approval of the Central Government. 1 [(1A) Where the Development Bank considers it necessary or desirable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), disburse or spend from the Development Assistance Fund any amount for one or more of the purposes specified in clause (l) or clause (m) of sub-section (1) of section 9.] (2) Before seeking the approval of the Central Government under sub-section (1), the Development Bank shall satisfy itself, that banking or other financial industrials or other agencies are not likely to grant such loan or advance to the industrial concern or to enter into any such arrangement with or in relation to the industrial concern in the ordinary course of business. (3) The Central Government, before giving its approval, shall satisfy itself that such loan, advance or arrangement is necessary as a matter or priority in the interests of the industrial development of the country. (4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the development Bank from granting any loan or advance or from entering into any arrangement under clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (f ) or clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 9 without the approval of the Central Government, if no amount in respect thereof is to be disbursed or spent from the Development Assistance Fund. Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 12 w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 17--> (1) To the Development Assistance Fund shall be debited-- (a) such amounts as may from time to time be disbursed or spent under sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 16; (b) such amounts as may be required for discharging the liabilities in respect of loans received for the purposes of that fund; (c) any loss arising on account of investment made out of that fund; and (d) such expenditure arising out of, or in connection with, the administration and application of the fund as may be determined by the Board. (2) No amount shall be debited to the Development Assistance Fund except as provided for in sub-section (1),
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 18--> (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Development Assistance Fund shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed. (2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the fund to be closed and balanced as on the 30th day of June each year 2[or such other date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint]: 1 [Provided that with a view to facilitating the transmission from one period of accounting to another period of accounting under this sub-section, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as it considers necessary or expedient for the closing and balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books or accounts in respect of the concerned years.] (3) The fund shall be audited by one or more auditors appointed by the Reserve Bank under section 23 who shall make a separate report thereon. (4) The provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (6) of section 23 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the audit of the Development Assistance Fund. (5) The Development Bank shall furnish to the Central Government 2 [Development Bank] and the Reserve Bank within four months from the date on which the accounts of the fund are closed and balanced, a copy of the balance-sheet and accounts together with a copy of the auditors' report and a report on the operation of the fund during the relevant year and 3 the Development Bank shall cause to be punished in the Official Gazette, copies of the said balance-sheet, accounts and reports. Inserted by Act 66 of 1988, section 28 w.e.f. 30-12-1988. Substituted for the word "Central Government" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 16,w.e.f.12-10-1994 Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 13, for certain words w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 19--> The Development Assistance Fund shall not be closed or wound up save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as that Government may direct.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 20--> All receipts of the Development Bank other than those which are to be credited to the Development Assistance Fund under this Act shall be credited to a fund to be called the General Fund and apply payments by the Development Bank, other than those which are to be debited to the Development Assistance Fund, shall be made out of the General Fund.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 21--> (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Development Bank shall be prepared in such form and manner as may be prescribed. (2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Development Bank to be closed and balanced as on the 30th day of June each year. 1 [Provided that with a view to facilitating the transition from one period of accounting to another period of accounting under this sub-section, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as it consider necessary or expedient for the closing and balancing of, or for other matters relating to, the books or accounts in respect of the concerned years.] Inserted by Act 66 of 1988, section 29 w.e.f. 30-12-1988.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 22--> (1) The Development Bank may establish a reserve fund to which may be transferred such sums as that bank may deem fit out of the annual profits accruing to the General Fund. 1 [(2) After making provision for lead and doubtful debt, depreciation of asses and for all other matters for which provisions is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided for by banker and for the reserve fund referred to in sub-section (1), and after transferring a part of the profits to such other reserves or funds as may be considered appropriate the Board may out of its net profits declare a dividend.] Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 17 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 23--> 1 [(1) The accounts of the Development Bank shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors under sub-section (1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) who shall be appointed by the Development Bank in general meeting of the shareholders out of the panel of auditors approved by the Reserve Bank for such term and on such remuneration as the Reserve Bank may fix.] (2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance-sheet of the Development Bank and it shall be their duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they shall have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the Development Bank and shall at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts, vouchers and other documents of the Development Bank. (3) The auditors may, in relation to such accounts, examine any director or any officer or other employee of the Development Bank and shall be entitled to require from the Board or officers or other employees of the Development Bank such information and explanation as they may think necessary for the performance of their duties. (4) The auditors shall make a report to the Development Bank upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts examined by them and in every such report they shall state whether in their opinion the balance-sheet is a full and fair balance-sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Development Bank and in case they had called for any explanation or information from the Board or any officer or other employee of the Development Bank whether it has been given and whether it is satisfactory. (5) The Development Bank shall furnish to the 2 [Central Government] 3 [within one month from the date on which the annual general meeting is held], a copy of its balance-sheet and accounts together with a copy of the auditors' report and a report of the working of the Development Bank during the relevant year, and 4 [the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they are received by it, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament];the Development Bank shall cause to be punished in the Official Gazette copies of the said balance-sheet, accounts and reports. (6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub-sections, the Central Government may t any time appoint the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to examine and report upon the accounts of the Development Bank and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such examination and report shall be payable by the Development Bank to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 18 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 15, for "Reserve Bank" w.e.f. 16-2-1976. Substituted for the words "within four months from the state on which its accounts are closed and balanced" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 18 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted for the words "within four months from the state on which its accounts are closed and balanced" by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 18 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 24--> Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (4) of section 18, nothing, contained in this Chapter shall apply to the Development Assistance Fund.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 25--> (1) On such date as the Central Government may, boundary notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, the entire undertaking of the Refinance Corporation for Industry, Limited (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as "the company") including all business, property, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges and obligations of whatever nature, shall stand transferred to and vest in the Development Bank. (2) As compensation for the transfer of the undertaking of the company to the Development Bank under sub-section (1), the Development Bank shall pay in cash to the company an amount equal to the total paid-up capital of the company for the purpose of being distributed to the shareholders of the company in proportion to their contribution to such paid-up capital. (3) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the date referred to in sub-section (1) and to which the company is a party or which are in favour of that company shall be of full force and effect against or in favour of the Development Bank, as the case may be, any may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectual as if instead of the company the Development Bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued in favour of the Development Bank. (4) If on the date referred to in sub-section (1) any suit, appeal or other legal proceeding of whatever nature, is pending by or against the company the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Development Bank of the undertaking of the company or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Development Bank. (5) The Central Government may appoint, whether on or after the date referred to in sub-section (1), a suitable present to take over the management of the company for the purpose of winding up its affairs and distributing its assets and simultaneously with such appointment the Central Government may issue directions to be followed by the present in the management of the company for the purpose aforesaid and thereupon-- (a) the provisions of the companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956.) or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such Act or other law, in so far as they are inconsistent with such directions, shall cease to apply to, or in relation to, the company; (b) all presents in charge of the management, including any present holding office as manager or director, of the company immediately before the issue of such directions, shall be deemed to have vacated their office as such; and (c) the present appointed to take over the management of the company shall, in accordance with those directions, take all such steps as may be necessary to facilitate the winding up of its affairs and the distribution of its assets. (6) The Central Government, when satisfied that nothing further requires to be done in order to wind up the affairs of the company, may, by order in writing, direct that as from such date as may be specified therein, the company shall stand dissolved and thereupon any such direction shall have effect accordingly. (7) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1966.) or any other law or any instrument having force by virtue of such Act or other law,
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 26--> (1) The Development Bank may appoint such number of officers and employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient performance of its functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the Development Bank to utilise, and for the Reserve Bank to make available the services of, such staff of the Reserve Bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Development Bank and the Reserve Bank. 1 [(3) Every member of the staff- (a) whose services are being, immediately before the appointed day, utilised by the Development Bank under sub-section (2), or (b) whose services, having been made available to the Development Bank, stand immediately before the appointed day, deputed by that Bank to any other organisation, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to be appointed by the Development Bank under sub-section (1) on the same salary, emoluments and other terms and conditions of service to which he was entitled immediately before the appointed day: Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 16 w.e.f. 16-2-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 27--> The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any committee of directors constituted under section 7 or to any director or to any officer or other employee of the Development Bank subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 28--> The Development Bank shall furnish, from time to time, to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank such returns as the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Reserve Bank, may require.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 29--> (1) The Development Bank shall not, except as otherwise required by this Act or any other law, divulge any information relation to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Development Bank to divulge such information. (2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or other employee of the Development Bank or of the Reserve Bank, whose services are utilised by the Development Bank under the provisions of this Act, shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. 1 [(1A) The Development Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, the State Bank, any subsidiary bank, nationalised bank or other scheduled bank, State Co-operative Bank, State Financial Corporation or such other financial institution, as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in such manner and at such times, as it may think fit. Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression “credit information” shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934 (2 of 1934), subject to the modification that “banking company” referred to therein shall mean the State Bank, any subsidiary bank, nationalised bank or other scheduled bank, State Co-operative Bank, State Financial Corporation or other financial institution as aforesaid.] (2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or other employee of the Development Bank or for the Reserve Bank, whose services are utilised by the Development Bank under the provision of this Act, shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. Inserted by Act 52 of 1975, section 17 w.e.f. 16-7-1976.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 30--> (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of the Development Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be. (2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was disqualified to be a director or that there was any other defect in his appointment.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 30A--> (1) Where any arrangement entered into by the Development Bank with an industrial concern provides for the appointment by the Development Bank of one or more directors of such industrial concern, such provision and any appointment or directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, (1 of 1956) or in any other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other instrument relation to the industrial concern, and any provision regarding share qualification, age-limit, number of directorships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the Development Bank in pursuance of the arrangement as aforesaid. (2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall- (a) hold office during the pleasure of the Development Bank and may be removed or substituted by any person by order in writing of the Development Bank; (b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation thereto; (c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the number of directors liable to such retirement.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 ,Section 7.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 31--> (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Development Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by him own wilful act or default. (2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for any officer or other employee of the Development Bank or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Development Bank or for any loss or expenses resulting to the Development Bank from the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Development Bank or the insolvency or wrongful act of any debtor or any person under obligation to the Development Bank or anything done in good faith in the execution of the duties of his officer or in relation thereto.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 32--> No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Development Bank or any other person authorised by the Development Bank to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any other law or provision having the force of law.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 32A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where a nomination in respect of any deposits, bonds or other securities is made in the prescribed manner, the amount due on such deposits, bonds or securities shall, on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest in, and be payable to, the nominee subject to any right, title or interest of any other person to such deposits, bonds or securities. (2) Any payment by the Development Bank in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) shall constitute a full discharge to the Development Bank of its liability in respect of such deposits, bonds or securities.] Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995, Section 19 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 33--> The Bankers Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply in relation to the Development Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of that Act.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 34--> 1 Nothing contained in the Banking Companies Act, 1949 , except section 34A thereof, shall apply to the Development Bank. Substituted by Act 35 of 1986, section 11, for section 34 w.e.f. 14-8-1986.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 35--> Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 , the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 or in any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, super-tax or super profits tax, or any other tax on income, profits or gains, the Development Bank shall not be liable to pay income-tax, super-tax, super profits tax or any other tax in respect of-- (a) any income, profits or gains accruing or arising to the Development Assistance Fund or any amount received in that fund; and (b) any income, profits or gains derived or any amount received by the Development Bank.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 36--> No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies or corporations shall apply to the Development Bank and the Development Bank shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct,
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 37--> (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 1 [Central Government], make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-- (a) the time and places of the meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted under this Act and the procedure to be followed at such meeting including the quorum necessary for the transaction of business2 [and the manner of adoption of resolutions]; (b) the 3 [...] constitution and functions of the Executive Committee; (c) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the directors and the members of the committee; (d) the conditions which the Development Bank may impose in granting loans or advances or entering into any other arrangements; 4 [(da) entering into business with industrial concerns specified in sub-section (1) of section 9A and the conditions and limitations in regard thereto;] 5 [(db) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which shares may be held and transferred; (dc) matters relating to the rights of shareholders: (dd) the maintenance of share registers and the particulars to be entered therein; (de) he safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of register of shareholders on computer floppies or diskettes: (df) the inspection and closure of the register and all other matters connected therewith; (dg) the holding and conduct of election of directors under this Act and the determination of disputes, regarding the qualification of directors; (dh) the manner in which general meeting, shall be convened, the procedure to be followed thereat, the manner in which voting rights may be exercised resolutions passed and business transacted in such meetings and other matters holding to meetings; (di) the manner in which notices may be served on shareholders or other persons; (dj) the manner in which nomination may be made in terms of section 32A;] (e) the conditions on which the Development Bank may accept, discount or rediscount bills of exchange or promissory notes; (f) the investment (whether by way of deposit in banks of otherwise) of the amounts in the Development Assistance Fund or the General Fund which are not for the time being required for the transaction of business; (g) the form and manner in which the balance-sheets and the accounts of the Development Assistance Fund and the Development Bank shall be prepared; (h) the forms of returns and statements required under this Act; (i) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and conditions of services of officers and other employees of the Development Bank; (j) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other benefit funds for officers and other employees of the Development Bank; (k) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Development Bank; and (l) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. (3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this Act may be made by the Reserve Bank within three months of the establishment of the Development Bank; and any regulation so made may be altered and rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 6 [(4) Every regulation or rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or rule or both Houses agree that the regulation or rule should not be made, the regulation or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such notified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation or rule] Substituted by Act 52 of 1975, section 18, for "Reserve Bank" (w.e.f. 16-2-1976). Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 20 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). The words "constitution and" omitted by Act 52 of 1975, section 18. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1972 ,Section 8. Inserted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 20 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Substituted by Industrial Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 1995 ,Section 20 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994).
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section 38--> The enactments specified in Parts I to IV of the Second Schedule to this Act shall be amended in the manner directed in the first column thereof and such amendments shall take effect on the dates specified in the second column of that Schedule.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section Sch.1--> THE FIRST SCHEDULE See section 29 (2) Declaration of fidelity and secrecy I..........do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties required of me as director, member of.......committee, auditor officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the Industrial Development Bank of India and which properly relate to the office or position held by me in or in relation to the said Development Bank. I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Industrial Development Bank of India or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Development Bank, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession of the said Development Bank and relating to the business of the said Development Bank or the business of any person having any dealing with the said Development Bank. (Signature) Signed before me.
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964_Section Sch.2-->  THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See section 38 ) Amendment of certain enactments PART I AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934 ( 2 OR 1931 ) Amendments Date on which amendment shall take effect 1 2 1. In section 2, after clause (bbb), insert the following clause, namely :--- The date of establishment of the Development Bank. '(bbbb) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 ; '. 2. In section 8-- Do. (a) in sub-section (1),--- (i) in clause (a), for the words "three", substitute the words "not more than four"; (ii) in clause (c), for the words "six", substitute the word "ten"; (b) in sub-section (4), omit the words,. brackets and figure "subject to the provisions of sub-section (6)"; (c) omit sub-section (6). 3. In sub-section (2) of section 13, for the words "three Directors", substitute the words "four Directors". Do. 4. In section 17--- Do. (a) after clause (4F), insert the following clauses, namely :-- "(4G) the making of loans and adv- ances to, and the purchasing of bonds and debentures of, the Development Bank out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under section 46C; (4H) the making to the Development Bank of loans and advances--- (a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed periods not exceeding ninety days, from the date of such loan or advance against the security of stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any law for the time being in force in India; or (b) against the security of bills of exchange or promissory notes, arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transactions bearing two or more good signa- tures and maturing within five years from the date of such loan or advance ; " ; (b) in clause (8A), after the words, "the Deposit Insurance Corporation", insert the words "the Development Bank". 5. After section 46B, insert the following section, namely :--- The date of establishment of the Development Bank. (National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations Fund.) "46C.(1) The Bank shall establish and. maintain a Fund to be known as the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund to which shall be credited--- (a) an initial sum of ten cores of rupees by the Bank. (b) such further sums of money as the Bank may contribute every year : Provided that the annual contribution during each of the five years commencing with the year ending on the 30 th day of June, 1965 shall not be less than five crores of rupees : Provided further that the Central Government may, if the circumstances so require, authorise the Bank to reduce the said sum of five crores of rupees in any year. (2) The amount in the said fund shall be applied by the Bank only to the following objects, namely :--- (a) the making to the Development Bank of loans and advances for the purposes of the purchase of, or subscription to, stocks, shares, bonds or debentures issued by the Industrial Finance Corporation of India established under the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948, (15 of 1948.) a State Financial Corporation established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 or any other (63 of 1951.) financial institution which may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, or for the purposes of any other business of the Development Bank; (b) the purchasing of bonds and debentures issued by the Development Bank.". PART II AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 (14 OF 1947 ) Amendments Date on which amendment shall take effect 1 2 In section 2, in clause (bb), after the words "and includes", insert the words "the Industrial Development Bank of India,". The date of establishment of the Development Bank. PART III AMENDMENTS TO THE INDUSTRIAL FINANCE CORPORATION ACT, 1948 ( 15 OF 1948 ) Amendments Date on which amendment shall take effect 1 2 1. In section 2, after clause (b), insert the following clause, namely :--- The date of establishment of the Development Bank. '(bb) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964;'. 2. In section 4,-- The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. (a) omit sub-section (5) and (6) ; and (b) in sub-section (7), for the word "the Central Government, the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Development Bank". 3. After section 4, insert the following section, namely :-- The date of establishment of the Development Bank. "4A.Transfer of shares and increase of capital. (1) On such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint--- (a) all shares of the Corporation held by the Central Government and the Reserve Bank shall stand transferred to and vest in the Development Bank and as compensation there for the Development Bank shall pay to the Central Government and to the Reserve Bank respectively the face value of the shares held by that Government and by that Bank; (b) the capital issued by the Corporation shall be increased by such number of shares as the Central Government may specify in this behalf and all such shares shall stand allotted to and be sub- scribed by the Development Bank, so however that after such increase the Development Bank holds not less than fifty per cent. of the paid-up capital of the Corporation. (2) If and when the remaining shares in the capital of the Corporation, or any part thereof, are issued, such further shares shall be offered to the holders of the shares of the Corporation in proportion, as nearly as circumstances admit, to the capital paid-up on those shares at the date of such further issue : Provided that if any such shares remain unallotted, they shall be subscribed for by the Development Bank.". 4. In section 6, -- The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. (a) in sub-section (3), for the words section "the Central Government", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (b) for sub-section (4), substitute the following sub-section, namely :-- "(4) If any dispute arises between the Development Bank and the Board as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the dispute shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final."; (c) in sub-section (5), for the words "laid down by the Central Govern- ment", substitute the words "given by the Development Bank". 5. In section 10, -- Do. (a) in sub-section (1) -- (i) in clause (a), for the words "the Board", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (ii) in clause (aa), for the words "the Central Government", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (iii) in clause (b), for the words "the Central Board of the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Central Government"; (iv) in clause (d), for the words "the Central Government, the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (b) after sub-section (1), insert the following sub-section, namely :-- "(2) On the date appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4A, the Directors holding office under clause (aa) or clause (b) immediately before the said date shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such.". 6. In section 10A, in sub-section (1), for the words "by the Board", substitute the section words "by the Development Bank". The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. 7. In section 11, in the proviso to sub-sec- tion (4), insert at the end the words "or of the Development Bank". Do. 8. In section 13, in sub-section (1), after the words "The Central Government may", insert the words "after consultation with the Development Bank". Do. 9. In section 13A, for the words "with the Board", substitute the "with the Develop- ment Bank". Do. 10. In section 17, in sub-section (6), for the words "the Central Government or the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Development Bank or the Central Government". Do. 11. In section 18, for the words "the Central. Government", substitute the words "the Development Bank". 12.In section 21, in sub-section (4), after the words "borrow money from the Central Government", insert the words "or the Development Bank" and after the words "borrowed by the Corporation from the Central Government", insert the words "and the Development Bank". 13. In section 23, in sub-section (1) -- (a) in clause (h), for the words "the Central Government", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (b) after clause (i), insert the following clause, namely :-- (ii) "acquiring with the approval of Development Bank the undertaking including the business, assets and liabilities of any institution the principal object of which is the promotion or development of industry in India, or the grant of financial assistance for such promotion or development;". 14. In section 24, -- The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. (i) for the words "one crore", wherever they occur, substitute the words "two crores"; (ii) for the words "the Central Government", substitute the words "the Development Bank". 15. For section 32A, substitute the following section, namely :-- Do "32A.Special reserve Fund.- (1) All dividends accruing on the shares of the Corporation held by the Central Government and the Reserve Bank immediately before the date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4A in respect of any completed accounting period, whether declared or not, shall be credited to a special reserve fund. (2) All dividends accruing to the Development Bank shall, instead of being paid to it, be also credited to the said fund until the aggregate of the sums credited to the fund under sub-section (1) and this sub-section exceeds one crore of rupees. (3) The Central Government, the Reserve Bank and the Develop- ment Bank only shall have claims to the said fund.". 16. In section 34, -- (a) in sub-section (1) -- Do (i) for the words "the Central Government in consulta tion with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India", substituted the words "the Development Bank"; (ii) for the words "the Central Government", where they occur for the second time, substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (b) in sub-section (4), for the words "the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India", substitute the words "the Development Bank"; (c) omit sub-section (5) ; (d) for sub-section (6), substitute the following sub-section, namely :--- "(6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub-sections, the Central Govern- ment may, at any time, appoint the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to examine and report upon the accounts of the Corporation and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such examination and report shall be payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.". 17. In section 35 -- The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. (a) in sub-section (2), for the words "Central Government", at both places where they occur, substitute the words "Development Bank"; (b) in section (3), for the words "and the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Reserve Bank and the Development Bank". 18. Renumber section 36 as sub- section (1) thereof, and -- Do (a) in sub-section (1) as so re-num- bered, for words "other than the Central Government and the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "other than the Development Bank"; (b) after sub-section (1) as so re-num- bered, insert the following sub- sections, namely :-- "(2) After the acquisition of the shares as provided by sub- section (1), the Central Gove- rnment shall transfer the shares to the Development Bank on that bank paying an amount equal to the amount paid by the Central Government for such acquisition. (3) After the transfer of the shares by the Central Government to the Development Bank under sub-section (2), the Central Government may direct by notification in the Official Gazette that with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification the entire undertaking of the Corporation, including all business, property, assets and liabilities, rights (including the right to recover loans and advances granted by the Corporation in accordance with the provisions of this Act), interests, privileges and obligations of whatever nature, shall stand transfer- red to and vest in the Development Bank. (4) For the purpose of giving effect to the transfer of the undertaking of the Corporation to the Development Bank, the Central Government shall, by order in writing, frame a scheme providing for all matters for which provision is necessary, and the scheme so framed shall be binding upon the Corporation, its creditors and employees and the Development Bank and shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in any contract or other instrument. (5) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law or any instrument having force by virtue of such Act or other law.". 19. After section 40A, insert the followingsection, namely :-- The date appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. "40B.Removal of difficulties.- (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act as appear to it necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. (2) An order under sub-section (1) may be made so as to have retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4A.". 20. In section 42, in sub-section (1), after the words "The Central Government may", insert the words "in consultation with the Development Bank". The date appointed by the Central Govern- ment under sub-section (1) of section 4A of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 as inserted by this Act. 21. In section 43, in sub-section (1), for the. words "the Reserve Bank", substitute the words "the Development Banks". Do PART IV AMENDMENT TO THE BANKING COMPANIES ACT, 1949 ( 10 OF 1949 ) Amendments Date on which amendment shall take effect 1 2 In section 34A, in sub-section (3), after the word "includes", insert the words "the Industrial Development Bank of India,". The date of establishment of the Development Bank. 
