Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Institutes of Technology act, 1961. BE it enacted by Parliament in the forty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 1--> (1) This act may be called the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act 1994. (2) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 1.9.94: vide Notification No.G.S.R.644(E) dated 1.9.1994
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 2--> In section 2 of the Institutes of Technology Act ,1961 (59 of 1961) (hereinafter refried to as the principal act) after the words 'the college of engineering and technology Delhi," the words "the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam" shall be inserted.
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 3--> In section 3 of the principal act,- (ii.) in clause (c) after sub-clause (IA) the following sub-clause shall be inserted namely:- "(ib) in relation to the society known as the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam, the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati." (ii) in clause (j) after sub-Clause (IA) the following sub-clause shall be inserted namely:- "(ib) the Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati Assam,"
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 4--> In section 4 of the principal act after sub-section (IA) the following sub-section shall be inserted namely :- "(1B) the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati Assam shall on such incorporation be called the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati."
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 5--> In section 5 of the principal act the following explanation shall be inserted at the end namely:- "Explanation- The reference in the section to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in relation to the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati as the reference to the date on which the provisions of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act 1994 come into force."
Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994_Section 6--> In section 368 of the principal act, after clause 9c0 the following shall be added, namely:- "(d) until the first statutes and the Ordinances in relation to the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati are made under this Act the Statutes and Ordinance of the Indian Institute of technology, Kharagpur as in force immediately before the commencement of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 1994 shall apply to the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati with the necessary modification and adaptations in so far as they re not inconsistent with the provisions of this act. Explanation-The reference in clause (a) this section to the commencement of this act shall be construed in relation to the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati as the reference to the date on which the provisions of the institutes of technology (Amendment) Act, 1994 come into force." 
