Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act,1993. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 2--> In the Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings Act,1993 (hereafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, in clause(f) for the words "or Union territory", the following shall be substituted, namely:- "or Union territory and includes,- (i) the National Small Industries Corporation, being a company, registered under the Companies Act,1956 , (ii) the Small Industries Development Corporation of a State or a Union territory, by whatever name called, being a company registered under the Companies Act,1956 "
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 3--> In section 3 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: "Provided that in no case the period agreed upon between the supplier and the buyer in writing shall exceed one hundred and twenty day s from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance."
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 4--> For section 4 of the principal Act the following section shall be substituted, namely:- 4.Date from which and rate at which interest is payable.-Where any buyer fails to make payment of the amount to the supplier, as required under section 3, the buyer shall notwithstanding any thing contained in any agreement between the buyer and the supplier or in any law for the time being in force, be liable to pay interest to the supplier on that amount from the appointment day or as the case may be from the date immediately following the date agreed upon, at one and half time to Prime Lending Rate changed by the State Bank of India Explanation: For the purposes of this section, "Prime Leading Rate" means the Prime Lending Rate of the State Bank of India which is available to the best borrowers of the bank.
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 5--> Section 6 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (I) thereof and after sub-session(i) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(i) any party to a dispute may make a reference to the Industry Facilitation Council for acting as an arbitrator or conciliator in respect of the matters referred to in that sub-section and the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act ,1996 shall apply to such dispute as if the arbitration or conciliation were pursuant to an arbitration agreement referred to in sub-section (i) of section 7 of that Act."
Interest on Delayed Payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial Undertakings (Amendment) Act. 1998_Section 6--> After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- 7A.Establishment of Industry Facilitation Council.-The State Government may, be notification in the Official Gazett, establish one or more Industry Facilitation Councils at such places exercising such jurisdiction and for such areas, as may be specified in the notification. 7B.Composition of Industry Facilitation Council.-(1) The Industry Facilitation Council shall consist of one or more members to be appointed from amongst the following categories:- (i) Director of Industries by whatever name called or any other officer not below the rank of such Director, of the State Government. (ii) representatives of banks and financial institutions. (iii) Office-bearers of representatives of State Industry Associations and (iv) persons having special knowledge in the field of Industry, Finance Law Trade and Commerce. (2) The person appointed under clause(i) of sub-section(i) shall be the Chair person of the Industry Facilitation Council. (3) The composition of the Industry Facilitation Council the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by the members shall be such as may be prescribed by rules by the State Government 7C. Every notification issued and every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made before the State Legislature." (Laying of rules before State Legislature) RAGHBIR SINGH Secretary to the Government of India. 
