Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section Preamble--> An Act to forester the development and ensure the efficient maintenance of an Indian mercantile marine in a manner best suited to seven the national interests and for that purpose to established a National Shipping Board 1 [...] and a Shipping Development Fund, to provide for the 2 [registration, certification, safety and security ] of Indian ships and generally to amend and consolidate the law relating to merchant shipping. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- The words “and a Shipping Merchant Development Fund” omitted by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987). Substituted by Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 2007, section 2, for “registration” .
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping Act, 19581 . (2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. The Act has been extended to the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu by Regions 12 of 1962 (w.e.f. 11-7-1963) (Goa is now a State), and Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963 (w.e.f 1-10-1963). Parts I and II came into force on 15-12-1958; Part IV came into force on 17-3-1959; section 7, whole of Part XIV, i.e. sections 405 to 414, section 436, in so far as it relates to offences mentioned at Sl. Nos. 122 to 125 under section 436, sections 437 to 442, sections 447, 448, sections 456 to 460 and section 461, so far as it relates to Control of Shipping Act, 1947, on 1-4-1960; All other sections or parts, etc., on 1-1-1961. (These provisions include Part III (except section 7 which came into force on 1-1-1960); Parts V, VI and VII (comprising sections 20 to 218), VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII (these parts comprise sections 357 to 404); XIV (sections 405 to 414); XVI (excepting sections 436 partly, 437 to 442, 447 and 448 which came into force on 1-1-1960); XVII and XVIII.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 2--> (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act which apply to ships which are registered in India or which in terms of this Act are required to be s registered shall so apply wherever the ships may be. (a) any vessel which is registered in India; or (b) any vessel which is required by this Act to be so registered; or (c) any other vessel which is owned wholly by persons to each of whom any of the descriptions specified in clause (a) or in clause (b) or in clause (c), as the case may be, of section 21 applies, shall so apply wherever the vessel may be. (2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this Act which apply to ships other than those referred to in sub-section (1) shall so apply only while any such ships is within India, including the territorial waters thereof.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 3--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 1 [(1) “cargo ship” means a ship which is not a “passenger ship”;] 2 (1A) "coasting ship" means a ship exclusively employed in trading between any port or place in India and any other port or place on the continent of India or between ports or places in India and ports or places in Ceylon or Burma; (2) "coasting trade of India" means the carriage by sea of passengers or goods from any port or place in India to any other port or place on the continent of India; (3) 'collision regulations" means the regulations made under section 285 for the prevention of collisions at sea; (4) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); (5) "Country to which the Load Line Convention applies" means,- (a) a country the Government of which has been declared or is deemed to have been declared under section 283 to have accepted the Load Line Convention and has not been so declared to have denounced that Convention; (b) a country to which it has been so declared that the Load Line Convention has been applied under the provisions of article twenty-one thereof, not being a country to which it has been so declared that that Convention has ceased to apply under the provisions of that article; (6) "Country to which the Safety Convention applies" means,- (a) a country the Government of which has been declared 3 [...] under section 283 to have accepted the Safety Convention and has not been so declared to have denounced that Convention; (b) a territory to which it has been so declared that the Safety Convention extends, not being a territory to which it has been so declared that that Convention has ceased to extend; (7) "court" in relation to sections 178 to 183 (inclusive) means a civil or revenue court; (8) "Director-General" means the director-General of Shipping appointed under section 7; (9) "distressed seaman" means a seaman engaged under this Act who, by reason of having been discharged or left behind from, or shipwrecked, in any ship at a place outside India, is in distress at that place; (10) "effects", in relation to a seaman, includes cloths and documents; (11) "equipment", in relation to a ship, includes boats, tackle, pumps, apparel, furniture, life saving appliances of ever description, spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes and signals of distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charges, radio installations, appliances for preventing, detecting or extinguishing fires, buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns, loading and discharging gears and appliances of all kinds and all others stores or articles belonging to or to be used in connection with or necessary for the navigation as safety of the ship; 4 [11A) “family” means,- (i) in the case of male, his wife, his children whether married or unmarried, his dependent parents and his deceased son’s widow and children: Provided that if a person proves that his wife has ceased under the personal law governing him or the customary law of the community to which the spouses belong, to be entitled to maintenance she shall no longer be deemed to be a part of such person’s family for the purpose of this Act, unless such person subsequently intimate by express notice in writing, to the Central Government that she shall continue to be so regarded; and (ii) in the case of female, her husband, her children, whether married or unmarried, her dependent parents, her husband’s dependent parents and her deceased son’s widow and children: Provided that if a person by notice in writing to the Central Government expresses her desire to exclude her husband from the family, the husband and his dependent parents shall no longer be deemed to be a part of such person’s family for the purpose of this Act, unless such person subsequently cancels in writing any such notice. Explanation.—In either of the above two cases, if the child, or, as the case may be, the child of a deceased son, of a person has been adopted by another person and if under the personal law of the adopter adoption is legally recognised, such a child shall be considered as excluded from the family of the first mentioned person;] (12) "fishing vessel" means a ship fitted with mechanical means of propulsion which is exclusively engaged in as fishing for profit; (13) "foreign-going ship" means a ship, not being a home-trade ship, employed in trading between any port or place in India and any other port or place or between ports or places, outside India; 5 (14) "free board" means-the distance measured vertically downwards, amidships from the upper edge of the deck line to the upper edge of the related load lines;] (a) in relation to a decked vessel, the distance above the waterline measured vertically at the side of the vessel amidships from the position of the upper adage of the uppermost complete deck; and (b) in the case of any other vessel, the distance above the waterline measured vertically at the side of the vessel amidships from the upper edge of the permanent bulwark of the vessel; (15) "High Court", in relation to a vessel, means the High Court within the limits of whose appellate jurisdiction- (a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate; or (b) the vessel is for the time being; or (c) the cause of action wholly or in part arises; (16) "home-trade ship" means a ship not exceeding three thousand tons gross which is employed in trading between any port or place in India and an other port or place on the continent of India or between ports or places in India and ports or places in Ceylon, Maladive Islands, Federation of Malaya, Singapore or Burma; (17) "Indian Consular Officer" means the consul-general consul, vice-consul, consular agent and proconsul appointed as such by the Central Government, and includes any person authorised by the Central Government to perform the functions of consul-general, consul, vice-consul, consular agent or pro-consul; (18) "Indian ship" means a ship registered as such under this Act and includes any ship registered at any port in India at the commencement of this Act which is recognised as an Indian ship under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 22; 6 [(18A) “international voyage” means a voyage from or to a port or place in India to or from a port or place outside India;] (19) "load line certificate" means the certificate issued under section 316 or section 321; 7 (20) "Load Line Convention" means the Convention signed in London on the 5th day of July, 1930, for promoting safety of life and property at sea, as amended from time to time; (21) "Marine Board" means a Board of Marine Inquiry convened under section 373; (22) "master" includes any person (except a pilot or harbour master) having command or charge of a ship; (23) "owner" means- (a) in relation to a ship, the person to whom the ship or a share in the ship belongs; (b) in relation to a sailing vessel, the person to whom the sailing vessel belongs; (24) "passenger" means any person carried onboard a ship except- (a) a person employed or engaged in any capacity on board the ship on the business of the ship; (b) a person on board the ship either in pursuance of the obligations laid upon the master to carry shipwrecked, distressed or other persons or by reason of any circumstances which neither the master nor the character, if any, could have prevented or forestalled; (c) a child under one year of age; (25) "passenger ship" means a ship carrying more than twelve passengers; (26) "pilgrim" means a person making a pilgrimage and, in the case of a passenger on board a pilgrim ship, includes every person accompanying or travelling with the person making the pilgrimage; 8 (27) "pilgrimage" means pilgrimage to any holy place in the Hedges;or to any other place declared by the Central Government to be a place of pilgrimage by notification in the Official Gazette; (28) "pilgrim ship" means a ship which makes a voyage to or from the Hedges during the season of the pilgrimage and which carries pilgrims in a proportion of not less than one pilgrim for every one hundred tons of the gross tonnage of the ship; (29) "port of registry", in relation to a ship or a sailing vessel, means the port at which she is registered or is to be registered; (30) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (31) "proceeding" in relation to sections 173 to 183 (inclusive) includes any suit, appeal or application; (32) "proper officer" means the officer designated by the Central Government to be the proper officer at the port or place and in respect of the matter to which reference is made in the provision of this Act in which the expression occurs; (33) "proper return port", in relation to a master, seaman or apprentice discharged or left behind, means the port at which the master, seaman or apprentice was engaged, or the port agreed to as such by the master, seaman or apprentice, as the case may be; (34) "radio inspector" means a person appointed as such under section 10; (35) "registrar" means the registrar referred to in section 24; (36) (a) "repatriation expenses" means expenses incurred in returning a distressed seaman to a proper return port and in providing him with necessary clothing and maintenance until his arrival at such port, and includes in the case of shipwrecked seaman the repayment of expenses incurred in conveying him to port after shipwreck and maintaining him while being so conveyed; and (b) "excepted expenses" , in relation to repatriation expenses, means repatriation expenses incurred in cases where the cause of the seaman behind is desertion or absence without leave or imprisonment for misconduct, or discharge from his ship by a Marine Board on the ground of misconduct; (37) "Safety Convention" means the Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea signed in London on the 10th day of June 1949, as amended from time to time; 9 (38) "safety convention certificate" means (i) a passenger ship safety certificate, 10 [(ia) a special trade passenger ship safety certificate, (ib) a special trade passenger ship space certificate,] (ii) a qualified passenger ship safety certificate,(iii) a cargo ship safety construction certificate, (iv) a qualified cargo ship safety construction certificate, (v) a cargo ship safety equipment certificate, (vi) a qualified cargo ship safety equipment certificate, (vii) a cargo ship safety radio telegraphy certificate, (viii) a cargo ship safety radio telephony certificate, (ix) an exemption certificate, (x) a nuclear passenger ship safety certificate, (xi) a nuclear cargo ship safety certificate, issued under Part IX or, as the case may be, Part IXA;] (39) "Sailing vessel' means any description of vessel provided with sufficient sail area for navigation under sails alone, whether or not fitted with mechanical means of propulsion, and includes a rowing boat or canoe but does not include a pleasure craft; (40) "salvage" includes all expenses properly incurred by the salvor in the performance of salvage services; (41) "sea-going", in relation to a vessel, means a vessel proceeding to sea beyond inland waters or beyond waters declared to be smooth or partially smooth waters by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette; (42) "seaman" means every person (except a master, pilot or apprentice) employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a ship under this Act, but in relation to sections 178 to 183 (inclusive) includes a master; (43) "seamen' employment officer" means the seamen's employment officer referred to in section 12; (44) "seamen's welfare officer" means the seamen' welfare officer referred to in section 13; (45) "ship" does not include a sailing vessel; 11 [(44A) “security” means maritime security and includes any measure to protect ports or ships or any person or thing relating directly or indirectly to maritime navigation,- (i) against terrorism, sabotage, stowaways, illegal migrants, asylum seekers, piracy, armed robbery, seizure or pilferage; and (ii) against any other hostile act or influence which threatens the security in the maritime transport sector, employed by the owners or operators or persons in charge of the vessels or management of port facilities, offshore installations and other marine organisations or establishments;] (46) "shipping master" means the shipping master referred to in section 11; but in relation to any seaman for the purposes of sections 178 to 183 (inclusive) means a shipping master appointed.- (i) for the port at which the seaman entered into, or is believed to have entered into, an agreement, or (ii) where the seaman did not enter into his agreement in India, for the port to which the seaman has returned, or is excepted to return, on the completion of his latest voyage; (47) "shipping officer" means the shipping office referred to in section 11;12 [(47A) “special trade” means the conveyance of large number of passengers by sea within prescribed sea areas; (48) "surveyor" means the surveyor referred to in section 9; 13 [(48A) “tanker” means a cargo ship constructed or adapted for the carriage in bulk of liquid cargoes of an inflammable nature;] (49) "tidal water" means any part of the sea and any part of a river within the ebb and flow of the tide at ordinary spring tides and not being a harbour; (50) "tindal" means the person in command or charge of a sailing vessel; 14 [...] (51) "unberthed passenger" means a passenger of the age of twelve years or upwards for whom no separate accommodation in any cabin, state room or saloon is reserved, and in the computation of passengers for any of the purposes of Part VIII, two persons of the age of one year or upwards and under the age of twelve years shall be reckoned as one unberthed passenger; (52) "unberthed passenger ship' means a ship carrying more than thirty unberthed passengers; (53) "valid international load line certificate" means a certificate purporting to have been issued in accordance with the Load Line Convention in respect of a ship, other than an Indian ship, by the Government of the country in which the ship is registered; (54) "valid safety convention certificate" means a certificate purporting to have been issued in accordance with the Safety Convention in respect of a ship, other than Indian ship, by the Government of the country in which the ship is registered; (55) "vessel" includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel, or other description of vessel used in navigation; (56) "voyage" for the purposes of Part VIII, means the whole distance between the ship's port or place of departure and her final port or place of arrival; (57) "wages" includes emoluments' (58) "wreck" includes the following when found in the sea or in tidal water or on the shores thereof- (a) goods which have been cast into the sea and then sink and remain under water; (b) goods which have been cast or fall into the sea and remain floating on the surface; (c) goods which are sunk in the sea, but are attached to a floating object in order that they may be found again; (d) goods which are thrown away or abandoned; and (e) a vessel abandoned without hope or intention of recovery; (59) "young person" means a person under eighteen years of age. Inserted by Act 21 of 1966, section 2 (w.e.f. 28-5-1966). Clause (1) re-numbered as clause (1A) by Act 21 of 1966, section 2 (w.e.f. 28-5-1966). The words “or is deemed to have been declared “omitted by Act 25 of 1970, section 2 (w.e.f. 21-7-1968). Inserted by Act 41 of 1984, section 2 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985). Substituted by Act 25 of 1970, section 2, for clause (14) (w.e.f. 21-7-1968). Inserted by Act 21 of 1966, section 2 (w.e.f. 28-5-1966). Substituted by Act 25 of 1970, section 2, for clause (20) (w.e.f. 21-7-1968). Substituted by Act 69 of 1976, section 3, for clauses (27) and (28) (w.e.f. 1-12-1976). Substituted by Act 21 of 1966, section 2, for clause (38) (w.e.f. 28-5-1966). Inserted by Act 69 of 1976, section 3 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976). Inserted by Act 40 of 2007, section 3 (w.e.f. 1-3-2008). Inserted by Act 69 of 1976, section 3 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976). Inserted by Act 21 of 1966, section 2 (w.e.f. 28-5-1966). Clauses (51) and (52) omitted by Act 69 of 1976, section 3 (w.e.f. 1-12-1976).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 4--> (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established a Board to be called the National Shipping Board (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Board.) (2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:- (a) six members elected by Parliament, four by the House of the People from among its members and the other two by the Council of States from among its members; (b) such number of other members, not exceeding sixteen as the Central Government may think fit to appoint to the Board, to represent- (i) the Central Government, (ii) ship owners, (iii) seamen, and (iv) such other interest as, in the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be represented on the Board. Provided that the Board shall include an equal number of persons representing the ship owners and seamen. (3) The Central Government shall nominate one of the members of the Board to be the Chairman of the Board. (4) The Board shall have power to regulate its own procedure.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 5--> The Board shall advise the Central Government- (a) on matters relating to Indian shipping, including the development thereof; and (b) on such other matters arising out of this Act as the Central Government may refer to it for advice.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 6--> (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rule may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the term of office of members of the Board and the manner of filling casual vacancies in the Board; (b) the appointment of officers and other employees to enable the Board to discharge its functions under section 5 and the terms and conditions of their service; (c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Board.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 7--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a person to be the Director-General of Shipping for the purpose of exercising or discharging the powers, authority or duties conferred or imposed upon the Director-General by or under this Act. (2) The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by it under or in relation to any such provisions of this Act as may be specified in the order shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be so specified, be exercisable also by the Director-General or by such other officer as may be specified in the order. (3) The Director-General may, by general or special order, and wit the previous approval of the Central Government, direct that any power or authority conferred upon or delegated to, and any duty imposed upon, the Director-General by or under this Act may, subject to such conditions as restrictions as he may think fit to impose, be exercised or discharged also by such officer other futurity as he may specify in this behalf.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 8--> (1) The Central Government may establish and maintain at each of the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and at such other port in India as it may consider necessary an officer of the Mercantile Marine Department for the administration of this Act and the rules and regulations thereunder. (2) The office of the Mercantile Marine Department at the port of Bombay, Calcutta or Madras shall be in the charge of a principal officer, and the office at any other port shall be in the charge of such officer as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf. (3) In the discharge of their duties, the principal officer and other officers shall be subject to the control of the Director-General.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 9--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint at such ports as it may consider necessary as many persons as it may think fit to be surveyors for the purposes of this Act. 1 [(lA) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government, in the case of cargo ships, may, by notification in the Official Gazette authorise any person or body of persons, on such terms and conditions as may be specified therein, to be surveyor or surveyors for the purposes of this Act.] (2) The surveyors may be nautical surveyors, ship surveyors or engineer and ship surveyors. (3) At any port at which no surveyor appointed under this section is available, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any qualified person to perform the functions of a surveyor under this Act. (4) All acts done under this cut by a principal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department or a person appointed under sub-section (3) relating to matters within the competence of a surveyor shall have the same effect as if done by a surveyor for the purposes of this Act. Inserted by Act 21 of 1966, section 3 (w.e.f. 25-8-1966).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 10--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gate, appoint as many radio inspectors as it may consider necessary for the purpose of securing that the requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations thereunder relating to radio telegraphy, radio telephony and direction finders are complied with.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 11--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a shipping office at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary so to do, and shall appoint thereto a shipping master and as many deputy shipping masters and assistant shipping masters as it may consider necessary. (2) Shipping masters, deputy shipping masters and assistant shipping masters shall exercise their powers and discharge their duties subject to the general control of the Central Government or of any intermediate authority which the Central Government may specify in this behalf. (3) The Central Government may direct that at any port at which no separate shipping office is established, the whole or any part of the business of the shipping office shall be conducted at the custom house or at the office of the port officer or at such other office as the Central Government may specify, and thereupon the same shall be conducted accordingly. (4) All acts done by or before a deputy shipping master, an assistant shipping master and the officer to whom any business of the shipping office is committed under sub-section (3) shall have the same effect as if done by or before as whipping master for the purposes of this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 12--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish at every port in India in which it thinks it necessary to do, a seamen's employment office and shall appoint thereto a director and as many deputy directors and assistant directors as it may consider necessary. (2) The directors, deputy directors and assistant directors shall exercise their powers and discharge their duties subject to the general control of the Central Government or of any intermediate authority which the Central Government may specify in this behalf. (3) All acts done by or before a deputy or assistant director shall have the same effects as if done by or before a director for the purposes of this Act. (4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that at any port at which not separate seamen's employment office is established, the functions of the seamen's employment office in that port shall be discharged by such person or body of persons as it may specify in the notification, and thereupon the office of the person or body of persons so specified shall be deemed to be the seamen's employment office established at that port for the purposes of this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 13--> (1) The Central Government may appoint seamen's welfare officers at such ports in or outside India as it may consider necessary. (2) A seamen's welfare officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall perform- (a) in the case of any such officer appointed at any port in India, such functions in relation to welfare of seamen as may be assigned to him by the Central Government; (b) in the case of any such officer appointed at any port outside India, such functions in relation to welfare of seamen and such functions of an Indian consular officer under Part VII as may be assigned to him by the Central Government. (3) If any seamen's welfare officer appointed at any port outside India performs any functions assigned to an Indian consular officer under Part VII, such functions shall have the same effect as if they had been performed by an Indian consular officer for the purposes of that Part.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 14--> There shall be formed a fund to be called the Shipping Development Fund (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Fund) and there shall be credited thereto- (a) the amount of such grants as the Central Government may make for being credited to the Fund; (b) the amount of any loans advanced by the Central Government to the Committee constituted under section 15 for carrying out the objects of the Fund; (c) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realised out of repayment of loans made from the Fund or from interest on loans or dividends from investments made from the Fund; (d) such other sums as may be received for being credited to the Fund. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 15--> (1) The Central Government shall constitute a committed to be called the Shipping Development Fund Committee (hereinafter in this Part referred to as the Committee) consisting of a chairman and such number of other members, not exceeding six, as the Central Government may think fit to appoint thereto. (2) The Committee so constituted shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and may be that name sue and be sued. (3) The Committee shall have power to regulate its own procedure. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 16--> (1) The Fund shall vest in the Committee and shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Committee and for granting loans and financial assistance in any other form to persons of the description mentioned in section 21 for acquisition and maintenance of ships. (2) The Committee shall not grant any loan or give any financial assistance to any person referred to in sub-section (1) except on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may from time to time specify. (3) The Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, prescribe. (4) The accounts of the Committee shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or a person authorised by him in this behalf at such intervals as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may specify and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Committee. (5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person authorised by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Committee shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any office of the Committee. (6) The accounts of the Committee as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be allied before each House of Parliament. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 17--> 1 No act done or proceeding taken by the Committee shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Committee. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987)
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 18--> 1 The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, the Committee shall be dissolved, and thereupon all the property vested in the Committee shall vest in the Central Government. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 19--> 1 (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the term of office of embers of the Committee and the manner of filling casual vacancies in the Committee; (b) powers of the Chairman of the Committee; (c) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the Committee; (d) the appointment of officers and other employees of the Committee and the terms and conditions of their service; (e) the custody and investment of the Fund; (f) the execution of instruments and the mode of entering into contracts by or on behalf of the Committee and the proof of documents purporting to be executed, issued or signed by or on behalf of the Committee; (g) any other matter which may be or is to be prescribed. Repealed by Act 66 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 3-4-1987).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 20--> This Part applies only to sea-going ships fitted with mechanical means of propulsion.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 21--> For the purposes of this Act, a ship shall not be deemed to be an Indian ship unless owned wholly by persons to each of whom 1 [any] of the following descriptions applies:- (a) a citizen of India; or 2 [(b) a company or a body established by or under any Central or State Act which has its principal place of business in India; or (c) a co-operative society which is registered or deemed to be registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or any other law relating to co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State. Substituted by Act 43 of 1981, section 2, for “either” (w.e.f. 28-9-1981). Substituted by Act 68 of 1993, section 2, for clauses (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 27-10-1993).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 22--> (1) Every Indian ship, unless it is a ship which does not exceed fifteen tons net and is employed solely in navigation on the coast of India, shall be registered under this Act. (2) No ship required by sub-section (1) to be registered shall be recognised as an Indian ship unless she has been registered under this Act; Provided that any ship registered at the commencement of this Act at any port in India under any enactment repealed by this Act, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Act and shall be recognised as an Indian ship. (3) A ship required by this Act to be registered may be detained until the master of the ship, if so required, produces a certificate of registry in respect of the ship. Procedure for registration. 1 [Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “ship” does not include a fishing vessel.] Inserted by Act 12 of 1983, section 4 (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 23--> (1) The ports at which registration of ships shall be made shall be the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras and such other ports in India as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette declare to be ports of registry under this Act. (2) The port at which an Indian ship is registered for the time being under this Act shall be deemed to be her port of registry and the port to which she belongs.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 24--> At each of the ports of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, the principal officer of the Mercantile Marine Department, and at any other port such authority as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, shall be the registrar of Indian ships at that port,. 1 [Provided that subject to such order as the Central Government may issue in this behalf, when the office of registrar of Indian ships at any port is vacant or the holder of such office is on leave or is not available, for any reason, at the port to exercise and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office, the senior most surveyor at that port may act as, and exercise and discharge the owers, duties and functions of, the registrar of Indian ships at that port.] Inserted by Act 41 of 1984, section 3 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 25--> Every registrar shall keep a book to be called the register book and entries in that book shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:- (a) the property in a ship shall be divided into ten shares; (b) subject to the provisions of this Act with respect to joint owners or owners by transmission, not more than ten individuals shall be entitled to be registered at the same time as owners of any one ship; but this rule shall not affect the beneficial interest o any number of persons represented by or claiming under or through any registered owner or joint owner; (c) a person shall not be entitled to be registered as owner of a fractional part of a share in a ship; but any number of persons not exceeding five may be registered as joint owners of a ship or of any share or shares therein; (d) joint owners shall be considered as constituting one person and shall not be entitled to dispose in severalty of any interest in a ship or any share therein in respect of which they are registered; (e) a company 1 [or a co-operative society] may be registered as owner by its name. Inserted by Act 43 of 1981, section 3 (w.e.f. 28-9-1981).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 26--> An application for the registry of an Indian ship shall be made- (a) in the case of an individual, by the person requiring to be registered as owner or by his agent; (b) in the case of more than one individual requiring to be so registered, by some one or more of the persons so requiring or by his or their agent; and (c) in the case of a company requiring to be so registered, by its agent; and the authority of the agent shall be testified by writing, if appointed by an individual, under the hand of the person appointing him and, if appointed by a company, 1 [or a co-operative society] under its common seal. Inserted by Act 43 of 1981, section 4 (w.e.f. 28-9-1981)
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 27--> (1) The owner of every Indian ship in respect of which an application for registry is made shall cause such ship to be surveyed by a surveyor and the tonnage f the ship ascertained in the prescribed manner. (2) The surveyor shall grant a certificate specifying the ship's tonnage and build and such other particulars descriptive of the identity of the ship as may be prescribed and the certificate of the surveyor shall be delivered to the registrar before registry.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 28--> (1) The owner of an Indian ship who applies for registry under this Act shall, before registry, cause her to b marked permanently and conspicuously in the prescribed manner and to the satisfy to of the registrar and any ship not so marked may be detained by the register. (2) Subject to any other provision contained in this Act and to the provisions of any rules made thereunder, the owner and the master of an Indian ship shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the ship remains marked as required by this section, and the said owner or master shall not cause or permit any alterations of such marks to be made except in the event of any of the particulars thereby denoted being altered in the manner provided in this Act or except to evade capture by the enemy or by a foreign ship of war in the exercise of some belligerent right.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 29--> A person shall not be registered as the owner of an Indian ship or of a share therein until he or, in the case of a company 1 [or a co-operative society], the person authorised by this Act to make declarations on its behalf has made and signed a declaration of ownership in the prescribed form referring to the ship as described in the certificate of the surveyor and containing the following particulars:- (a) a statement whether he is or is not a citizen of India; 2 [or in the case of a company, or a co-operative society, whether the company or a co-operative society, satisfies the requirements specified in clause (b) or, as the case may be, clause (c) of section 21;] (b) a statement of the time when and the place where the ship was built or if the ship is built outside India and the time and place of building is not known, a statement to that effect; and in addition, in the case of a ship previously registered outside India, a statement of the name by which she was so registered; (c) the name of her master; (d) the number of shares in the ship in respect of which he or the company, 3 [or a co-operative society] as the case may be, lames to be registered as owner; and (e) a declaration that the particulars stated are true to the set of his knowledge and belief. Explanation.- In respect of a ship or share owned by more than one person, a declaration may be made by such one of them as may be authorised by them. Inserted by Act 43 of 1981, section 5 (w.e.f. 28-9-1981). Substituted by Act 43 of 1981, section 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 28-9-1981) Inserted by Act 43 of 1981, section 5 (w.e.f. 28-9-1981).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 30--> On the first registry of an Indian ship, the following evidence shall be produced in addition to the declaration of ownership:- (a) In the case of a ship built in India, a builder's certificate, that is to say a certificate signed by the builder of the ship and containing a true account of the proper denomination and the tonnage of the ship as estimated by him and the time when and the place where she was built, and the name of the person, if any, on whose account the ship was built; and if there has been any sale, the instrument of sale under which the ship or the share therein has become vested in the applicant for registry; (b) in the case of a ship built outside India, the same evidence as in the case of a ship built in Indian unless they declaring who makes the declaration of ownership declares that the time and place of her building are not known to him, or that the builder's certificate cannot be procured, in which case there shall be required only the instrument of sale under which the ship or a share therein has become vested in the applicant for registry.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 31--> As soon as the requirements of this Act preliminary to registry have been complied with, the registry shall enter in the registrar book the following particulars in respect of the ship:- 1 [(aa) the ship identification number;] (a) the name of the ship and the name of the port to which she belongs; (b) the detail contained in the surveyor's certificate; (c) the particulars respecting her origin stated in the declaration of ownership; and (d) the name and description of her registered owner or owners, and, if there are more owners than one, the number of shares owners by each if them. Inserted by Act 40 of 2007, section 4 (w.e.f. 1-3-2008).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 32--> On the registry of a ship, the registrar shall retain in his custody the following documents:- (a) the surveyor's certificate; (b) the builder's certificate; (c) any instrument of sale by which the ship was previous sold; (d) all declarations of ownership.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 33--> (1) Where it appears to the Central Government that thresher is any doubt as to the title of any Indian ship to be registered as an Indian ship, it may direct the registrar of her port of registry to require evidence to be given to his satisfaction within such time, not being less than thirty days as the Central Government may fix, that the ship is entitled to be registered as an Indian ship. (2) If within such time as may be fixed by the Central Government under sub-section (1) evidence to the satisfaction of the registrar that the ship is entitled to be registered as an Indian ship is not given, the ship shall be liable to forfeiture. Certificate of registry
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 34--> On complete of the registry of an India ship, the registrar shall grant a certificate of registry containing the particulars respecting her as entered ion the register book with the name of her master.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 35--> (1) The certificate of registry shall be used only for the lawful navigation of the ship, and shall not be subject to detention by reason of any title, lien, charge or interest whatever, had or claimed by any owner, mortgagee or other person to, on or in the ship. (2) No person, whether interested in the ship or not, who has in his possession or under his control the certificate of registry of a ship, shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause to deliver such certificate on demand to the person entitled to the custody thereof for the purposes of the lawful navigation of the ship or to any registrar, customs collector or other person entitled by law to require such delivery. (3) Any person refusing or omitting to deliver the certificate as required by sub-section (2), may, by order, be summoned by 1 [any Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be,] to appear before him and to be examined touching such refusal, and if the person is proved to have absconded so that the order of such Magistrate cannot be served on him, or if he persists in not delivering up the certificate, 2 [the said Magistrate] shall certify the fact, and the same proceedings may then be taken as in the case of a certificate mislaid, lost or destroyed, or as near thereto as circumstances permit. (4) If the master or owner of an Indian ship uses or attempts to use for her navigation a certificate of registry not legally granted in respect of the ship, he shall be guilty of an offence under this sub-section and the ship shall be liable to forfeiture. Substituted by Act 12 of 1983, section 17 and Schedule for “the Magistrate” (w.e.f. 18-5-1983). Substituted by Act 12 of 1983, section 17 and Schedule for “the Magistrate” (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 36--> (1) In the event of the certificate of registry of an Indian ship being defaced or mutilated, the registrar of her port of registry may, on the delivery to him of that certificate, grant a new certificate in lieu of her original certificate. (2) In the event of the certificate of registry of an Indian ship being mislaid, lost or destroyed or of the person entitled thereto being unable to obtain it from the custody of any other person, the registrar of her port of registry shall grant a new certificate in lieu of her original certificate. (3) If the port at which the ship is at the time of the event referred to in sub-section (2) or first arrives after the event is outside India, then the master of the ship or some other person having knowledge of the facts of the case shall make a declaration stating such facts and the names and descriptions of the registered owners of much ship to the best of the declarant's knowledge and belief to the nearest available Indian consular officer who may thereupon grant a provisional certificate containing a statement of the circumstances under which it is granted. (4) The provisional certificate shall, within ten days after the first subsequent arrival of the ship at her port of discharge in India, be delivered by the master to the registrar of her port of registry and the registrar shall thereupon grant a new certificate of registry. (5) If the certificate of registry stated to have been mislaid, lost or destroyed shall at any time afterwards be found, or if the person entitled to the certificate of registry obtains it at any time afterwards, the said certificate shall forthwith be delivered to the registrar of her port of registry to be cancelled.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 37--> Where the master of an Indian ship is changed, each of the following persons, that is to say,- (a) if the change is made in consequence of the removal of the master by a Marine Board or by a court under this act, the presiding officer of the Marine Board or f the court, as the case may be; (b) if the change occurs from any other cause,- (i) in India, the registrar or any other officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf at the port where the change occurs and (ii) outside India, the Indian consular officer at the port where the change occurs; shall endorse and sign on the certificate of registry a memorandum shall endorse and sign on the certificate of registry a memorandum of the change; and any customs collector at any port in India may refuse to permit any person to do any act there as master of an Indian ship unless his name is inserted in or endorsed on her certificate of registry as her last appointed master.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 38--> (1) Whenever a change occurs in the registered ownership of an Indian ship, the change of ownership shall be endorsed on her certificate of registry either by the registrar of the ship's port of registry or by the registrar of any port at which the ship arrives who has been advised of the change by the registrar of the ship's port of registry. (2) The master shall, for the purposes of such endorsement by the registrar of the ship's port of registry, deliver the certificate of registry to the registrar, forthwith after the change if the change occurs when the ship is at her port of registry, and if it occurs during her absence from that port and the endorsement under this section is not made before her return, then, upon her first return to that port. (3) The registrar of any port, not being the ship's port of registry, who is required to make an endorsement under this section may, for that purpose, require the master of the ship to deliver to him the ship's certificate of registry so that the ship need not thereby be detained and the mater shall deliver the same accordingly.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 39--> (1) In the event of a registered ship being either actually or constructively lost, taken by the enemy, burnt or broken up or ceasing for any reason to be an Indian ship, every owner of the ship or any share in the ship shall immediately on obtaining knowledge of the event, if no notice thereof has already been given to the registrar, give notice thereof to the registrar at her port of registry and that registrar shall make an entry thereof in the register book and its registry in that book shall be considered as closed except so far as relates to any unsatisfied mortgages entered therein. (2) In any such case, except where the ship's certificate of registry is mislaid, lost or destroyed, the master of the ship shall, immediately if the event occurs in any port in India, or within ten days after his arrival in port if it occurs elsewhere, deliver the certificate to the registrar of the port or any other officer specified in this behalf by the Central Government if the port of arrival is in India, or if the arrival is in any port outside India to the Indian consular officer there, and the registrar if he is not himself the registrar of her port of registry or the officer so specified or the Indian consular officer, as the case may be shall forthwith forward the certificate officer, as the case may be, shall forthwith forward the certificate delivered to him to the registrar of her port of registry.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 40--> (1) If at any port outside India a ship becomes entitled to be registered as an Indian ship, the Indian consular officer there may grant to her master on his application a provisional certificate containing such particulars as may be prescribed in relation to the ship and shall forward a copy of the certificate at the first convenient opportunity to the Director-General. (2) Such a provisional certificate shall have the effect of a certificate of registry until the expiration of six months from it date or until the arrival of the ship at a port where there is a registrar whichever first happens, and on weather of those events happening shall cease to have effect.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 41--> Where it appears to the Central Government that by reason of special circumstances it is desirable that permission should be granted to any Indian ship to pass without being previously registered from one port to any other port in India, the Central Government may authorise the registrar of the first-mentioned port to grant a pass in such form as may be prescribed, and that pass shall for the time and within the limits therein mentioned have the same effect as a certificate of registry. Transfers of ships, shares, etc.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 42--> (1) No person shall transfer or acquire any Indian ship or any share or interest therein 1 [at any time during which the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or external aggression and during which a proclamation of emergency issued under clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution is in operation] without the previous approval of the Central Government and any transaction effected in contravention of this provision shall be void and unenforceable. (2) The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purpose of conserving the tonnage of Indian shipping, refuse to give its approval to any such transfer or acquisition. 2 [(2A) No transfer or acquisition of any Indian ship shall be valid unless- (a) all wages and other amounts due to seamen in connection with their employment on that ship have been paid in accordance with the provisions of this Act; (b) the owner of the ship has given notice of such transfer or acquisition of the ship to the Director General.] (3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this section, an Indian ship or a share therein shall be transferred only by an instrument in writing. (4) The instrument shall contain such description of the ship as is contained in the surveyor's certificate or some other description sufficient to identify the ship to the satisfaction of the registrar and shall be in the prescribed form or as near thwart as circumstances permit and shall be executed by the transferor in the presence of and be attested by at least two witness. Inserted by Act 68 of 1993, section 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-1993). Inserted by Act 68 of 1993, section 3 (w.e.f. 27-10-1993).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 43--> (1) Every instrument for the transfer of an Indian ship or of a share therein when duly executed shall be produced to the registrar of her port of registry, and the registrar shall thereupon enter in the register book the name of the transferee as owner of the ship share, as the case may be, and shall endorse on the instrument the fact of that entry having been made with the day and hour thereof. (2) Every such instrument shall be entered in the register book in the order of its production to the registrar.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 44--> (1) Where the property in an Indian ship or share therein is transmitted to a person on the death r insolvency of any registered owner, or by any lawful means other than by a transfer under this Act,- (a) that person shall authenticate the transmission by making and signing a declaration in the prescribed form (in the Act referred to as a declaration of transmission) identifying the ship and also a statement of the manner in which and the person to whom the property has been transmitted; (b) if the transmission is consequent on insolvency, the declaration of transmission shall be accompanied by proper proof of such claim; (c) if the transmission is consequent on death, the declaration of transmission shall be accompanied by a succession certificate, probate or letters of administration under the Indian Succession cut, 1925 (39 of 1925), or a duly certified copy thereof. (2) The registrar, on receipt of the declaration of transmission so accompanied, shall enter in the register book the name of the person entitled under the transmission as owner f the ship or share the property in which has been transmitted, and, where there are more persons than one, shall enter the names of all those persons, but those persons however numerous shall, for the purpose of the provisions of this Act with respect to the number of persons claiming to be registered as owners, be considered as one person: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the registrar to make an entry in the register book under this section, if he is of opinion that by reason the transmission the ship has ceased to be an Indian ship.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 45--> (1) Where by reason of the transmission of any property in a ship or a share therein on death, insolvency or otherwise, a ship ceases to be an Indian ship, the registrar of her port of registry shall submit a report to the Central Government setting out the circumvent in which the ship has ceased to be an Indian ship. (2) On receipt of such report, the Central Government may make an application to the High Court for a direction form the sale to any citizen of India 1 or any 2 company which satisfies the requirements specified in clause (b) of section 21 of the property so transmitted. (3) The High Court may require any evidence in support of the application it thinks requisite and may make such order thereon and on such terms and conditions as it thinks just or may reject the application 3 [in case] it finds that the ship has not ceased to be an Indian ship; and in case the ship or the share is ordered to be sold, it shall direct that the proceeds of the sale after deducting the expenses thereof, be paid to the person entitled under such transmission or otherwise. (4) Every application for sale shall be made within such time as may be prescribed; Provided that an application may be admitted by the High Court after the time prescribed, if the Central Government satisfies the High Court that it had sufficient cause for not making the application within such time. Substituted by Act 43 of 1981, section 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 28-9-1981) Substituted by Act 68 of 1993, section 4, for “company or any co-operative society” (w.e.f. 27-10-1993) Substituted by AMENDING AND REPEALING ACT 1960 for the words "in any case" (w.e.f. 26-12-1960).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 46--> Where any court, whether under section 45 or otherwise, orders the sale of any ship or share therein, the order of the court shall contain a declaration vesting in some person named by the court the right to transfer that ship or share, and that person shall thereupon be entitled to transfer the ship or share in the same manner and to the same extent as if he were the registered owner thereof; and every registrar shall obey the requisition of the person so named in respect of any such transfer to the same extent as if such person were the registered owner.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 47--> (1) A registered ship or a share therein may be made a security for a loan or other valuable consideration, and the instrument creating the security (in this Act called a mortgage) shall be in the prescribed form or as near thwart as circumstances permit and on the production of such instrument the registrar of the ship's port of registry shall record it in the register book. (2) Mortgages shall be recorded by the registrar in the order in time in which they are produced to him for that purpose, and the registrar shall, by memorandum under his hand, notify on each mortgagee that it has been recorded by him stating the day and hour of that record.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 48--> Where a registered mortgage is discharged, the registrar shall, on the production of the mortgagee deed with a receipt for the mortgage money endorsed thereon, duly signed and attested, make an entry in the register book to the effect that the mortgage has been discharged, and on that entry being made the estate, if any, which passed to the mortgagee shall vest in the person in whom (haven regard to intervening acts and circumstances, if any) it would have vested, if the mortgage had not been made.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 49--> If there are more mortgages than one reworded in respect of the same ship or share, the mortgagees shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or constructive notice, have priority according to the date on which each mortgage is recorded in the register book and not according to the date of each mortgaged itself.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 50--> Except in so far as may be necessary for making a mortgaged ship or shrew available as a security for the mortgage debt, the mortgagee shall not, by reason of his mortgage, be deemed to be the owner of the ship or share, nor shall the mortgagor be deemed to have ceased to be owner thereof.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 51--> (1) A registered mortgagee of a ship or share hall be entitled to recover the amount due under the mortgage in the High Court, and when passing a decree or thereafter the High Court may direct that the mortgaged ship or share be sold in execution of the decree. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), no such mortgagee shall merely by virtue of the mortgagee be entitled to sell or otherwise dispose of the mortgaged ship or share. Substituted by Act 68 of 1993, section 5, for section 51 (w.e.f. 27-10-1993)
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 52--> A registered mortgage of a ship or share shall not be affected by any act of insolvency committed by the mortgagor after the date of the record of such mortgage, notwithstanding that the mortgagor, at the commencement of his insolvency, had the ship or share in his possession, order or disposition or was the reputed owner thereof, and the mortgage shall be preferred to any right, claim or interest therein of the other creditors of the insolvent or any trustee or assignee on their behalf.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 53--> (1) A registered mortgage of a ship or share may be transferred to any person and the instrument effecting the transfer shall be in the prescribed form or as near thereto as circumstances permit, and on the production of much instrument, the registrar shall record it by entering in the register book the name o the transferee as mortgagee of the ship or share and shall, by memorandum under his hand, notify on the instrument of transfer that it has been recorded by him stating the day and hour of the record. (2) The person to whom any such mortgage has been transferred shall enjoy the same right f preference as was enjoyed by the transferor.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 54--> (1) Where the interest of a mortgagee in a ship or share is transmitted on death, or insolvency, or by any lawful means other than by a transfer under this Act, the transmission shall be authenticated by a declaration of the person to whom the interest is transmitted containing a statement of the manner in which and the person to whom the property has been transmitted, and shall be accompanied by the like evidence as is by this Act required in case of a corresponding transmission of the ownership of a ship or share. (2) The registrar, on receipt of the declaration and the production of the evidence aforesaid, shall enter the name of the person entitled under the transmission in the register book as mortgagee of the ship or share.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 55--> (1) An Indian ship shall not be described by any name other than that by which she is for the time being registered. (2) The registrar may refuse the registry f any Indian ship by the name by which it is proposed to register the ship if that name is already borne by another ship or if the name be so similar as is calculated or likely to deceive. (3) A change shall not be made in the name of an Indian ship except in the prescribed manner. (4) If any person acts or suffers any person under his control to act in contravention of this section or omits to do or suffers any person under his control to omit to do anything required under this 1 [section], the ship may be detained until the provisions of this section are complied with: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a foreign ship which has become, and is sought to be registered as, an Indian ship. Registry of alterations, registry anew and transfer of registry Substituted by AMENDING AND REPEALING ACT 1960 for the words "sub-section" (w.e.f. 26-12-1960).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 56--> When a registered ship is so altered as not to correspond with the particulars relating to her tonnage or description contained in the register book, then, if the alteration is made at any port having a registrar, that registrar, or if it I mad elsewhere, hew registrar of the first port having a registrar at which the ship arrives after the alteration, shall, on application being made to him stating the particulars of the alteration, either cause the alteration to be registered or direct that the ship be registered anew.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 57--> (1) For the purpose of registry of an alteration in a ship the ship's certificate of registry shall be produced to the registrar, and the registrar shall, in his discretion, either retain the certificate of registry and grant a new certificate of registry containing a description of the ship as altered or endorse and sign on the existing certificate a memorandum of the alteration. (2) The particulars of the alteration so made, and the fact of the new certificate having been granted, or endorsement having been made, shall be entered by the registrar of the ship's port of registry in his register book; and for that purpose the registrar to whom the application for the registry of the alteration has been made (if he is not the registrar of the ship's port of registry) shall forthwith report to the last-mentioned registrar the particulars and facts as aforesaid, accompanied, where a new certificate of registry has been granted by the old certificate of registry.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 58--> (1) Where any registrar, not being the registrar of the ship's port of registry, on an application as to an alteration in a ship directs the ship to be registered anew, he shall either grant a provisional certificate describing the ship as altered, or provisionally endorse the particulars of the alteration on the existing certificate. (2) Every such provisional certificate, or certificate provisionally endorsed, shall, within tern days after the first subsequent arrival of the ship at her ;port of discharge in India, be delivered to the registrar thereof and that registrar shall cause the ship to be registered anew. (3) The registrar granting a provisional certificate, or provisionally endorsing a certificate under this section shall add to the certificate or endorsement a statement that the am is made provisionally, and shall send a report of the particulars of the case to the registrar of the ship's port of registry, containing a similar statement as the certificate or endorsement.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 59--> Subject to the other provisions continued in this Act, where the ownership of any Indian ship is changed, the registrar of the port at which the ship is registered may, on the application of the owner of the ship, register the ship anew altered registry anew is not required under this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 60--> (1) Where a ship is to be registered anew, the registrar shall proceed as in the case of first registry, and on the delivery to him of the existing certificate of registry and on the other requisites to registry, or in the case of a change of ownership such of them as he thinks material, being duly complied with, shall make such registry anew, and grant a certificate thereof. (2) When a ship is registered anew, her former registry shall be considered as closed except so far as relates to any unsatisfied mortgage entered thereon, but the names of all persons appearing on the former register to be interested in the ship as owners or mortgagees shall be entered in the new register and the registry anew shall not in any way affect the rights of any of those persons.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 61--> (1) The registry of any ship may, with the previous approval of the Director-General, be transferred from one port of registry to another on the application to the registrar of the existing port of registry of the ship made by declaration in writing of all persons appearing in hew register to be interested therein as owners or mortgages, but that transfer shall not in any way affect the rights of those persons moor any of them and those rights shall in all respects continue in the same manner as if no such transfer had been effected. (2) On receipt of any such application the registrar shall transmit notice thereon to the registrar of the intended port of registry with a copy of all particulars relating to the ship and the names of all persons appearing in that register to be interested therein as owners or mortgagees. (3) The ship's certificate of registry shall be delivered to the registrar either of the existing or intended port of registry, and, if delivered to the former, shall be transmitted to the registrar of the intended port of registry. (4) On receipt of the documents aforesaid the registrar of the intended port of registry shall enter in his register book all the particulars and names so transmitted as aforesaid, and grant a fresh certificate of registry, and thenceforth such ship shall be considered to be registered at the new port of registry, and the name of the ship's new port of registry shall be substituted for the name of her former port of registry on the ship.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 62--> Where a ship has ceased to be registered as an Indian ship by reason of having been wrecked or abandoned, or for any reason other than capture by the enemy, the ship shall not re-registered until she has at the expense of the applicant for the registry been surveyed by a surveyor and certified by him to be seaworthy. National character and flag
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 63--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare what shall be the proper national colours for all ships registered under this Act and for all ships which are not so registered but which are owned by the Government or by any local authority or by any body corporate established by or under any law for the time being in force in India or by a citizen of India; and different colours may be decelerated for different classes of ships. (2) Any Commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, or any customs collector, or any Indian consular officer, may board any ship on which any colours are hoisted contrary to this Act and seize and take away the colours which shall be forfeited to the Government.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 64--> No person on board a ship which is not an Indian ship shall, for the purpose of making it appear to be an Indian ship, use the Indian national colours, unless the assumption of Indian character has been made (the burden of proving which shall lie on him) for the purpose of escaping capture by the enemy or by a foreign ship of war in the exercise of some belligerent right.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 65--> No owner or master of an Indian ship shall knowingly do anything, or permit anything to be done, or carry or permit to be carried any peppers or documents, with intent to conceal the Indian character of the ship from any person entitled by any law for the time being in force to inquire into the same, or with intent to assume a foreign character for the ship, or with intent to do any person so entitled as aforesaid.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 66--> An Indian ship shall hoist the proper national colours- (a) on a signal being made to her by any vessel of the Indian Navy; (b) on entering or leaving any foreign port; (c) if of fifty tons gross tonnage or more, on entering or leaving any Indian port.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 67--> (1) A customs collector shall not grant a clearance for any ship until the master of such ship has declared to that officer the name of the country to which he lames that she belongs, and that officer shall thereupon inscribe that name on the clearance. (2) If a ship attempts to proceed to sea without such clarion, she may be detained by any customs collector until the declaration is made. Miscellaneous
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 68--> Where it is declared by this Act that an Indian ship shall not be recognised as such, that ship shall to be entitled to any privileges, benefits, advantages or protection usually enjoyed by Indian ships or to use the Indian national colours for Indian ships or to assume the Indian national character, but so far as regards the payment of dues, the liability to fine and forfeiture and the punishment of offences committed on board such ship, or by any persons belonging to her, such ship shall be dealt with in the same manner in all respites as if she were a recognised Indian ship.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 69--> Where any ship has either wholly or as to any share therein become subject to forfeiture under this Part, any commissioned officer of the Indian Navy, any customs collector or any Indian consular officer or any other officer authorised by the Central Government, may seize and detain the ship, and bring her for adjudication before the High Court, and the High Court may thereupon adjudge the ship with her equipment to be forfeited to the Government, and make such order in the case as to the High Court seems just and may award to the officer bringing in the ship for adjudication such portion of the proceedings of the sale of the ship or any share therein as the High Court thinks fit.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 70--> No notice of any trust, express, implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register book or be receivable by the registrar, and subject to any rights and powers appearing by the register book to be vested in any other person, the registered owner of a ship or of a share therein shall have power to dispose of the ship or share in the manner provided in this Act and to give effectual receipts for any money paid or advance by way of consideration.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 71--> Where any person is beneficially interested otherwise than by way of mortgage in any ship r share in a ship registered in the name of some other person as owner, the person so interested shall, as well s the registered owner, be subject to all the pecuniary penalties imposed by this or any other Act on the owners of ships or shares therein, so nevertheless that proceedings for the enforcement of any such penalties may be taken against both or either of the said parties with or without joining the other of them.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 72--> (1) On application to the registrar and on payment of the prescribed fee, a person may, at any time during office hours, inspect any register book, and may obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register book.(Evidence of registers book, certificate of registry and other documents. (2) The following documents shall be educible in evidence in any court in manner provided by this Act, namely:- (a) any register book on its production from the custody of the registrar or other person having the lawful custody thereof; (b) a certificate of registry under this Act purporting to be signed by the registrar our any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Go permanent; (c) an endorsement on a certificate of registry purporting to be signed by the registrar or any other officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government; (d) every declaration made in pursuance of this Part in respect of an Indian ship. (3) A certified copy of an entry in a registrar book shall be admissible in evidence in any court and have the same effect to all intents as the original entry in the register book of which it is a copy.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 73--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, ships belonging to the Government other than ships of the Indian Navy may be registered is Indian ships under this Act and thereupon this Act, subject to any exceptions and modifications which may be made in the notification either generally or with respect to any class of ships belonging to Government , shall apply to ships belonging to Government registered in accordance with those rules as they apply to Indian ships registered in manner provided by this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 74--> (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Part. (2) In Particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the manner in which the tonnage of any ship shall be ascertained, whether for the purpose of registration or otherwise, including the mode of measurement; (b) the recognition for the purpose of ascertaining the tonnage of any ship or for any other purpose, of any tonnage certificate granted in respect of any ship in any country outside India, the tonnage regulations of which are substantially the same as the tonnage rules made by the Central Government, including the conditions and restrictions subject to which such recognition may be granted (c) the manner in which surveys of ships shall be conducted and the form of certificates of surveying officers; (d) the manner in which ships shall be marked; (e) the form in which any document required by this Part shall be prepared and the particulars which it should contain; (f) the persons by whom and the authorities before which any declaration required by this Part shall be made and the circumstances in which any such declaration may be waived and other evidence accepted; (g) the form of the instrument creating a mortgage on a ship or share or transferring a mortgage; (h) the returns that shall be made by registrars to the Director-General or to such other authority as the Central Government may appoint and the form in which and the intervals within which such returns shall be made; (i) the procedure for the registration, marking or alteration of the names of Indian ships; 1 (j) the fees that may be levied under this Part and the manner in which such fees shall be collected; (k) the manner in which registrars and other authorities may exercise their powers under this Part or maintain their books and other registers; (l) the manner in which ships belonging to the Government, to which the provisions of this Act may be made applicable under section 73, may be registered; (m) any other master which may be or is to be prescribed. Substituted by Act 12 of 1983, section 5, for clause (j) (w.e.f. 18-5-1983).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 75--> 1 This Part applies only to sea-going ship fitted with mechanical means of propulsion. Substituted by Act 13 of 1987, section 2, for section 75 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 76--> (1) Every foreign-going Indian ship, every home-trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more when going to sea from any port or place in India and every ship carrying passengers between ports or places in India shall be provided with officers duly certificate under this Act according to the following scale, namely:- (a) in every case, with a duly certificate master; (b) if the ship is a foreign-going ship or a home-trade passenger ship of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more, with at least one officer besides the master holding a certificate not lower than that of first mate in the case of a foreign-going ship and of mate in the case of a home-trade passenger ship; (c) if the ship is a home-trade ship, not being a passenger ship, of four hundred and fifty tons gross or more, with at least one officer besides the master holding a certificate not lower than that of mate; (d) if the ship is a foreign-going ship and carries more than one mate, then with the second mate duly certificate. (2) Every foreign-going Indian ship when going to sea from any port or place in India shall be provided with engineers duly certificate under this Act according to the following scale, namely:- (a) if the ship is of one hundred nominal horse-power or more, with at least two engineers one of whom shall be a first class engineer designated as the chief engineer, and the other a first class or second class engineer designated as the second engineer; (b) if the ship is of less than one hundred nominal horsepower, with at least one first class or second class engineer designated as the chief engineer. (3) Every home-trade Indian ship when going to sea from any port or place in India and every ship carrying passengers between ports or places in India shall be provided with engineers or engine drivers duly certificate according to the following scale, namely:- (a) if the ship is of fifty nominal horse-power or more, with at least one first class or second class engineer designated as the chief engineer; (b) if the ship is of less than fifty nominate horse-power, with at least one first class or second class engineer designated as the chief engineer, or with at least one engine diver of a sea-going ship. (4) Every fishing vessel when going to sea from any port or place in India shall be provided- (a) if the vessel exceeds twenty-five tons gross but does not exceed fifty tons gross, with ma certificate skipper; (b) if the vessel exceeds fifty tons gross, with a certificate skipper and a certificate second hand; (c) if the vessel is of fifty nominal horse-power or more, with at least one engineer duly certificated, being an engineer of a fishing vessel, who shall be designated as the chief engineer; (d) if the vessel is of less than fifty nominal horse-power, with at least one engineer duly certificated, being an engineer of a fishing vessel, who shall be designated as the chief engineer or with at least one engine driver of a fishing vessel duly certificated. Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (c) , persons holding certificates of competency as first class or second class engineers shall be deemed to be duly certificated and for the purposes of clause (d), persons holding certificates of competency as engine rivers of sea-going ships shall be deemed to be duly certificate. (5) Nothing in this section which relates to engineers or engine drivers shall apply to any ship to which the provisions of the Inland Steam-vessels Act, 1917 (1 of 1917), apply. Explanation.- In this section "nominal horse-power", in relation to any ship, means the horse-power of the engines of the ship calculated in the prescribed manner. Substituted by Act 63 of 2002, section 2, for section 76 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 77--> Subject to the provisions contained in section 86, an officer shall not be deemed to be duly certificated under this Act unless he holds a certificate of a grade appropriate to his station in the ship or of a higher grade granted in accordance with this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 78--> (1) Certificates of competency shall be granted in accordance with this Act for each of the following grades, namely:- master of a foreign-going ship; first mate of a foreign-going ship; second mate of a foreign-going ship.; master of a home-trade ship; mate of a home-trade ship; first class engineer; second class engineer; engine driver of a sea-going ship; skipper of a fishing vessel; second hand of a fishing vessel; engineer of a fishing vessel; engine driver of a fishing vessel. (2) A certificate of competency granted for the grade of first or second class engineer or engine driver shall state whether it entitles the holder to act as engineer or engine driver of ships fitted with steam engines or of ships fitted with any other type of engines and the holder shall not be entitled to act as engineer or engine driver of a ship fitted with a type of engine not stated in he certificate. (3) If it appears to the Central Government that certificates of competency for grades other than those referred to in sub-section (1) may, be granted, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the other grades in respect of which certificates of competency may be granted. (4) A certificate of competency for a foreign- going ship shall be deemed to be of a higher grade than the corresponding certificate for a home-trade ship, and shall entitle the lawful holder thereof to go to sea in the corresponding grade in such last-mentioned ship; but no certificate for a home-trade ship shall entitle the holder to go to sea as master or mate of a foreign-going ship. Substituted by Act 13 of 1987, section 4, for section 78 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 79--> (1) The Central Government or a person duly authorised by it in this behalf shall appoint persons for the purpose of examining the qualifications of persons desirous of obtaining certificates of competency under section 78. (2) The Central Government or such authorised person shall grant to every applicant, who is duly reported by the examiners to have passed the examination satisfactorily and to have given satisfactory evidence of his sobriety, experience and ability and general good conduct on board ship, such a certificate of competency as the case requires: Provided that the Central Government may, in any case in which it has reason to believe that the report has been unduly made, require, before granting a certificate a re-examination of the applicant or a further inquiry into his testimonials and character. 1 [(3) Every certificate granted under sub-section (2), shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed.] 2 [...] Inserted by Act 13 of 1987, section 5 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989). Section 80 omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 2 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 80--> (1) A person who has attained the rank of lieutenant in the executive branch of the Indian Navy shall be entitled to a certificate of service as the master of am foreign-going ship without examination. (2) A person who has attained the rank of lieutenant or sub-lieutenant in the engineering branch of the Indian Navy shall be entitled without examination, if a lieutenant to a certificate of service as first class engineer, and if a sub-lieutenant t a certificate of service as second class engineer. (3) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, provide for the grant of certificates of service to officers of the Indian Naval Reserve Forces who have attained the prescribed ranks. (4) A certificate of service shall differ I form from a certificate of competency and shall contain the name and rank of the person to whom it is delivered, and the Central Government shall deliver a certificate of service to any person who proves himself to be entitled thereto. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government, may, if it is of opinion that a person who is entitled to a certificate of service under this section is not a fit person to hold such certificate, refuse to grant or deliver such certificate to him. (6) The provisions of this Act (including the provisions relating to penalties) shall apply in relation to a certificate of service as they apply in relation to a certificate of competency.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 81--> Every certificate of competency granted under this Act shall be in the prescribed form and shall be made in duplicate, and one copy shall be delivered to the person entitled to the certificated, and the other shall be kept and recorded in the prescribed manner.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 82--> A note of all orders made for cancelling, suspending, altering or otherwise affecting any certificate of competency, in pursuance of the powers containing in this Act, shall be entered on the copy of the certificate kept under section 81.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 83--> Whenever a person holding a certificate granted under this Act proves to the satisfaction f the Central Government that he has, without fault on his part, lost or been deprived of such certificate, the Central Government shall, on payment of the prescribed fee, cause a copy of the certificate, to which by the record kept in accordance with this Act he appears to be entitled, to be granted to him, and such copy shall have all the effect of the original.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 84--> (1) The master of a foreign-going ship or the master of a home-trade ship of two hundred tons gross or more- (a) on signing the agreement with his crew, shall produce to the shipping master before whom the same is signed, the certificate of competency which 1 the master, mate, engineers and engine drivers f the ship are by the Act required to hold; and 2 [...] (b) in the case of a running agreement, shall, also, before the second and every subsequent voyage, produce to the shipping master the certificate of competency of any mate or engineer then first engaged by him who is required by this Act to hold a certificate. 3 [(c) who is not required to sign the agreement with the crew, shall submit before commencing the first voyage from any port to the Mercantile Marine Department having jurisdiction over such port, a list of crew with the particulars of grades of certificates of master, mates and engineers and shall also report to that Department of any later change in the list of the crew before any subsequent voyage.] (2) Upon the production of the certificates of competency, the shipping master shall, if the certificates are such as the master, mates and engineers of the ship ought to hold, give to the master a certificate to the effect that the proper certificates of competency have been so produced. (3) The master shall, before proceeding t sea, produce the certificate given to him by the shipping master to the customs collector. (4) No customs collector shall clear any such ship outwards without the production of such certificate; and, if any ship attempts to go to sea without a clearance, the customs collector may detain her until the certificate is produced. Substituted by Act 13 of 1987, section 6, for “masters, mates, engineers and engine drivers” (w.e.f. 1-7-1989). The word “and” omitted by Act 13 of 1987, section 6 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989). Inserted by Act 13 of 1987, section 6 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 85--> If it appears to the Central Government that the holder of a certificate granted under this Act has obtained it on false or erroneous information, it may cancel or suspend such certificate: Provided that no order under this section shall be passed by the Central Government unless the person concerned has been given an opportunity of making a representation against the order proposed.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 86--> (1) If provision, is made by the laws in force in any country other than India for the grant of certificates of competency 1 [...] similar to those referred to in this Act, and the Central Government is satisfied- (a) that the conditions under which any such certificates are granted in that country require standards of competency 2 [...] not lower than those required for the grant under this Act of corresponding certificates; and (b) that certificates granted under this Act are accepted in that country in lieu of the corresponding certificates granted under the laws of that country, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any certificate of competency 3 [...] granted under the laws in force in that country and specified in that notification, shall for the purposes of this Act be recognised as equivalent to the corresponding certificate of competency 4 [...] granted under this Act and specified in the notification. (2) Whenever the provisions of this Act require that a person employed in any capacity on board any ship shall be the holder of a specified certificate of competency 5 [...] granted under this Act, any person employed in that capacity shall, if he is the holder of a certificate recognised under sub-section (1) as equivalent to the first-mentioned certificate or to a certificate of higher grade granted under this Act, and still in force, be deemed to be duly certificated under this Act. The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or service” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 3 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 86A--> (1) Every master of a foreign ship shall, before proceeding to sea from any port or place in India, ensure that the ship has the requisite number of officers and engineers of appropriate grades as specified by the Convention. (2) A surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government may, at any reasonable time, go on board a ship to which any of the provisions of this Part applies for the purpose of ensuring that the officers holding certificates issued in accordance with the Convention are actually appointed and are present, and satisfy himself about the adequacy of such officers for the watchkeeping duties in ports and at sea. (3) If any report made under sub-section (2) by a surveyor or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government, reveals any deficiency in a foreign ship in relation to the requirements of the Convention and the Central Government is satisfied that it will be unsafe for such ship to proceed to sea, that ship may be detained by the officer authorised for this purpose till such requirements are fulfilled.] Inserted by Act 13 of 1987, section 7 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 87--> 1 The Central Government may make rules to carry out the provisions of this Part relating to certificates of competency, and may, by such rules,- (a) prescribe the manner in which the horse-power of the engines of ships may be calculated, and the methods by which such calculation may be made in respect of different types of engines; (b) the number of persons and the qualifications they may possess for maintaining watches 2 [by different types of ships] at sea or in any port or place; (c) prescribe the qualifications to be respectively required of persons desirous of obtaining certificates of competency for the grades falling under section 78; (d) fix the fees to be paid by applicants for examination; (e) prescribe the form of such certificates and the manner in which copies of certificates are to be kept and recorded; (f) prescribe the circumstance or cases in which certificates of competency may be cancelled or suspended. (g) the form of such certificates and the manner in which copies of certificates are to be kept and recorded; (h) the circumstances or cases in which certificates of competency may be cancelled or suspended.] Substituted by Act 13 of 1987, section 8, for section 87 (w.e.f. 1-7-1989) Substituted by Act 63 of 2002, section 3, for “by a ship” (w.e.f. 1-2-2003).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 87A--> In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) “appointed day” means the date on which the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1979, comes into force; (b) “certificate” means- (i) a certificate of competency referred to in section 78; or 1 [...] (iii) a certificate of competency 2 [...] referred to in section 86, which has been obtained by any person by availing of training facilities in any of the merchant navy training establishments in India or experience of sea service on board any Indian ship 3 [...]; (c) “Government” includes- (i) a Board of Trustees constituted under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963), for any port; (ii) a corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act; (iii) A Government company within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); and (iv) a Merchant Navy Training Institution financed wholly or mainly by Government; (d) “suitable employment”, in relation to the holder of any certificate, means employment in a capacity for which the holding of such certificate is an essential qualification. Clause (ii) omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 4 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or service “ omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section 4 (w.e.f. 14-8-1986). The words “or Indian Naval Ship” omitted by Act 33 of 1986, section (w.e.f. 14-8-1986).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 87B--> (1) Every citizen of India who obtains, on or after the appointed day, a certificate shall be liable to serve the Government, or in any Indian ship, for such period not extending beyond four years from the date on which he obtains such certificate or for such shorter period as the Central Government may, by a general or special order published in the Official Gazette, specify. (2) No citizen of India who has obtained, on or after the appointed day, a certificate shall accept any employment other than an employment under the Government or in any Indian ship, before the expiry of the period during which he is liable to serve the Government or in any Indian ship in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) and the orders made thereunder. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), a citizen of India who has obtained, on or after the appointed day, two or more certificates shall not be liable to serve under the Government or in any Indian ship for any period or periods exceeding, or, as the case may be, exceeding in the aggregate, seven years or such shorter period as the Central Government may, by a general or special order published in the Official Gazette, specify.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 87C--> (1) When any person referred to in section 87B has failed to secure suitable employment within a reasonable period from the date on which he applied for the same, he may make an application to the Director General for exempting him from the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2) of that section and if the Director General is satisfied that the grounds stated in the application justify the exemption sought for, he shall, by order, exempt such person from the requirements of those sub-sections. (2) The Director General may, either on his own motion or on an application made by any person referred to in section 87B, by order in writing, exempt such person from the requirements of sub-sections (1) and (2) of that section, if the Director General is satisfied- (a) that it is necessary so to do for compliance with any request made by the Government of any foreign country to make available the services of Indian personnel for meeting shortage of qualified personnel in its ships or shore establishments, or for compliance with any request made by any agency of the United Nations Organisation for making available Indian personnel for providing consultancy services on its behalf in technical co-operation or technical assistance programme in any country; or (b) that such person is likely to suffer undue hardship if he is not so exempted. (3) An application for exemption under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall set out clearly all the particulars on the basis of which such exemption is applied for. (4) Every such application shall be disposed of by the Director General as expeditiously as possible and where the Director General refuses to grant the exemption applied for, he shall record his reasons therefor and communicate the same to the applicant. (5) Where, within a period of forty-five days of the date of receipt of any such application, the Director General does not refuse to grant the exemption applied for, or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the Director General shall be deemed to have granted the exemption applied for. (6) Where the Director General refuses to grant the exemption applied for, the applicant may prefer an appeal against such refusal to the Central Government within thirty days of the receipt of the order of the Director General refusing the exemption and the Central Government may make such orders as it deems fit: Provided that the Central Government may admit any appeal after the expiry of the period aforesaid, if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time: Provided further that no order confirming the order of the Director General shall be made under this sub-section without giving the appellant an opportunity to represent his case.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 87D--> Every citizen of India who obtains, on or after the appointed day, a certificate, shall furnish, in such form and at such intervals as may be prescribed, particulars of the certificate or certificates obtained by him and of his employment.] Classification of seaman and prescription of minimum manning scale
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 88--> The Central Government may make rules for the classification of seamen other than ship's officers into different categories and for the prescription of the minimum manning scale of seamen of such categories for ships; and different scales may be prescribed for different classes of ships. Shipping masters
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 88A--> In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance" means a declaration issued by the Director-General of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in this behalf, in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements and standards set out in the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention; (b) "Maritime Labour Certificate" means the certificate issued by the Director-General of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in this behalf, in accordance with the provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention; (c) "Maritime Labour Convention" means the International Convention of Maritime Labour Organisation on Maritime Labour Standards signed in Geneva on the 23rd February, 2006; (d) "seafarer" means any person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on board a sea going ship, but does not include- (i) the employment or engagement or work on board in any capacity of any person in a ship of war; or (ii) any Government ship used for military or non-commercial purposes. Inserted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 88B--> (1) The provisions relating to maritime labour standards as contained in the Maritime Labour Convention, shall apply to all seafarers and ships engaged in commercial activities, but does not include- (a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland waters or waters within, or closely adjacent to, sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating to ports apply; (b) ships engaged in fishing activities; (c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks; (d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Director-General of Shipping, by order, extend the provisions of the said sub-section to ships not engaged in commercial activities with such exceptions and modifications as it may consider necessary. Inserted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 89--> It shall be the duty of shipping masters- (a) to superintend and facilitate the engagement and discharge of seamen in the manner provided in this Act; (b) to provide means for securing the presence on board at the proper times of the seamen who are so engaged; (c) to facilitate the making of apprenticeship to the sea service; (d) to hear and decide disputes under section 132 between a master, owner or agent of a ship and any of the crew of the ship; 1 [(dd) to transmit the complaint of any dispute of a foreign seaman of a vessel, registered in a country other than India, in Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner or agent, to the competent authority of the country of registration and a copy of such complaint shall be forwarded to the Director General, International Labour Organisation Office;] (e) to perform such other duties relating to seamen, apprentices and merchant ships as are for the time being committed to them by or under this Act. [(dd) to transmit the complaint of any dispute of a foreign seaman of a vessel, registered in a country other than India, in Indian territorial waters, with the master, owner or agent, to the competent authority of the country of registration and a copy of such complaint shall be forwarded to the Director General, International Labour Organisation Office;] Inserted by Act 9 of 1998, section 2 (w.e.f. 26-9-1997).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 90--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the fees which shall be payable upon all engagements and discharges effected before a shipping master. (2) Scales of the fees payable for the time being shall be conspicuously placed in the shipping office, and a shipping master may refuse to proceed with any engagement or discharge unless the fees payable thereon are first paid. (3) Every owner or master of a ship engaging or discharging any seamen in a shipping office or before a shipping master, shall pay to the shipping master the whole of the fees hereby made payable in respect of such engagement or discharge, and may, for the purpose of reimbursing himself in part, deduct in respect of each such engagement or dishrag from the wages of all persons (except apprentices) so engaged or discharged, and retain any sums not exceeding such sums as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf: Provided that, if in any case the sums which may be so deducted exceed the amount of they fee payable by him, such excess shall be paid by him to the shipping master in addition to such fee. (4) For the purpose of determining the fees to be paid upon the engagement and discharge of seamen belonging to foreign-going ships which halve running agreements as hereinafter provided, the crew shall be considered to be engaged when the agreement is first singed, and to be discharged when the agreement finally terminates; and all intermediate engagements and discharges shall be considered to be engagements and discharges of single seamen. Apprenticeship to the sea service
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 91--> All shipping master shall give to persons desirous of apprenticing 1 [young person’s not under the age of sixteen years] to the sea service or requiring apprentices not under that age for the sea service such assistance as may be in their power, and may receive from those persons such fees as the Central Government may fix. Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "boys not under fifteen years of age".
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 92--> (1) 1 [The apprenticeship of any person to the sea service shall be by contract in writing between the apprentice or if he is a young person, then, on his behalf by his guardian, and the master or owner of the ship requiring the apprentice.] (2) Every such contract shall be executed in duplicate in the prescribed form and in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf. (3) Every such contract shall be executed in the presence of , and shall be attested by, the shipping master of the port, who shall, before the execution of the contract, satisfy himself- (a) that the intended apprentice- (i) understands the contends and provisions of the contract; (ii) freely consents to be bound; (iii) has attained the age of 2 [sixteen years]; and (iv) is in possession of a certificate to the effect that he is physically fit for sea service; (b) if the intended apprentice is a 3 [an young person], that his guardian's consent has been obtained to his being bound as an apprentice. (4) Every such contract made in India and every assignment, alteration or cancellation thereof, and where the apprentice bound dies or deserts, the fact of the death or desertion shall be recorded in the manner specified in section 93. Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "1. The apprenticeship of any boy to the sea service shall be by contract in writing between the apprentice or on his behalf by his guardian, if the boy is a minor, and the master or owner of the ship requiring the apprentice." Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "fifteen years". Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "minor".
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 93--> For the purpose if the record- (a) the master or owner of the ship to whom an apprentice to the as service is bound shall transmit the contract executed in duplicate within seven days of the execution thereof, to the shipping master, who shall record one copy and endorse on the other the fact that it has been recorded and redeliver it to the master or owner; (b) the master or owner shall notify any assignment or cancellation of the contract and the death or desertion of the apprentice to the shipping master, within seven days of the occurrence, if it occurs with India, or, as soon as circumstances permit, if it occurs elsewhere.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 94--> (1) The master of a ship shall, before carrying an apprentice to sea from a port in India, cause the apprentice to appear before the shipping master before whom the crew are engaged, and shall produce to him the contract by which the apprentice is bound, and every assigned thereof. (2) The name of the apprentice, with the date of the contract and of the assignments thereof, if any, and the names of the prostrate which the same have been registered, shall be entered on the agreement with the crew. Seamen's employment offices
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 95--> (1) It shall be the business of the seamen's employment offices- 1 (a) to regulate and control- (i) the supply of such categories of seamen and for such class of ships as may be prescribed; (ii) the recruitment of persons for employment as seamen and the retirement of seamen from such employment; (iii) the promotion of seamen or changes of their categories; (b) to maintain registers of seamen in respect of the categories prescribed under sub-clause (i) of clause (a); (c) to perform such other duties relating to seamen and merchant ships as are, from time to time, committed to them by or under this Act. 2 [...] (2) Where there is in existence at any port a seamen's employment office, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contender in any other provision of this Act, no person shall receive or accept to be entered on board any ship of the class prescribed under sub-section (1) any seamen of the categories prescribed under that sub-section, unless such seaman has been supplied by such seamen's employment office. (3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of enabling seamen's employment offices effectively to exercise their powers under this Act; and in particular and, without prejudice to the generality of such power, such rules may provide for- (a) consultation with respect to any specified matter by seamen's employment offices with such advisory boards or other authorities as the Central Government may think fit to constitute or specify in this behalf; 3 (b) the levy and collection of such fees as may be specified for any seamen's employment office for registering the name of any seaman in any register maintained by it; (c) the issue of directions by the Central Government to any seamen's employment office with reference to the exercise of any of its powers;(ca) the conditions under which the recruitment and placement service to recruit and place seafarers abroad; (cb) the circumstances and conditions under which licence to be suspended or withdrawn; (cc) the conditions under which seafarers’ personal data to be processed by the recruitment and placement services including the collection, storage, combination and communication of such data to third parties;] (d) the suppression of any seamen's employment office which fails to comply with any such direction. 4 [Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,- (a) “recruitment and placement service” means any person, company, institution, agency or other organisation, in the public or private sector which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf of employers or placing seafarers with employers; (b) 5 [...]] Substituted by Act 63 of 2002, section 4, for clauses (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). Sub-section (2) omitted by Act 63 of 2002, section 4 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). Substituted by Act 63 of 2002, section 4, for clauses (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). Inserted by Act 63 of 2002, section 4 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003). Omitted by the 										Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014									. 									Prior to the omission the text read as "“seafarer” means any person who fulfills the conditions to be employed or engaged in any capacity on board a sea-going ship other than a government ship used for military or non-commercial purposes."
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 96--> (1) A person shall not engage or supply a seaman to be entered on board any ship in India unless that person is the owner, master or mate of the ship, or is the agent of the owner or is bona fide the servant and in the constant employ of the owner, or is a director of a seamen's employment office, or a shipping master. (2) A person shall not employ for the purpose of engaging or supplying a seaman to be entered on board any ship in India, any person unless that person is the owner, master or mate of the ship, or is the agent of the owner or is bona fide the servant and in the constant employ of the owner, or is a director of a seamen's employment office, or a shipping master. (3) A person shall not receive or accept to be entered on board any ship any seaman, if that person knows that the seaman has been engaged or supplied in contravention of this section or section 95.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 97--> 1 A person shall not demand or receive, either directly or indirectly, from any seaman, or from any person seeking employment as a seaman, or from any person on his behalf, any remuneration whatever for providing him with employment, other than the fees authorised by this Act. (2) It shall be the duty of the company employing or proposing to employ person as seaman to ensure that no money has been demanded or received by any person or company or organisation including the union purporting to represent the interests of seamen by way of any remuneration or donation or fees or compulsory subscription of any kind attributable to employment of such person as seaman.] Substituted by Act 63 of 2002, section 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section [97A--> There shall be no discrimination between seamen,- (a) on the ground of their membership or lack of membership in any particular union purporting to represent the interests of seamen and membership in such union shall not be pre-requisite condition; (b) on the basis of training institute from where they obtained training or place of issue of their continuous discharge certificates, for their recruitment and engagement on board any ship.] Inserted by Act 63 of 2002, section 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-2003).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 98--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, seamen generally or any category of seamen in particular shall not be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship or in any class of ships so specified, unless each one of them possesses the prescribed qualifications. (2) Except as otherwise provided under the rules made under sub-section (3), no person shall engage or carry to sea any seaman to work in any capacity in any ship or in any class of ships specified in this behalf by the Central Government, unless the seaman is in possession of a certificate in the prescribed form granted by the prescribed authority to the effect that he is physically fit to be employed in that capacity. (3) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this section; and, in particular, and, without prejudice to the generality of such power, any rules so made may provide for- (a) the courses of training to be pursued, the vocational standards to be attained or the tests to be passed by seamen generally or by any class of seamen in particular; (b) the standard of physical fitness required of seamen, different standards being laid down, if necessary, for different classes of seamen having regards to the age of the seamen to be examined or the nature of the duties to be performed by them; (c) the nature of the medical examination of seamen, the authorities by which the examination shall be conducted, and the fees payable therefor; (d) the form and contends of medical certificates and the period of their validity; (e) the re-examination by such medical authority as may be specified of person who have been refused medical certificates of physical fitness in the first instance and the fees payable for such re-examination; (f) the circumstances in which, or the conditions subject to which, any seaman or class of seamen, or any ship or class of ships, may be exempted from the operation of sub-section (2).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 99--> No person shall engage or carry to sea any seaman under this Act in any ship, except a home-trade ship of less than two hundred tons gross, from any port in India unless the seaman is in possession of a certificate of discharge or a continuous certificate of discharge issued under this Part.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section [99A--> (1) No person shall engage or carry to sea any seafarer in any ship, unless the seafarer is in possession of seafarer’s identity document. (2) The seafarer’s identity document under sub-section (1) shall be issued in such form and manner and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed. 2 [...]] Inserted by Act 40 of 2007, section 5 (w.e.f. 1-3-2008). Omitted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the omission the text read as "Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, “seafarer” means any person who is employed or engaged or works in any capacity on board a sea going ship ordinarily engaged in maritime navigation, other than a ship of war."
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 100--> The master of every Indian ship, except a home-trade ship of less than two hundred tons gross, shall enter into an agreement (in this Act called the agreement with the crew) in accordance with this Act with every seaman whom he engages in, and carries to sea as one of his crew from, any port in India.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 101--> (1) An agreement with the crew shall be in the prescribed form, and shall be dated at the time of the first signature thereof, and shall be 1 signed by the master before any seaman signs the same. (2) The agreement with the crew shall contain as terms thereof the following particulars, namely:- (a) the name of the ship or ships on board which the seaman undertakes to serve; (b) either the nature and, as far as practicable, the duration of the intended voyage or engagement or the maximum period of the voyage or engagement, and the places or parts of the world, if any, to which the voyage or engagement is not to extend; (c) the number and description of the crew of different categories in each department; 2 [(cc) hours of work and rest in a week, as may be prescribed.] (d) the time at which each seaman is to be on board or to begin work; (e) the capacity in which each seaman is to serve; (f) the amount of wages which each seaman is to receive; 3 [(ff) the entitlement for leave, as may be prescribed;] (g) a scale of the provisions which are to be furnished to each seaman, such scale being not less than the scale fixed by the Central Government and published in the Official Gazette; (h) a scale of warm clothing and a scale of additional provisions to be issued to each seaman during periods of employment in specified cold regions; (i) any regulations as to conduct on board and a to fines or other lawful punishments for misconduct, which have been sanctioned by the Central Government as regulations proper to be adopted, and which the parties agree to adopt; (j) payment of compensation for personal injury or death caused by accident 4 [arising out of employment or] in the course of employment; (k) where it is agreed that the services of any seaman shall end at any port not in India, a stipulation to proved him either fit employment on board some other ship bound to the port at which he was shipped or to such other port in India as may be agreed upon, or a passage to some port in India free of charge or on such other terms as may be agreed upon; 5 [(kk) the terms of agreement with the crew shall be determined after consultation with such organisations in India as the Central Government may, by order, notify to be the most representative of the employers of seamen and of seamen.] (l) stipulations relating to such other matters as may be prescribed. (3) The agreement shall provide that in the event of a disputes arising outside India between the master, owner or agent of a ship and a seaman in respect of any matter touching the agreement, such dispute shall be referred to the Indian consular officer whose decision thereon shall be binding on the parties until the return of the ship t the port in India at which the seaman is to be discharged: Provided that in the case of a ship other than an Indian ship, no such dispute shall be referred to the Indian consular officer if such reference is contrary to the rules of international law. (4) The agreement with the crew shall be so framed as to admit of stipulations, to be adopted at the will of the master and seaman in each case (not being inconsistent with the provisions of this Act) respecting the advance and allotment of wages and may contain any other stipulation which are not contrary to law. Substituted by Act 41 of 1984, section 4, for “signed by the master” (w.e.f. 15-7-1985) Inserted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Inserted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "arising out of and". Inserted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 102--> 1 If the master of a ship registered at a port outside India has an agreement with the crew made in due form according to the law of that or of the ;port in which her crew were engaged and engages a seaman in any port in India, not being the holder of a certificate of discharge or a continuous certificate of discharge issued in India, the seaman may sign the agreement so made, and it shall not be necessary for him to sign an agreement under this Act. Substituted by Act 41 of 1984, section 5 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985).
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 103--> (1) The following provisions shall have effect with respect to every agreement made in India with the crew of an Indian ship, namely:- (a) the agreement shall, subject to the provisions of this Act as to substitutes, be signed by each seaman in the presence of a shipping master; (b) the shipping master shall cause the agreement to be read over and explained to each seaman, in a language understood by him or shall otherwise ascertain that each seaman understands the same before he signs it, and shall attest each signature; (c) when the crew is first engaged, the agreement shall be signed in duplicate, and one part shall be retained by the shipping master, and the other part shall be delivered to the master and shall contain a special place or form for the descriptions and signatures of substitutes or persons engaged subsequently to the first departure of the ship; (d) when a substitute is engaged in the place of a seaman who has duly signed the agreement and whose services are within twenty-four hours of the ship's putting to sea lost by death, desertion or other unforeseen cause, the engagement shall, if practicable, be made before a shipping master, and if not practicable, the master shall, before the ship puts to sea, if practicable, and, if not, as soon afterwards as possible, cause the agreement to be read over and explained to the substitute; and the substitute shall thereupon sign the same in the presence of a witness, who shall attest the signature. (2) In the case of an agreement made in India with the crew of a foreign-going Indian ship, the following provisions shall have effect in addition to the provisions specified in sub-section (1).namely:-- (a) the agreement may be made for a voyage of the whip or, if the voyage of the ship average less than six months in duration, may be made to extend over two or more voyages, and agreements so made are in this Act referred to as running agreements; (b) a running agreement may be made to extend over tow or more voyages s that it shall terminate either within six months from the date on which it was executed, or n the first arrival of the ship at her port of destination in India after the expiration of that period, or on the discharge of cargo consequent upon such arrival, whichever of these dates shall be the latest: Provided that no such running agreement shall continue in force, if, after the expiration of such period of six months as aforesaid, the ship proceeds on a voyage from a port outside India to any other such port which is not on the direct route or a customary route to her port of destination in India; (c) on every return to a port in India before the final termination of a running agreement, the master shall discharge or engage before the shipping master at such port any seaman whom he is required by law so to discharge or engage, and shall upon every such return endorse on the agreement a statement (as the case may be) either that no such discharges or engagements have been made or are intended to be made before the ship leaves port, or that all those made have made as required by law; (d) the master shall deliver the running agreement so endorsed to the shipping master, and the shipping mater shall if the provisions of this Act relating to agreement have been complied with, sign the endorsement and return the agreement to the master. (3) In the case of an agreement made in India with the crew of a home-trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more, the following ;revisions shall have effect in addition to the provisions specified in sub-section (1), namely:- (a) the agreement shall not be for a period longer than six months, but if the period for which the agreement was entered into expires while the ship is not in man Indian port, the agreement shall continue in force until the ship is again in an Indian port; Provided that, except with the consent in writing of the seaman concerned, the agreement shall not continue in force for more than three months after the expiration of the period for which it was entered into; (b) an agreement for service in two or more ships belonging to the same owner may be made by the owner instead of by the master, and the provisions of this Act with respect to the making of the agreement shall apply accordingly.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 104--> (1) When a running agreement has been made with the crew of a foreign-going Indian ship and the ship arrives after the expiration of a period of six months from the date on which it was executed at a port of destination in India which is not the port at which the crew have agreed to be discharged, the master may, with the previous sanction of the shipping master, renew the agreement for the voyage from such port of destination to the port in India at which the crew have agreed to be discharged. (2) If the master of the ship is required by the shipping master to renew the agreement as aforesaid and refuses so to renew it, any expenses which may be incurred by the Government for the subsistence of the crew and their conveyance to the port at which they have agreed to be discharged shall be a charged upon the ship, and shall be recoverable as if they were expenses incurred in respect of distressed seamen under the provisions of this Act.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 105--> 1 The master of every foreign-going Indian ship and of every home-trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross r more, the crew of which has been engaged before a shipping master, shall, before finally leaving the port where the engagement took place, sign and send to the nearest shipping master a full and accurate statement in the prescribed form, of every change which has taken place in his crew, and that statement shall be admissible in evidence. 2 [(2) A copy of the statement referred to in sub-section (1) shall also be sent to the seaman’s employment office concerned.] Section 105 re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 41 of 1984, section 6 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985). Inserted by Act 41 of 1984, section 6 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 106--> (1) In the case of a foreign-going Indian ship or a home-trade Indian ship of two hundred tons gross or more, on the due execution of an agreement with the crew in accordance with this Act, and also when, in the case of a foreign-going Indian ship, the agreement is a running agreement, on compliance by the master before the second and every subsequent voyage made after the first commencement of the agreement with the provisions of this Act respecting that agreement, the shipping master shall grant the master of the ship a certificate to that effect. (2) The master of every such ship shall, before proceeding to sea, produce that certificate to the customs collector whose duty it is to grant a port clearance. (3) No customs collector shall clear any such ship outwards without the production of such certificate, and, if any such ship attempts to go to sea without a clearance, the customs collector may detain her until such certificate as aforesaid is produced. (4) The master of every such ship shall, within forty-eight hours after the ship's arrival at the port in India at which the crew is to be discharged, deliver such agreement to a shipping master at the port; and such shipping master shall thereupon give to the master a certificate of such delivery; and no customs collector shall clear any such ship inwards without the production of such certificate.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 107--> The master shall, at the commencement of every voyage or engagement, cause a legible copy of the agreement and, if necessary, a certified translation thereof in a language understood by the majority of the crew (omitting the signatures) , to be placed or posted up in such part of the ship as to be accessible to the crew.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 108--> Every erasure, interlineation or alteration in any agreement with the crew (except additions made for the purpose of shipping substitutes or persons engaged subsequently to the first departure of the ship)1 shall be wholly inoperative, unless proved to have been made with the consent of-- (a) all the persons interested in such erasure, interlineation or alteration by the written attestation, if made in India, of some shipping master, or customs collector; or (b) an Indian Consular Officer, if made out of India. Employment of young persons Substituted by Act 41 of 1984, section 7 (w.e.f. 15-7-1985)
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 109--> (1) No person under the age of sixteen years shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship. (2) (a) No young person shall be engaged in night work. (b) The period of night work shall be such, as may be prescribed: Provided that the Director-General of Shipping,- (i) for giving effective training; or (ii) for performing a specific nature of duty, at night, may, by order permit engagement of any young person in night work which shall not be detrimental to the health or well-being of such young person. Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "Employment of children; No person under *[fourteen] years of age shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship, except- (a) in a school ship, or training ship, in accordance with the prescribed conditions; or (b) in a ship in which all persons employed are members of one family; or (c) in a home-trade ship of less than two hundred tons gross; or (d) where such person is to be employed on nominal wages and will be in the charge of his father or other adult near male relative. *Substituted by Act 61 of 1986, section 25, for “fifteen’ (w.e.f. 23-12-1986) .
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 110--> Omitted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the omission the text read as "Engagement of young persons as trimmers or stokers; (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-sections (2) and (3), no young person shall be engaged or carried to sea to work as a trimmer or stoker in any ship. (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply- (a) to any work of trimming or stoking done by a young person in a school ship or training ship in accordance with the prescribed conditions; or (b) to any work of trimming moor stoking done by a young person in a ship which is mainly propelled otherwise than by steam; or (c) to the engagement or carrying to sea of a person over sixteen years of age to work as a trimmer or stoker on a coasting ship, provided he is employed in accordance with the prescribed conditions. (3) Where in any port a trimmer or stoker is required for any ship other than a coasting ship, and no person over eighteen years of age is available, two young persons over sixteen years of age may be engaged and carried to sea to do the work which would otherwise have been done by one person over eighteen years of age. (4) There shall be included in every agreement with the crew in ship to which this section applies a short summary of the provisions of this section.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 111--> (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), no young person shall be engaged or carried to sea to work in any capacity in any ship, unless there has been delivered to the master a certificate granted by a prescribed authority that the young person is physically fit to be employed in that capacity. (2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply,- (a) to the employment of a young person in a ship in which all persons employed are members of one family; or (b) where the shipping master, on the ground of urgency, has authorised a young person to be engaged and carried to sea, without the certificate required by sub-section (1) being delivered to the master, and the young person is not employed beyond the first port at which the ship in which he is so engaged calls except in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1). (3) A certificate of physical fitness required under this section shall remain in force for one year only from the date on which it is granted.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 112--> There shall be included an every agreement with the crew of every Indian ship and every other ship which engages young persons in India, a list of young persons who are members of the crew, together with particulars of the dates of their birth, and, in the case of any such ship where there is no agreement, the master shall keep a register of young persons with particulars of the dates of their birth and of the dates on which they became or ceased to be members of the crew.
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 113--> The Central Government may make rules for the purposes of employment of young persons, prescribing- (a) the authorities, whose certificates of physical fitness shall be accepted for the purposes of section 111; (b) the form of register of young persons to be maintained in ships where there is no agreement with the crew. Substituted by the Merchant Shipping (Second Amendment) Act, 2014. Prior to the amendment the text read as "Power to make rules respecting employment of young persons; (1) The Central Government may make rules prescribing- (a) the conditions of employment of young persons in any capacity in school ships and training ships, and the authorities by whom and the manner in which the inspection of their work shall be carried out; (b) the conditions of employment of young persons as trimmers or stokers in coasting ships; (c) the authorities whose certificates of physical fitness shall be accepted for the purposes of section 111; and (d) the form of the register of young persons to be maintained in ships where there is no agreement with the crew. (2) Rules under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be made after consultation with such organisations in India as the Central Government may consider to be most representative of the employers of seamen and of seamen. Engagement of seamen by masters of ships other than Indian ships
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958_Section 114--> (1) When the master of a ship other than an Indian ship engages a seaman at any port in India to proceed to any port outside India, he shall enter into an agreement with such seaman, and the agreement shall be made before a shipping master in the manner provided by this Act for the making of agreements in the case of foreign-going Indian hips. (2) All the provisions of this Act respecting the form of such agreements and the stipulations to be contained in them and the making and signing of the same, shall be applicable to the engagement of such seaman. (3) The master of a ship other than an Indian ship hall give to the shipping master a bond with the security of some approved person resident in India for such amount as may be fixed by the Central Government in respect of each seaman engaged by him at any port in India and conditioned for the due performance of such agreement and stipulations, and for the repayment to the Central Government of all expenses which may be incurred by it in respect of any such seaman who is discharged or left behind at any port out of India and becomes distressed and is relieved under the provisions of this Act: Provided that the shipping master may waive the execution of a bond under this section where the owner of the ship has an agent at any port in India and such agent accepts liability in respect of all matters for which the master of the ship would be liable if he were to execute a bond under this section or may accept from the agent such security as may be approved by the Central Governmental. (4) The fees fixed under section 90 shall be payable in respect of weary such engagement, and deductions from the wages of seamen so engaged may be made to the extent and in the manner allowed under the said section 90.
