Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 for certain purposes. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 for the purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted as follows :-
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939.1 (2) It shall come into force at once ; but sections 2 and 3 shall be deemed to have taken effect on the 1st day of July, 1939. Received the assent of the Governor General on the 29th September, 1939.
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 2--> In sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), after the word " but " the following shall be inserted, namely:- " section 38 and Chapter IV shall not have effect until the 1st day of April, 1940, or such earlier date as the Provincial Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint, and "..
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 3--> In section 134 of the said Act,- (a) for sub-section (2) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914, rules made by any Provincial Government under section 11 of that Act, other than rules prescribing the fees payable in respect of the grant or renewal of licences to drive motor vehicles, shall, whether or not they are consistent with this Act but subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this section, continue to be in force for a period of nine months from the commencement of this Act, unless before the expiry of that period they are cancelled by the Provincial Government by notification in the official Gazette." ; (b) after sub-section (4) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(5) While, under the provisions of sub-section (2), any rules made by a Provincial Government under section 11 of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914, continue to be in force- (?) section 112 shall be construed as if after the words " any rule made thereunder " there were inserted the words and figure " or of any rule made under the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914 and continuing in force ", and (b) section 113 shall be construed as if after the words " under this Act ", wherever they occur, there were inserted the words and figure " or under any rule made under the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914 and continuing in force ".
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 4--> In the First Schedule to the said Act,- (?) in Section 111 of A,- (i) for question (d) the following questions shall be substituted, namely:- " (d) Can you readily distinguish the pigmentary colours red and green ? (e) Do you suffer from night blindness?" ; (ii) questions (e) and (f) shall be relettered as (xxx)and (g), respectively; (b) in Form C, for question, (b) in paragraph 4 the following questions shall be substituted, namely:- " (b) Can the applicant readily distinguish the pigmentary colours red and green ? " (c) Does the applicant suffer from night blindness ? " and question (c) shall be relettered as (d).
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 5--> In Part I of the Second Schedule to the said Act, for item 6 the following item shall be substituted, namely :- " Inability readily to distinguish the pigmentary colours red and green."
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 6--> In the Sixth Schedule to the said Act, after the entry relating to Ajmer-Merwara the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "Andaman and Nicobar Islands........AN. "
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 7--> In Part A of the Ninth Schedule to the said Act, for the entry relating to Sign No. 7 (including the direction as to colour so far as it relates to Sign No. 7) the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- " No. 7 Use of Sound Signals prohibited Image 
