Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section Preamble--> Whereas, it is expedient to regulate the use of Weights and Measures of Capacity in Mysore. Her Highness the Maharani-Regent is pleased to enact as follows -
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902. It extends to the whole of Mysore; and it shall come into force at once.
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 2--> (1) The Government may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribe either generally for Mysore or for any specified part thereof, the standards of weights and measure of capacity that shall be followed therein. (2) Copies of standards prescribed as aforesaid shall be kept in the Office of the Inspector-General of Police, in the Offices of the Deputy Commissioners of Districts and in such other offices as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Government and shall at all reasonable times be available for public inspection. Sections 2, 3 and 3-A substituted by Act No. IX of 1927
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 3--> 1 [(1)] The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that, after a date to be fixed therein, only certified weights or measures of capacity or both shall be used in all dealings and contracts in any specified area and may in like manner alter or revoke such direction: Provided that such direction shall not apply to dealings and contracts effected otherwise than by weight or measure of capacity and those based on the British, the Metric, the Indian Railway or any other system of weight or measure of capacity for the exclusion of which provision is made in the rules. [(2) A weight or measure of capacity shall be certified only when it has been manufactured by the Government or by a manufacturer duly licensed under this Act.]2 Section 3 renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act No. XLIX of 1943 Sub-section (2) inserted by Act No. XLIX of 1943
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 3A--> The Government may make rules to regulate the following matters - (a) the shapes, dimensions and designations of all or any of the weights and measures of capacity that may be permitted to be used and the materials of which the same shall be made; (b) the method of testing weights and measures of capacity and of certifying to their correctness by means of stamping or otherwise and the fees to be levied therefor; 1 [(c) the charges, terms and conditions, subject to which licenses may be granted to manufacturers of weights and measures of capacity;] 2 [(d)] the agency to be employed, the powers and duties of such agency and generally any other matters connected with the carrying out of the purposes of this Act.] Clause (c) inserted by Act No. XLIX of 1943 Existing clause (c) renumbered as clause (d) by Act No. XLIX of 1943
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 4--> Any weight or measure of capacity, which is not in accordance with a copy of the standard of weight or measure of capacity kept under 1 [Section 2(2) shall be deemed to be a false weight or measure of capacity within the meaning of Chapter XIII of the Indian Penal Code. Substituted by Act No. IX of 1927
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 5--> Whoever manufacturers or uses any weight or measure of capacity in contravention of the provisions of Section 3 shall, on conviction by a Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf, be punishable with fine which may extend to Rs. 50 and for every such subsequent manufacture or use, with fine which may extend to Rs. 100]. Section 5 substituted by Act No. XLIX of 1943
Mysore Weights and Measures Act, 1902_Section 6--> Whoever knowingly counterfeits any mark prescribed by the rules for certification under Section 3 shall, on conviction, by a Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.] Section 6 inserted by Act No. IX of 1927 
