Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala AN ACT to re-enact certain enactments WHEREAS the President of India had under article 356 of the Constitution, declared by Proclamation dated the 1st November, 1956, that the powers of the Legislature of the State of Kerala shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament; AND WHEREAS Parliament had under the Kerala State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1956, conferred on the President the powers of the Legislature of the said State to make laws; AND WHEREAS in pursuance of the said powers, the President enacted the laws mentioned in the Schedule; AND WHEREAS the said Proclamation has ceased to operate; AND WHEREAS under clause (2) of Article 357 of the Constitution, the laws mentioned in the Schedule will cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of one year after the said Proclamation has ceased to operate, unless sooner re-enacted by Act of the appropriate Legislature; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to re-enact the said laws with suitable modifications; BE it enacted in the Ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958 (2) It shall come into force at once.
Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala The Acts specified in the Schedule are hereby re-enacted with the modifications specified in section 3 and in the fourth column of the Schedule.
Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) The words "Enacted by the President in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India" occurring before the long title of Acts Nos.1 and 2 of 1957 specified in the Schedule and the words "Enacted by the President in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India" occurring before the long title of each of the remaining Acts specified in the Schedule shall be omitted. (2) The words beginning with "In exercise of the powers" and ending with "the President is pleased to enact as follows:-" occurring before section 1 of each of the Acts specified in the Schedule shall be omitted.
Kerala Re-enacting Act, 1958_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Kerala (See section 2) Year No. Short title Modifications (1) (2) (3) (4) 1957 1 The Kerala Civil Courts Act, 1957 Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to civil courts in the State of Kerala, subordinate to the High Court of Kerala;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1957 2 The Legislative Assembly (Removal of Disqualifications) Amendment Act, 1957. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Legislative Assembly (removal of Disqualifications) Act, 1951, for the purpose hereinafter appearing;  BE it enacted as follows:- 1957 3 The Travancore Cochin Interpretation and General Clauses (amendment) Act, 1959. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Travancore Cochin Interpretation and General Clauses Act, 1125, for the purposes hereinafter appearing;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1957 5 The Code of Criminal Procedure (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1957. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, in its application to the State of Kerala, for the purpose hereinafter appearing;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1957 6 The Kerala Road Transport Services (Validation) Act, 1957. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is necessary to validate the running and operation of certain road transport services by the Government;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1957 7 The Kerala Board of Revenue Act, 1957 Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient to constitute a Board of Revenue for the State of Kerala and to define its powers and functions;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1957 8 The Kerala Small Cause Courts Act, 1957. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to courts of Small causes;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 1157 9 The Kerala Khadi and village Industries Board Act, 1957. Before section 1, the following shall be inserted, namely:-  ?Preamble.-Whereas it is expedient to provide for the organisation development and regulation of Khadi and Village industries in the State of Kerala and to constitute a Board to carry out the said objects;  BE it enacted as follows:-? 
