Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for certain measures and safeguards for the protection of the ecological balance in the protected area of the Silent Valley Hydro Electric Project in the Mannarghat Taluk of the Palghat district of the State of Kerala. Whereas it is necessary to provide for certain measures and safeguards for the protection of the ecological balance in the protected area of the Silent Valley Hydro Electric Project in the Mannarghat taluk of the Palghat district of the State of Kerala and for matters incidental or ancillary thereto; Be it enacted in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala This Act may be called the Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 19791 . Published in Kerala Gazette Ex. No. 235 dated 29-3-1979.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Committee" means the Silent Valley Environmental Monitoring Committee constituted under S. 3; (b) "full capacity contour" means the contour of full reservoir level of the project; (c) "monitoring operations" means the operations for collecting, observing and interpreting the data relating to the environment of the protected area and the changes thereto; (d) "monitoring station" means a monitoring station established under section 4; (e) "monitoring team" means the monitoring team appointed by the Government under section 4; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (g) "project" means the Silent Valley Hydro Electric Project in the Mannarghat taluk of the Palghat district of the State: (h) "project area" means the submersible area below the full capacity contour, the project dam site, the power intake and their permanent appurtenant works and such other areas within the protected area as may specified by the Government by notification in the Gazette, in consultation with the Committee and the Project Authority, as being required for the execution and operation of the project; (i) "Project Authority" means the Kerala State Electricity Board or such other authority as may be specified by the Government in this behalf by notification in the Gazette; (j) "protected area" means the area comprised in the Silent Valley Reserved Forest notified under the Kerala Forest Act, 1962 (4 of 1962); (k) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Kerala Forest Act, 1962 (4 of 1962), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall, in consultation with the National Committee on Environmental Planning and Co-ordination, by notification in the Gazette, constitute a committee by the name "the Silent Valley Environmental Monitoring Committee" for the purpose of exercising the powers and performing the functions of the Committee under this Act. (2) The functions of the Committee shall be- (a) to advise on the monitoring of the environmental impacts of the project and the ecological aspects of the protected area; and (b) to ensure the implementation of the environmental safeguards provided in this Act.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall, on the recommendation of the Committee, establish one or more monitoring station or monitoring stations in the protected area for the purpose of on-the-spot monitoring operations. (2) The monitoring operations shall be carried out by a monitoring team appointed by the Government on the recommendation of the Committee. (3) The monitoring team shall consist of such number of persons possessing the prescribed qualifications as may be decided by the Government and shall include representatives of the National Committee on Environmental Planning and Co-ordination. (4) In carrying out its functions under this Act, the monitoring team shall follow such instructions and advice as may be issued to it by the Committee.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala The expenses on account of the Committee, the monitoring team, the monitoring stations and the monitoring operations shall be met by the Government.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala (1) Roads shall not be constructed in the protected area except along with or within the full capacity contour or in the project area. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Project Authority shall be responsible for the construction of roads and the transportation of the staff, labourers and other persons engaged in the construction of the works in connection with the project, in the protected area. (3) Construction of colonies, staff quarters, offices, workshops and other works for essential services, within the protected area, required for the execution of the project, shall be subject to the following restrictions, namely:- (a) site selected for the purpose shall be such that deforestation shall be the minimum: and (b) only the minimum area necessary for the purpose, as may be decided by the committee, shall be utilised. (4) No such colonies shall be established outside the full capacity contour or the project area except in consultation with the Committee.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala No forests shall be felled in the protected area except those within the full capacity contour or the project area.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person engaged in the construction of the project shall keep cattle or goats or let out any animal into the protected area for grazing. (2) No person referred to in sub-section (1) shall, without the previous sanction of the Project Authority, bring any land in the protected area under cultivation or put up any structure, temporary or permanent, in the protected area.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall carry on quarrying in, or remove earth or soil from, the protected area, except in or from the area within the full capacity contour or the project area. (2) The Project Authority shall take all necessary soil conservation measures in the quarries and burrow pits and work and buildings sites inside the protected area.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala (1) After the completion of the construction of the project, only the minimum number of staff required for the maintenance of the project, as determined by the Project Authority, shall be allowed to stay in the protected area. (2) A person who is allowed to stay in the protected area under sub-section (1)- (a) shall not keep cattle or goats and shall not let out any animal into the forest for grazing; (b) shall not bring any land under cultivation.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala All persons engaged in the construction of the project in the protected area and all persons allowed to stay in the protected area shall assist in measures to protect the forest in the protected area from fire, when required to do so by any forest officer.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala The Project Authority shall not carry out any survey or other similar operations which are required to be carried out in the protected area outside the full capacity contour, without the prior concurrence of the monitoring team.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall enter into the protected area without an identity card or pass issued by the Project Authority or any forest officer or other officer authorised in that behalf by the Committee. (2) Issue of identity cards and passes under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala The Project Authority shall provide and place at the disposal of the Kerala Forest Department, funds for compensatory afforestation of an area equivalent to the area comprised in the forests felled for the purpose of the project, and such funds shall be provided before the trees in that area are allowed to be felled.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala The Government may appoint such number of officers and other employees in such manner as may be prescribed to assist the Committee in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions under this Act.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every Forest Officer and every officer authorised by the Government in this behalf shall prevent, and may interfere for the purpose of preventing, the commission of any offence under this Act and shall have power to evict all encroachers and squatters from the protected area and to confiscate or demolish any sheds or other structures put up in the protected area. (2) Forest officers and other officers authorised under sub-section (1) shall have the powers of Police Officers for the purpose of investigations or prevention of offences under this Act and the collection of evidence.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala If any person contravenes any provision of this Act, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by a forest officer or any other officer authorised by the Government in this behalf.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala The members of the Committee, the officers and servants to the Committee and the members of the monitoring team shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of S. 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45 of 1860).
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 21--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, in consultation with the Committee and by notification in the Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is laid, or the session immediately following, the Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the rule or decides that the rule should not be made, the rule thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Act, 1979_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Silent Valley Protected Area (Protection of Ecological Balance) Ordinance, 1978 (31 of 1978), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act had come into force on the 30th day of December, 1978. 
