Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for the control of the sale, supply and distribution of drugs. Whereas it is necessary to provide the control of the sale, supply and distribution of drugs in the State of Travancore-Cochin; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 19501 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Travancore-Cochin. (3) It shall come into force at once. Published in Gazette dated 6th June 1950.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) "dealer" means a person carrying on, either personally or through any other person, the business of selling any drugs, whether wholesale or retail; (b) drug includes all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals, and all substances intended to be used for or in the treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease in human beings or animals, (other than medicines, and substances exclusively used or prepared for use in accordance with the Ayurvedic or Unani systems of medicine) in respect of which a declaration has been made under Section 3; (c) "offer for sale" includes a reference to an intimation by a person of the price proposed by him for a sale of any drug, made by the publication of a price list, by exposing the drug for sale in association with a mark indicating price, by the furnishing of a quotation or otherwise howsoever: (d) "producer" includes a manufacturer. (2) A drug shall be deemed to be in the possession of a person- (i) when it is held on behalf of that, person by another person; (ii) notwithstanding that it is mortgaged to another person.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala The Government may by notification in the Gazette declare any drug to be a drug to which this Act shall apply.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, fix in respect of any drug- (a) the maximum price or rate which may be charged by a dealer or producer; (b) the maximum quantity which may at any one time be possessed by a dealer or producer; (c) the maximum quantity which may in any one transaction be sold to any person. (2) The prices or rates and the quantities fixed in respect of any drug under this Section may be different in different localities or for different classes of dealers or producers.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala No dealer or producer shall- (a) sell, agree to sell, offer for sale or otherwise dispose of to any person any drug for a price or at a rate exceeding the maximum fixed by notification under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 4; (b) have in his possession at any one time a quantity of any drug exceeding the maximum fixed by notification under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 4; or (c) sell, agree to sell or offer for sale to any person in any one transaction a quantity of any article exceeding the maximum fixed by notification under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 4.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall have in possession at any one time a greater quantity of any drug to which this section applies than the quantity necessary for his reasonable needs. (2) This section shall apply only to such drugs as the Government may. by order published in the Gazette, specify for the purpose: Provided that nothing contained in this section, shall apply to a dealer or producer in respect of any drug sold or produced by him.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala Any person having in his possession a quantity of any drug exceeding that permitted by or under this Act shall forthwith report the fact to the Government or other officer empowered in this behalf by the Government, and shall take such action as to the storage, distribution or disposal of the excess quantity as the Government may direct.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala No dealer or producer shall, unless previously authorised to do so by the Government, without sufficient cause refuse to sell to any person any drug within the limits as to quantity, if any, imposed by this Act. Explanation. - The possibility or expectation of obtaining a higher price for a drug at a later date shall not be deemed to be a sufficient cause for the purpose of this section.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every dealer or producer when selling any drug for cash shall, if the amount of the purchase is five rupees or more, in all cases, and. if the amount of the purchase is less than five rupees, when so requested by the purchaser, give to the purchaser a cash memorandum containing particulars of the transaction. (2) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, prescribe the particulars to be contained in any such cash memorandum. (3) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, exempt specified areas, classes of dealers or producers, or classes of drugs from the operation of this section.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may direct dealers or producers in general or any dealer or producer in particular, to mark any drug exposed or intended for sale with the sale prices or to exhibit on the premises a price list of drugs held for sale, and may further give directions as to the manner in which any such direction as aforesaid is to be carried out. (2) No dealer shall destroy, efface or alter any label or mark affixed to a drug and indicating the price marked by a producer.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala Where a dealer or producer makes an offer to enter into a transaction for a consideration to be given as a whole in respect both of a sale of any drug and of some other matter, the dealer or producer making the offer shall state in writing the price which he assigns to that drug, if he is required to do so by any person to whom the offer is made and the offer shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be an offer to sell that drug at the price so stated.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala (1) If in the opinion of the Government it is necessary or expedient so to do, they may, by order in writing- (a) prohibit the disposal of any drug except in such circumstances and under such conditions as may be specified in the order; (b) direct the sale of any drug to any such dealer or class of dealers and in such quantities as may be specified in the order; (c) requisition any drug (whether at the place of import or at any other place); and make such further orders as appear to them to be necessary or expedient in connection with any order issued under this sub-section. (2) Where the Government have requisitioned any drug under sub section (1) they may use or deal with the drug in such manner as may appear to them to be expedient, and may acquire it by serving on the owner thereof or, where the owner is not readily traceable or the ownership is in dispute, by publishing in the Gazette a notice stating that the Government have decided to acquire it in pursuance of this section. (3) Where a notice of acquisition is served on the owner of the drug or published in the Gazette under sub-section (2), then at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so served or published, the drug shall vest in the Government free from any encumbrance and the requisition thereof shall be deemed to have ended. (4) wherever in pursuance of this section the Government reqisition or acquire any drag, the owner thereof shall be paid such compensation as the Government may, by rules prescribe. (5) The Government may, with a view to requisitioning any drug under sub-section (1) or determining the compensation payable under sub-section (4) by order- (a) require any person to furnish to such authority as may be specified in the order such information in his possession relating to the drag as may be so specified; (b) direct that the owner of the drug shall not. without the permission of the Government, dispose of it till the expiry of such period as may be specified in the order.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or of any direction made under authority conferred by this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both. (2) A Court convicting any person of any offence punishable under this Act may order that the whole or any part of the stock of drugs in respect of which the offence was committed shall be forfeited to the Government. (3) It shall be a defence for a person charged with a contravention of any of the provisions of this section to prove that. in relation to the matter in respect of which he is charged, he acted in the course of his employment as a servant or agent of another person on the instruction of his employer or some other specified person.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala Where a person committing an offence punishable under this Act is a company or an association or a body of persons, whether incorporated or not, every director, manager, secretary, agent or other officer or person concerned with the management thereof, shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent its commission be deemed to be guilty of such offence.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person other than a police officer of or above the rank of an Inspector of Police or an officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Police authorised in this behalf by the Government by notification in the Gazette, shall investigate any offences under this Act. (2) No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the District Magistrate.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala Any person competent to investigate any offence under this Act may search any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been, or is being committed, and take possession of any stock of drugs in respect of which the offence has been or is being committed.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may make rules to cany out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the maintenance by dealers and producers generally, or by any dealer or producer in particular, of records of all sale and purchase transactions made by them; (b) the furnishing of any information as may be required with respect to the business carried on by any dealer or producer; (c) the inspection of any books of account or other documents belonging to or under the control of any dealer or producer; (d) the compensation which shall be payable under Section 12 and the manner in which such compensation shall be determined.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Travancore-Cochin Drugs (Control) Act, 1950_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act. 
