Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to Empower the Government to Remove or Destroy Obstructions in Fairways. And to Prevent the Creation of Such Obstructions. Passed by His Highness the Maharaja of Cochin on the 21s' day of Vrischigam 1112, corresponding to the 9th day of December 1936. Whereas it is expedient to empower the Government to remove or destroy obstructions to navigation in fairways leading to ports in Cochin State, and to prevent the creation of such obstructions; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called The Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936. (2) It shall come into force at once. But nothing herein contained shall apply to vessels belonging to His Highness the Maharaja of Cochin or to His Majesty the King Emperor of India or hired by His Highness the Maharaja of Cochin or by His Majesty the King Emperor of India or by the Secretary of State for India in Council.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala Whenever, in any fairway leading to any port in Cochin State, any vessel is sunk, stranded or abandoned, or any fishing stake, timber or other thing, is placed or left, the Government may, if in its opinion such thing is, or is likely to become, an obstruction or danger to navigation,- (a) cause such thing or any part thereof to be removed; or (b) if such thing is of such a description or so situate that, in the opinion of the Government, it is not worth removing, cause the same or any part thereof to be destroyed.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala Whenever anything is removed under section 2, the Government shall be entitled to receive a reasonable sum, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, for the expenses incurred in respect of such removal. Dispute concerning such expenses. - Any dispute arising concerning the amount due under this section, in respect of anything so removed, shall be decided by the District Magistrate, upon application to him for that purpose by either of the disputing parties; and such decision shall be final.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala The Government shall, whenever anything is removed under section 2 publish in the Cochin Government Gazette a notification containing a description of such thing, and the time at which and the place from which the same was so removed.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala If, after publishing such notification, such thing is unclaimed, or if the person claiming the same fails to pay the amount due for the said expenses and any customs-duties or other charges properly incurred by the Government in respect thereof; The Government may sell such thing by public auction, if it is of a perishable nature, forthwith, and, if its not of a perishable nature, at any time not less than six months after publishing such notification as aforesaid.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala On realising the proceeds of such sale, the amount due for expenses and charges as aforesaid, together with the expenses of the sale, shall be deducted there from, and the surplus (if any) shall be paid to the owner of the thing sold, or, if no such person appear and claim such surplus, shall be held in deposit for payment, without interest, to any person thereafter establishing his right to the same: Provided that he makes the claim within one year from the date of the sale.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala For, the purposes of this. Act, the term "vessel" shall be deemed to include also every article or thing or collection of things being or forming part of the tackle, equipment, cargo, store or ballast of a vessel: and any proceeds arising from the sale of a vessel and of the cargo, thereof, or of any other property recovered there from, shall be regarded as a common fund.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala The Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette, make rules to regulate or prohibit, in the fairway leading to a port in Cochin State, the placing of fishing stakes, the casting or throwing of ballast, rubbish or any other thing likely to give rise to a bank or In shoal, or the doing of any other act which will, in its opinion, cause, or be likely to cause, obstruction or danger to navigation.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala Whoever is guilty of any act or omission in contravention of the rules made under section 8 may be tried for such offence by any Magistrate within whose jurisdiction he is found, and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala Whenever the maintenance or creation of an obstruction in any fairway, has become lawful by long usage or otherwise, and such obstruction is removed or destroyed under section 2, or its creation is regulated or prohibited under section 8, any' person having a right to maintain, or create such obstruction shall be entitled to receive from the Government reasonable compensation for any damage caused to him by such removal, destruction, regulation or prohibition. Every dispute arising concerning the right to such compensation, or the amount thereof, shall be determined according to the law for the time being in force relating to like disputes in the case of land needed for public purposes and not otherwise; and for the purpose of such law the fairway from or in which such obstruction was removed or destroyed, or in which its creation was regulated or prohibited, shall be deemed to be a part of the district in which the port to which such fairway leads is situate.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala Whenever any obstruction in a fairway leading to a port in Cochin State has been removed or destroyed, or whenever the creation of any such obstruction has been regulated or prohibited, by an order of the Government, previous to the passing of this Act, such removal, destruction, regulation or prohibition shall be deemed to have been effected under this Act.
Cochin Obstructions in Fairways Act, 1936_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prevent the exercise by the Government of any other powers possessed by it in this behalf. 
