Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to trespass by cattle in the State of Kerala. WHEREAS it is necessary to consolidate and amend the law relating to trespass by cattle on lands and causing damage to crops and other produce thereon, in the State of Kerala; BE it enacted in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called The Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961. (2) (a) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (b) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, exclude any area from the operation of this Act from such date as may be specified therein. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, appoint.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) "cattle" means cows, oxen and bulls and includes elephants, camels, buffaloes, horses, mares, geldings, ponies, colts, fillies, mules, asses, pigs, rams, ewes, sheep, lambs, goats, kids, and fowls and such other kinds of animals as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, specify; (2)"Director" in relation to any area comprised in a Municipality or a Municipal Corporation, shall mean the Director appointed under clause (13) of section 3 of the Kerala Municipalities Act, 1960 (Act 14 of 1961), and, in relation to any area comprised in a Panchayat, shall mean the Director appointed under clause (7) of section 2 of the Kerala Panchayats Act, 1960 (Act 32 of 1960);] 1 (3)["local authority" means a village panchayat constituted under section 4 of the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (13 of 1994) or a municipality constituted under section 4 of the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (20 of 1994):] Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) Pounds may be established at such places in each village panchayat or municipality if the local authority so decides. (2) Any pound established in one local authority may be used by the adjacent local authority subject to the conditions as may be mutually agreed by the local authorities concerned.] Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala The pounds shall be under the control of the local authority and that authority shall fix, and may, from time to time, alter the rates of charge for feeding and watering impounded cattle.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every pound shall be in the charge of a pound-keeper appointed by the local authority concerned. (2) Every pound-keeper shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 1 [(3) The pay and allowances, discipline and conduct and other conditions of service of a pound-keeper appointed by a local authority under sub-section (1) shall] 2 be as prescribed. 3 [...] (4) 4 [...] Substituted by Act 13 of 1968 Inserted by Act 16 of 2000 Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 Omitted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala Every pound-keeper shall keep such registers, and furnish such returns as the Government may, from time to time, direct.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala When cattle are brought to a pound, the pound-keeper shall enter in his register- (a) the number and description of the cattle, (b) the day and hour on and at which they were so brought, (c) the name and residence of the seizure, and (d) the name and residence of the owner, if known. The seizer shall affix his signature in the register. The pound-keeper shall give the seizer of his agent a copy of the entries aforesaid.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala The pound-keeper shall take charge of, feed and water the cattle, until they are disposed of as hereinafter directed.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala (1) The cultivator or occupier of any land, or any person who has acquired a right for the cultivation of the crop or produce on any land. or the vendee or mortgagee of such crop or produce or any part thereof, may seize, or cause to be seized, any cattle trespassing on such land and doing damage thereto or to any crop or produce thereon, and send them or cause them to be sent within twelve hours to the pound established for the area in which the land is situate. (2) All officers of Police shall, when required, aid in preventing- (a) resistance to such seizures, and (b) rescues from persons making such seizures.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala Persons in charge of public roads, pleasure-grounds, plantations wherein common grazing grounds are available, canals, drainage works, tanks, embankments, and the like and the officers of Police, officers employed by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions 1 [...] may seize, or cause to be seized, any cattle doing, damage to such roads, grounds, plantations, canals; drainage works, tanks, embankments or found straying thereon, and shall sent them or cause them to be sent within twenty-four hours , to the nearest pound. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala (1) For every head of cattle impounded as aforesaid the pound-keeper shall levy a fine in accordance with the scale for the time being prescribed by the 1 [local authority] in this behalf by notification in the Gazette. Different scales may be prescribed for different local areas or for different localities and for different kinds of cattle. (2) Not-withstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when it appears to the local authority in any local area cattle are habitually allowed to trespass on land and damage crops or other produce thereon, he may, by notification in the Gazette, direct that for every head of cattle of any kind specified therein which may be seized within such local area and impounded as aforesaid, such amount of fine as may be specified by him in the said notification, not exceeding double the fine prescribed under sub-section (1), shall be levied. (3) All fines levied 2 [under this section or section II A] shall be credited to the fund of the local authority. 3 [...] (4) A list of the fines and of the rates of charge for feeding and watering cattle shall be exhibited in a conspicuous place on, or near to, every pound. 4 11A Special provisions for cattle straying in aerodromes:-Not-withstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section II when it appears to the 5 [local authority that in any aerodrome cattle are habitually allowed to trespass and cause nuisance in such aerodrome he may, by notification in the Gazette, direct that for every head of cattle of any kind specified therein which may be seized within such aerodrome and impounded as aforesaid, such amount of fine as may be specified by 6 [it] in the said notification, not exceeding four times the fine prescribed under sub-section (1) of section II, shall be levied. EXPLANATION .- For the purposes of this section "aerodrome" shall have the same meaning assigned to it under the Aircraft Act, 1934 (Central Act 22 of 1934) 2. Substituted by Act 18 of 1975 3. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 4. Inserted by Act 18 of 1975 5. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000 6. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000 Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala (a) If the owner of the impounded cattle or his agent appears and claims the cattle, the pound-keeper shall deliver them to him on payment of the fines and charges incurred in respect of such cattle. (b) The owner or his agent, on taking back the cattle shall sign a receipt for them in the register kept by the pound-keeper.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala (1) If the cattle be not claimed within seven days from the date of their being impounded the pound-keeper shall report the fact to the local authority concerned 1 [...] (2) The local Authority 2 [...] shall thereupon affix in a conspicuous part of its or his office a notice stating- (a) the number and description of the cattle . (b) the place where they were seized, (c) the place where they are impounded, and shall cause proclamation of the same to be made 3 [...] in the village and in the market place nearest to the place of seizure. (3) If the cattle be not claimed within seven days from the date of the notice, they shall be sold by public auction by the local authority 4 [...] at such place and time and subject to such conditions as the 5 [local authority] by general or special order, from time to time, directs: 6 [...] 2. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 3. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 4. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 5. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000 6. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000 Omitted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala If the owner or his agent appears and refuses to pay the said fines and expenses, on the ground that the seizure was illegal and that the owner is about to make a complaint under section 19, then, upon deposit of the fines and charges incurred in respect of the cattle, the cattle shall be delivered to him.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala (1) If the owner or his agent appears and refuses or omits to pay or in the case mentioned in section 14 to deposit the said fines and expenses, the cattle, or as many of them as may be necessary, shall be sold by public auction by the local authority 1 [...] at such place and time, and subject to such conditions as are referred to in section 13. (2) The fines leviable and expenses of feeding and watering together with the expenses of sale, if any, shall be deducted from the proceeds of the sale. (3) The remaining cattle and the balance of the proceeds of sales if any, shall be delivered to the owner or his agent, together with an account showing- (a) the number of cattle seized (b) the time during which they have been impounded, (c) the amount of fines and charges incurred. (d) the number of cattle sold, (e) the proceeds of sale, and (f) the manner in which those proceeds have been disposed of. (4) The owner or his agent shall give a receipt for the cattle delivered to him and for the balance of the proceeds of sale, if any, paid to him according to such account. (5) If the owner or his agent refuses to receive the remaining cattle and the surplus proceeds of sale delivered to him, the cattle and the proceed of sale shall be deemed to be unclaimed and disposed of according to the provisions of this Act. Omitted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala (1) The officer by whom the sale was made shall send to the local authority the fine so deducted. (2) The charges for feeding and watering deducted under section 15 shall be paid over to the pound-keeper, who shall also retain and appropriate all sums received by him on account of such charges under section 12. (3) The surplus unclaimed proceeds of the sale of the cattle shall be sent to the local authority, who shall hold them in deposit, and if no claim thereto be preferred within three months and established, shall dispose of them as hereinafter provided.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala (1) All sums received on account of fines and unclaimed proceeds of the sale of cattle shall be credited to the fund of the local authority [or where there is no Municipal Corporation, Municipal council or Panchayat, in such manner as the Government may, from time to time , direct.] (2) The salaries allowed to pound-keepers and the expenses incurred for the construction and maintenance of pounds or for any other purpose connected with the carrying out of the provisions of this Act shall be paid by the local authority.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala (1) No Police Officer, or other officer or pound-keeper appointed under the provisions herein contained and no member of the local authority under whose control the pound is, shall, directly or indirectly purchase any cattle at a sale under this Act. (2) No pound-keeper shall release or deliver any impounded cattle otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, unless such release or delivery is ordered by [ the Director or] the local authority [or the Magistrate acting under Chapter V of this Act or a civil court, in writing, stating the reasons for such order.]
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala Any person whose cattle have been seized under this Act, or having been so seized, have been detained in contervention of this Act , may at any time within ten days from the date of seizure, make a complaint to 1 [local authority]. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala (1) The complaint shall be made by the complainant in person or by an agent personally acquainted with the circumstances . It may be either in writing or verbal. If it be verbal the substance of it shall be taken down in writing by the 1 [Secretary of the local authority]. (2) If the 2 [Secretary of the local authority] on examining the complainant or his agent, sees reason to believe the complaint to be well founded he shall summon the person complained against and make an enquiry into the case. 2. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000 Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 21--> State(s): Kerala (1) If the seizure or detention be adjudged illegal, the 1 [Secretary of the local authority] shall award to the complainant, for the loss caused by the seizure or detention, reasonable compensation not exceeding one hundred rupees, to be paid by the person who made the seizure or detained the cattle, together with all fines paid and expenses incurred by the complainant in procuring the release of the cattle. (2). If the cattle have not been released, the 2 [Secretary of the local authority] awarding such compensation, order their release and direct that the fines and express leviable under this Act shall be paid by the person who made the seizure or detained the cattle. 2. Substituted by Act 16 of 2000 Substituted by Act 16 of 2000
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala The compensation, fines and expenses mentioned in section 21 may be recovered [as if it were arrears of public revenue due on land) the manner provided for the recovery of fines under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.]
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 23--> State(s): Kerala Whoever forcibly opposes the seizure of cattle liable to be seized under this Act, and whoever rescues the same after seizure, either from a pound or from any person taking or about to take them to a pound, such person being near at hand and acting under the powers conferred by this Act, shall on conviction before a Magistrate, be punished with imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees, or with both.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 24--> State(s): Kerala Any owner, or keeper, or attendant of cattle, who causes or suffers cattle to stray about without a keeper or who, through neglect or otherwise, damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land, or any crop or produce of land or any public road, by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon, shall on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not less than twenty five rupees, but not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or to both.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 25--> State(s): Kerala Any fine imposed under section 24 or for the offence of mischief by causing cattle to trespass on any land may be recovered by sale of all or any of the cattle by which the trespass was committed, whether they were seized in the act of trespassing or not, and whether they are the property of the person convicted of the offence, or were only in his charge when the trespass was committed.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 26--> State(s): Kerala Notwithstanding the provisions contained in the code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, any Police Officer may investigate without the order of a Magistrate into an offence under section 24 as if it were a cognizable case, but he shall not arrest without warrant from a Magistrate any person accused of an offence under section 24.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 27--> State(s): Kerala Any pound-keeper releasing or purchasing or delivering cattle contrary to the provisions of section 18, or omitting to provide any impounded cattle with sufficient food and water or failing to perform any of the other duties imposed upon him by this Act, shall, over and above any other penalty to which he may be liable, be punished , on conviction before a Magistrate, with fine not exceeding fifty rupees. Such fines may be recovered by deductions from the pound-keeper's salary.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 28--> State(s): Kerala All fines recovered under sections 24, 25 and 27 may be appropriated, in whole or in part, as compensation for loss or damage proved to the satisfaction of the convicting Magistrate.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 29--> State(s): Kerala Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit any person whose crops or other produce of land have been damaged by trespass of cattle from suing for compensation in any competent civil court.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 30--> State(s): Kerala Any compensation paid under this Act, by order of a convicting Magistrate, to a person whose crops or other produce of land have been damaged by trespass, by cattle, shall be set-off and deducted from any sum due to that person as compensation in any civil suit referred to in section 29.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 31--> State(s): Kerala The Director may, by notification in the Gazette, delegate all or any of his powers under this Act to any officer of his Department and may, by like notification withdraw such powers.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 32--> State(s): Kerala The Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this section shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly for a period of not less than fourteen days as soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as the Legislative Assembly may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following.
Kerala Cattle Trespass Act, 1961_Section 33--> State(s): Kerala The Travancore-Cochin Cattle Trespass Act, 1125 (Act XII of 1125) and the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 (Central Act 1 of 1871) in its application to the Malabar District referred to in sub-section (2) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, are hereby repealed; but notwithstanding such repeal all pounds established under the aforesaid Acts shall be deemed to be pounds established under this Act. 
