Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for the levy of a tax on passengers and goods carried in stage carriages and 1 [goods vehicles] in the State of Kerala. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the levy of a tax on passengers and goods canned in stage carriages and public carrier vehicles in the State of Kerala; Be it enacted in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows; Substituted by Act 25 of 1967 (1-7-1967)
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 19631 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification appoint2 . Published in Kerala Gazette Ex. No. 77 dated 15-4-1963. The Act came into force on 1-7-1963 as per Nob. No. 18997/63/ PWTB2 dated 17-6-1963 pub in Kerala Gazette dt. 28-6-1963.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 1 [(a)"articulated vehicle" means a tractor to which a trailer is attached in such a manner that a part of the trailer is super-imposed on, and a part of the weight of the trailer is borne by, the tractor; (ai) "carriage", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes haulage; (aii) "goods vehicle" means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use for the carriage of goods solely or in addition to passengers or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods solely or in addition to passengers, and includes an articulated vehicle, a tractor trailer combination, a filler-trailer combination and a trailer drawn by any other motor vehicle when used for the carriage of goods]. 2 [(aa)] "notification" means a notification published in the Gazette: 3 [(b) "operator" means the owner or the person having possession or control of the vehicle and includes any person whose name is entered in the permit as holder thereof.) (c) "Permit" means a permit granted or counter-signed under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act 4 of 1939) authorising the use of a vehicle as a stage carnage or as a public carrier vehicle in any part of the State: (d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 4 [(dd) "Private carrier vehicle" means a goods vehicle, which is not a public carrier vehicle.] 5 [(e) "public carrier vehicle" means a goods vehicle carrying goods for hire or reward;] (f) "stage carriage" means or motor vehicle carrying or adapted to carry more than six persons excluding the driver, which carries passengers for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the whole journey or for stages of the journey, and includes such a carriage when used as a contract carriage within the meaning of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939; (g) "State" means the State of Kerala; (h) "tax" means the tax referred to in section 3; (i) "taxable vehicle" means a stage carriage, or 6 [goods vehicle), which is referred to in section 3. Substituted by Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Act 4 of 1973 (1-7-1967). Substituted by Act 4 of 1973 (1-7-1967). Inserted by Act 25 of 1967 (1-7-1967) Substituted by Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Act 25 of 1967 (1-7-1967).
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala 1 [(1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, 2 [there shall be levied a tax) on all passengers, luggage and goods carried by stage carriages and 3 [on all goods transported by goods vehicles, at the following rates, namely:- (a) in the case of stage carriages. 10 Paise in the rupee, on the fares and freights payable to the operators of such carriages; (b) in the case of public carrier vehicles, five paise in the rupee on the freights payable to the operators of such vehicles; (c) in the case of private carrier vehicles. 2 paise per tonne kilometre of the goods.] 4 [(2) The tax levied under sub-section (1) shall be paid by the passengers or the consignors of the goods, as the case may be, to the operators along with the fares or freights payable to the operators of the stage carriages or the goods vehicles. (3) The operator shall be liable to pay the tax levied under section (1) on all passengers, luggages or goods carried by stage carriages and on all goods carried by goods vehicles of which he is the operator to the Government in the manner provided in this Act], Provided that in the case of all goods transported by 5 [goods vehicles] for export out of the territory of India, no tax under this section shall be payable; 6 [xxxx] Explanation 1. - For the purposes of this proviso, "export" shall not include movements of goods from one part in the territory of India to another part in the said territory. Explanation 2. - For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that- (i) in respect of passengers, luggage or goods booked through over the railways and road 7 [carried] service the tax payable under this Act shall be calculated only on the fares and freights payable for such passengers, luggage or goods for the distance on the road covered by the taxable vehicle; (ii) no tax shall be payable under this Act on goods carried by any vehicle owned by any department of the Central Government or by the Railways. Re-numbered by Act 18 of 1971. Substituted by Act 18 of 1971 (1-7-1963). Substituted by Act 25 of 1967 (1-7-1967). Substituted by Act 18 of 1971 (1-7-1963). Substituted by Act 25 of 1967. Omitted by Act 4 of 1973 (12-3-1973.) Substituted by Act 2 of 1984.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala [The operator may, at his option, compound the tax payable by him under sub-section (3) of section 3 by paying in lieu thereof, a fee fixed in the manner specified in the Schedule, to the prescribed officer or to any other officer authorised by the Government in this behalf by notification in the Gazette before the 29th day of February, 1984.] Substituted by Act 2 of 1984.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala In respect of every taxable vehicle, the operator shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the officer-in-charge of any police station which lies on the neighbourhood of, the route on which such vehicle is used and which is specified by the prescribed officer in consultation with the operator a return in the prescribed form, either daily or at such other intervals as may be prescribed: Provided that an operator may, after intimation to the prescribed officer, or if two or more officers are prescribed in respect of the same area, to any of them chosen by the operator, deliver his return or cause it to be delivered to the officer to whom such intimation is given, in which case the operator shall have no right, except with the permission of such officer, to deliver the return or cause it to be delivered at any police station or to any other officer.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala The tax payable during any month in accordance with the returns submitted under section 5 shall be paid into a Government treasury by the operator and the receipt evidencing such payment forwarded to the prescribed officer, on or before the fifteenth day of the month immediately succeeding.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala In the following cases, that is to say,- (a) where no returns have been submitted by the operator in respect of any taxable vehicle for any month or portion thereof, or (b) where the returns submitted by the operator in respect of any taxable vehicle for any month or portion thereof, appear to the prescribed officer to be incorrect or incomplete; the prescribed Officer shall, after giving the operator a reasonable opportunity, in case (a) of making his representation, if any, and in case (b) of establishing the correctness and completeness of the returns submitted by him, determine the sum payable to the Government by the operator by way of tax during such month or portion thereof: Provided that the sum so determined shall not exceed the maximum tax which would have been payable to the Government if the vehicle had carried its full complement of passengers, luggage and goods or of goods only, as the case may be during such month or portion thereof.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala If, for any reason the whole or any portion of the tax leviable under this Act in respect of any month has escaped assessment, the prescribed officer, may, at any time, within, but not beyond 1 [ten years] from the expiry of that month, assess the tax which has escaped assessment, after issuing a notice to the operator and making such inquiry as the officer may consider necessary: 2 [Provided that in computing the period of limitation for the assessment of tax under this section, the periods, if any, during which such assessment has been stayed by an injunction or order of any Court shall be excluded]. Substituted Act 4 of 1973 (1-7-1963). Inserted by Act 4 of 1973 (1-7-1963).
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala Where the whole or any portion of the tax payable to the Government for any taxable vehicle in respect of any month in pursuance of section 6, 7 or 8 has not been paid to them in time, the prescribed officer may after giving the defaulter an opportunity of being heard in his discretion levy in addition to the tax so payable, a penalty not exceeding 25 per cent of the tax which is payable to the Government for the period or portion thereof under section 6, 7 or 8 as the case may be.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala (1) In the cases referred to in sections 6, 7. 8. and 9 the Prescribed Officer shall serve on the operator a notice of demand for the sums payable to the Government and the sums specified in such notice may be recovered from the operator as if they were arrears of land revenue. (2) Where the sums specified in the notice of demand are not paid within thirty days from the date on which the notice was served on the operator, the taxable vehicle and its accessories may be distrained and sold under the appropriate Act relating to the recovery of land revenue, whether or not such vehicle or accessories are in the possession or control of the operator: Provided that no distrait shall be made in pursuance of this sub-section except at the instance or with the consent of such officer as may be authorised by the Government in this behalf.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala (1) If the tax leviable in respect of any motor vehicle remains unpaid by any person liable for the payment thereof and such person before having paid the tax has transferred the ownership of such vehicle or has ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicle, the person to whom the ownership of the vehicle has been transferred or the person who has possession or control of such vehicle shall be liable to pay the said tax to the Prescribed Officer. (2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the liability to pay the said tax of the person who has transferred the ownership or has ceased to be in possession or control of such vehicles.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 1lA--> State(s): Kerala [When during the pendency of any proceeding under this Act, any operator or other person liable to pay any tax or any other amount under this Act. creates a charge on or parts with the possession by way of sale, mortgage, exchange or any other mode of transfer what so ever, of any of his assets in favour of any other person with the intention to defeat the recovery of the tax or other amount from him under the Act. such charge or transfer shall be void as against any claim in respect of the tax or other amount found payable by the operator or such person on completion of the said proceeding: Provided that nothing in this section shall impair the rights of a charge holder or transferee in good faith for consideration] Inserted Act 4 of 1973.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala No taxable vehicle shall be used on any public road in the State.- (a) in case any tax or penalty payable in respect thereof remains unpaid for more than thirty days after the notice of demand referred to in section 10 has been served on the operator, until such tax or penalty is paid, or (b) in case the returns required by section 5 have not been submitted, if daily returns are required, for more than seven days and if-returns at less frequent intervals have been prescribed, for such number of times and during such period as may be prescribed, until the returns are submitted: Provided that the prescribed officer may, if the operator proves to his satisfaction that the failure to. submit the returns referred to in clause (b) was not deliberate, exempt the vehicle from the operation of that clause.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala (1) Any operator objecting to a notice of demand served on him under section 10 may within thirty days of the service thereof, appeal to the District Collector- Provided that no appeal shall be entertained unless it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of the payment of the tax admitted by the appellant to be due. (2) The District Collector may. after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders on the appeal as he thinks fit.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala Any officer of the Government prescribed by them in this behalf may, by order, require any operator to produce such accounts, registers and documents, and to furnish such information relating to the taxable vehicle or the 1 [fares, freights and taxes collected from passengers or consignors of goods 2 [carried] as the case may be] as may be specified in the order. Substituted by Act 18 of 1971 (1-7-1963). Substituted by Act 2 of 1984.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala Any person who- (a) being an operator, submits or allows to be submitted an incorrect or incomplete return under section 5"or fails to submit a return as required under that section; or (b) being an operator, fraudulently evades or allows to be evaded, the payment of any tax due from him; or (c) being an operator, fraudulently makes or allows to be made any wrong entry in, or fraudulently omits or allows to be omitted any entry from, any statement submitted or any account or register maintained by him; or (d) willfully acts in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder or any lawful order passed in accordance therewith, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and if the Magistrate concerned so directs in his order, the person convicted shall pay in addition, as if it were a fine, such specified amount as the Magistrate may determine to be the amount which the person convicted has evaded to pay.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in. this Act if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, (a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals, and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala (1) The prescribed officer may accept from any person who has committed, or is reasonably suspected of having committed, any offence against this Act consisting of the evasion of any tax leviable under this Act, a sum of money not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees or double the amount of the tax recoverable, whichever is greater, in addition to the amount of tax so recoverable. (2) No offence punishable under this Act shall be inquired into or tried by any Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the Second Class.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala [x x x x] Omitted by Act 18 of 1971 (5-1-1970).
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification, make an exemption or reduction in rate, in respect of the tax on any specified class of passengers, luggage or goods having regard to all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) in the case of passengers and luggage, the purpose for which the journey is performed: (b) in the case of goods, the commercial importance of such goods; and (c) such other matters as may be prescribed. (2) Any exemption from tax or reduction in the rate of tax notified under sub-section (1) may be subject to such restrictions and conditions as maybe specified in the notification, (3) The Government may, by notification, cancel or vary any notification issued under sub-section (1).
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification. make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) the intervals, if any, at which returns under section 5 shall be submitted; (c) the maintenance of accounts and registers and the submission of returns and statements by operators; (d) the manner of serving notices of demand under this Act; (e) the duties and powers of officers appointed for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Act; (f) generally regulating the procedure to be followed and the forms to be adopted in proceedings under this Act; (g) any other matter for which there is no provision or no sufficient provision in this Act and for which provision is, in the opinion of the Government, necessary for: giving effect to the purposes of this Act. (3) The power to make rules conferred by this section, shall, except on the first occasion of the exercise of, be subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication for a period of not less than one month, (4) Every rule made under this section and every notification issued under section 19 shall be laid as soon as possible before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative Assembly, make any modification in the rule or notification or decide that the rule or notification should not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 21--> State(s): Kerala (1) No prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted in a criminal court without the previous sanction of the Government, against any officer or servant of the Government, for any act done or purported to be done under this Act. (2) No officer or servant of the Government shall be liable in respect of any such act in any civil or criminal proceeding, if the act was done in good faith in the course of the execution of duties or the discharge of functions imposed by or under this Act.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala No suit or other proceeding shall be instituted against the State and no suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted against any officer or servant of the Government in respect of any act done or purporting to be done under this Act, unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding is instituted within one year from the date of the act complained of.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section 23--> State(s): Kerala The Madras Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1952, as in force in the Malabar District referred to in sub-section (2) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 (Central Act 37 of 1956) is hereby repealed.
Kerala Motor Vehicles (Taxation of Passengers and Goods) Act, 1963_Section Sch.--> State(s): Kerala Schedule 
