Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to amend the Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund Act, 1979. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Kerala Cashew Workers' Relief and Welfare Fund Act, 1979, for the purposes herein after appearing; be it enacted in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Cashew Workers' Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In section 2 of the Kerala Cashew Workers' Relief and Welfare Fund Act, 1979 (19 of 1984), (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (b), after the words "employer or employee" the words "or the Government" shall be inserted.
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala In section 3 of the principal Act, in clause (a) of sub-section (2), for the words "employers and employees" the words "the Government, employers and employees" shall be sub stituted.
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala In section 4 of the principal Act, after clause (a), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: - "(aa ) payment of pension,- (i) to an employee who is unable to work due to old age or infirmity or who has completed the age of sixty years; and (ii) to a person who, before the commencement of this Act was an employee and completed the age of sixty years or who suffers from permanent disablement and is out of employment; and (aaa) payment of, - (i) family pension to the spouse of a deceased employee; (ii) financial assistance to an employee who suffers from permanent or temporary disablement; (iii) loans or grants to an employee to meet expenses for the marriage of children or for expenses in connection with the death of dependent or for expenses for construction or maintenance of house; (iv) for providing. - (a) maternity benefits to women employees and members of their families who are not eligible for such benefits under any other law for the time being in force; (b) medical facilities to those employees and members of their families who are not eligible for such benefits under any other law for the time being in force; (c) facilities for education to the employees and members of their families; and Explanation. - For the purpose of the above clause (aaa) family means and includes the following relatives of the employee, namely: - (a) wife in case of male employee; (b) husband in case of female employee; (c) minor sons; (d) minor daughters; (e) father and mother who are solely dependent upon the employee.
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala In section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - ("3A) The Government shall contribute to the fund every year by way of grant on a matching basis an amount equal to the contribution paid by employees under sub-section (2)."
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala In section 7 of the principal Act, - (a ) sub-section (6) shall be omitted; (b) in sub-section (7), the words " the Vice-Chairman" shall be omitted.
Kerala Cashew Workers Relief and Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 1987_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala In the schedule to the principal Act, after item 5, the following items shall be inserted, namely: - "5A. The amount and the conditions and procedures for the payment of pension, family pension, grant and advances from the fund. 5B. The purposes for which the fund may be utilised for the welfare of employees or their dependents.". 
