Kerala Electricity Duty (Validation) Act, 1965_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to validate the levy and collection of duty on sales of electrical energy under the Travancore-Cochin Electricity Duty Act, 1950 In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of the Kerala State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1965 (12 of 1965), the President is pleased to enact as follows
Kerala Electricity Duty (Validation) Act, 1965_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Electricity Duty (Validation) Act, 19651 . (2) It shall come into force at once. Pub. in Gazette of India Part II S.I. Ex. No. 22 dated 14-7-1965.
Kerala Electricity Duty (Validation) Act, 1965_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act,- (a) "duty" means the duty on sale of electrical energy; (b) "repealed Act" means the Travancore-Cochin Electricity Duty Act, 1950, repealed by Section 16 of Kerala Electricity Duty Act, 1963.
Kerala Electricity Duty (Validation) Act, 1965_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all duties levied or collected or purporting to have been levied or collected under the repealed Act and the rules made thereunder before the 15th day of April, 1963 shall be deemed to have validly levied or collected in accordance with law as if the provisions of the repealed Act and of the rules made thereunder, insofar as such duty had been included in, and formed part of, this section and this section had been in force at all material times when such duty was levied or collected; and accordingly:- (a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of any duty paid under the repealed Act and the rules made thereunder; (b) no court shall enforce a decree or order directing the refund of any duty paid under the repealed Act and the rules made thereunder; and (c) any duty levied under the repealed Act and the rules made there-under before the 15th day of April, 1963, but not collected, may be recovered in the manner provided under the repealed Act and the rules made thereunder. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person from claiming refund of any duty paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the repealed Act and the rules made thereunder. 
