Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for the constitution of a Fund to promote the welfare of motor transport workers in the State of Kerala- Whereas it is expedient to provide for the constitution of a Fund to promote the welfare of motor transport workers in the State of Kerala; Be it enacted in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 19851 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of June, 1985 Issued by Notification No, 8843-Leg-C3/85. law dated 16-8-85 pub. in Kerala Gazette Ex. No. 681 dated 16-8-85.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Board" means the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Board constituted under Section 6; (b) "Chief Executive Officer" means the Chief Executive Officer appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 7; (c) "contribution" means a contribution payable in respect of a member under the scheme; (d) "employee" means a person who is employed for wages in a motor transport undertaking directly or through an agency to work in a professional capacity on a transport vehicle or to attend to duties in connection with the arrival, departure, loading or unloading of such transport vehicle and includes a driver, conductor, cleaner, station staff, line checking staff, booking clerk, cash clerk, depot clerk, time keeper, watchman or attendant. (e) "employer" means, 1 [in relation to any motor transport undertaking, the registered owner or the person] who, or the authority which, has the ultimate control over the affairs of the motor transport undertaking, and where the said affairs are entrusted to any other person, whether called a manager, managing director, managing agent or by any other name, such other person: (f) "Fund" means the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund established under the scheme; (g) "member" means a member of the Fund and includes any person eligible to become a member of the Fund; (h) "motor transport undertaking" means a motor transport undertaking engaged in carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward and includes a private carrier; (i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 2 [(ia) "quantum" means a fixed amount of welfare fund contribution payable to the fund by the employer, employee and self employed person as may be specified in the Scheme;"; (j) "scheme" means the scheme framed under this Act; 3 (ja) "self employed person" means a person other than an employee who is engaged in the profession of a motor transport undertaking by actually operating the vehicle and depending mainly on such a motor transport undertaking for his livelihood"; (k) 4 [x x x x] (l) all other words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (Central Act 4 of 1939) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. Substituted by Act 23 of 2005. Inserted by Act 23 of 2005. Inserted by Act 23 of 2005. Omitted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, frame a scheme to be called the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Scheme for the establishment of a Fund under this Act for employees and there shall be established, as soon as may be after the framing of the scheme, a Fund in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the scheme. (2) The Fund shall vest in, and be administered by, the Board. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the scheme may provide for all or any of the matters specified in the Schedule.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala [(1) The Contribution payable by the employee to the fund shall be such quantum for each type of motor transport undertaking as may be specified in the scheme. (2) The contribution payable by the employer and self-employed person shall be such quantum as may be specified in the Scheme. (3) The quantum under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be fixed taking into account the average number of manpower required for operating the motor transport undertaking. (4) The contribution payable by the employer, employee and self-employed person shall be subject to revision from time to time. Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a motor transport undertaking to which the provisions of the Employee's Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (Central Act 19 of 1952) or the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (Central Act 39 of 1972) apply.] Substituted by Act 23 of 2005
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, add to, amend or vary the scheme either prospectively or retrospectively. (2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the notification or decides that the notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, constitute with effect from such date as may be specified in such notification a Board to be called the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Board for the administration of the Fund and to supervise or carry out the activities financed from the Fund. (2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The Board shall consist of such number of Directors as may be appointed by the Government and they shall be chosen in such manner as may be provided for in the scheme. Provided that the Board shall include an equal number of Directors representing the Government, the employers and the employees. (4) One of the Directors of the Board shall be appointed by the Government to be its Chairman. (5) The Government shall publish the names of all the Directors of the Board in the Gazette. (6) The Board shall administer the Fund in such manner as may be specified in the scheme. (7) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Government, delegate to its Chairman or to the Chief Executive Officer or to any officer appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 7 such of its powers and functions under this Act or the scheme as it may consider necessary for the efficient administration of the Fund, subject to such restrictions and conditions, if any, as it may specify: Provided that no delegation shall be made under this sub-section unless all the members present support such delegation.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may appoint a. Chief Executive Officer and such number of other officers and staff as they consider necessary to assist the Board in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act. (2) The Chief Executive Officer and the other officers appointed under sub-section (I), shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be prescribed. (3) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances, discipline and other conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer and the other officers and staff appointed under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala [(1) The Chief Executive Officer or any other officer appointed under sub-section (1) of section 7 authorised by him in this behalf may, by order, determine the amount due under the provisions of this Act or of the Scheme from the employer, employee and self-employed person and if the amount due is not paid on or before the due date he shall issue a demand notice to the defaulter showing the amount of arrears. (2) Any person aggrieved by the determination of arrears under sub-section (1) may file a review petition before the authority who had determined the arrears, showing detailed facts and reasons for reviewing the original determination within seven days of receipt of demand notice. (3) A review petition filed under sub-section (2) shall be disposed of by the authority within a period of thirty days from the date of its receipt. (4) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (3) may prefer an appeal before the District Labour Officer of the concerned district and it shall be disposed of by him within a period of sixty days from the date of its receipt. (5) If the amount of arrears in dispute exceeds rupees one lakh, any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (4) may prefer a second appeal before the Board and it shall be disposed of within a period of sixty days from the date of its receipt. (6) Every order passed under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) as the case may be, shall be final. (7) No appeal under this section shall be entertained unless the amount in accordance with the order against which the appeal has been preferred is paid. (8) If the appellate authority in an appeal decides that the amount paid is in excess of what is due from the appellant, it may, by order, direct for the refund of the excess amount. (9) An officer or authority exercising the power of appeal under sub-section (5) of section 8 of the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985, immediately before the commencement of the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund (Amendment) Ordinance, 2005 shall continue to exercise such powers, in respect of the case pending before such officer or authority.] Substituted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 8A--> State(s): Kerala [Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force every registered owner or person having possession or control of a motor vehicle in respect of a motor transport undertaking liable to pay contribution (other than autorickshaws covered under the provisions the Kerala Autorickshaw Workers' Welfare Fund Scheme, 1991) shall, at the time of making payment of the tax under the Kerala Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1976 (19 of 1976), produce before the Taxation Officer the receipt of remittance of the contribution to the fund upto the preceding month.] Inserted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala [(1) Every employer, employer and self-employed person shall, pay the contribution due from him every month as provided for the Scheme. (2) The monthly contribution shall become payable on or before tire 7th day of the succeeding month.) Substituted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala [(1) The amount of arrears for which demand notice has been issued under sub-section (1) of section 8, shall be recovered together with interest thereon at the rate of 9 per cent per annum in the same manner as an arrear of public revenue due on land. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, where an employer transfers his vehicles before paying any amount due under this Act in respect of the vehicle, the liability wherefore accrued before the date of the transfer, such amount shall be a charge on the vehicle so transferred.] Substituted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala (1) The amount standing to the credit of any member in the Fund shall not in any way be capable of being assigned or charged and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any court in respect of any debt or liability incurred by the member, and no receiver appointed under the Insolvency Act, 1955 (II of 1956) shall be entitled to or have any claim on any such amount. (2) Any amount standing to the credit of a member in the Fund at the time of his death and payable to his nominee under the scheme shall, subject to any deduction authorised by the scheme, vest in the nominee and shall be free from any debt or other liability incurred by the deceased or the nominee before the death of the member.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala Where any employer adjudicated insolvent or the employer is a company and an order for winding up of such company is made, the amount due from the employer under this Act or the scheme shall, where the liability, therefore has accrued before the order for adjudication or winding up is made, be deemed to be included among the debts which under Section 64 of the Insolvency Act, 1955 (II of 1956) or under Section 530 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956), are to be paid in priority to all other debts in the distribution of the property of the insolvent or the assets of the company being wound up, as the case may be.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 12A--> State(s): Kerala [Every Employee or self-employed person shall, register himself with the Board as a member of the fund within one month of commencement of his service in a transport undertaking and obtain Identity Card in such manner as may be provided for in the Scheme: Provided that every employee or self-employed person who has been already registered as a member of the fund as on the date of commencement of the Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund (Amendment) Ordinance, 2005 shall get himself re-registered with the Board within a period of one month of such commencement as specified in the Scheme.] Inserted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala No employer shall by reason only of his liability for the payment of any contribution to the Fund, reduce, whether directly or indirectly the wages of any employee to whom the scheme applies or the total quantum of benefits to which the employee is entitled under the terms of his employment express or implied.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala Every Director of the Board, the Chief Executive Officer and every officer appointed under sub-section (i) of Section 7shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45 of 1860).
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala (1) Whoever, for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be made by him under this Act or under the scheme or of enabling any other person to avoid any payment to be made under this Act or the scheme, knowingly makes or causes to be made any false statement or false representation, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 1 [five thousand rupees], or with both. (2) Whoever contravenes or makes default in complying with any of the provisions of this Act or of the scheme shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere provided by or under this Act for such contravention or non-compliance, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to 2 [two thousand five hundred rupees], or with both. (3) No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act. (4) No court shall take cognisance of any offence punishable under this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made with the previous sanction of the Chief Executive Officer. Substituted by Act 23 of 2005. Substituted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala (1) Whoever makes default in the payment of the employees' share of the contribution to the Fund after having deducted it from the wages of the employees in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the scheme, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, but which shall not be less than three months, and with fine which may extend to four thousand rupees. Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), an offence under sub-section (1) shall be cognizable.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala Whoever, having been convicted by a court of an offence punishable under this Act, again commits the same offence shall be punishable for every such subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, but which shall not be less than three months, and with fine which may extend to four thousand rupees: Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or, other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation:- For the purposes of this section,- (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals: and (b) director in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, after consultation with the Board, give to the Board general instructions to be followed by the Board. (2) In the exercise of its powers and performance of its duties under this Act, the Board shall not depart from any general instructions issued under sub-section (I), except with the previous permission of the Government.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, at any time, appoint any person to inquire into the working of the Board and to submit a report to the Government. (2) The Board shall give the person so appointed all facilities for the proper conduct of the inquiry and furnish to him such documents, accounts and information in the possession of the Board as he may require.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 21--> State(s): Kerala (1) If, on consideration of the report under Section 20 or otherwise, the Government are of opinion that the Board has persistently made default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act or the scheme or has exceeded or abused its powers, the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, supersede the Board for such period not exceeding six months as may be specified in the notification: Provided that, before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Board to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board. (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1),- (a) all the Directors of the Board shall, as from the date of such publication, vacate their offices as such Directors: (b) all the powers and duties, which may be exercised or performed by the Board shall, during the period or supersession, be exercised or performed by such officer or officers as may be specified in the notification; (c) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, during the period of supersession vest in the Government. (3) On the expiration of the period of supersession the Government shall reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in Section 6.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against any Director of the Board or the Chief Executive Officer or any other person m respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder or under the scheme.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 23--> State(s): Kerala No civil court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any question or to determine any matter which is by or under this Act or the scheme required to be settled, decided or dealt with or to be determined by the Government or the Board or the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer appointed under sub-section (i) Section 7.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 24--> State(s): Kerala All welfare funds established either by custom or agreement before the date of commencement of this Act and standing to the credit of the employees on such date shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force or in any deed or other instrument, stand transferred to, and vest in the Fund established under Section 3 and shall be credited to the accounts of the employees entitled thereto in the Fund.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 25--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, 1 [either prospectively or retrospectively make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if. before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the rule or decides that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Inserted by Act 23 of 2005.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section 26--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Ordinance, 1985 (38 of 1985), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
Kerala Motor Transport Workers' Welfare Fund Act, 1985_Section Sch.--> State(s): Kerala Schedule 
