Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for a decentralised system of administration at the district level by constituting district councils. Whereas it is necessary to provide for a democratic and decentralised system of administration at district level by constituting district councils and delegating certain powers and functions of the State Government to such district councils:- Be it enacted in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala District Administration Act, 19791 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, appoint:2 Provided that different dates may be appointed for different areas and for different provisions of this Act. and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. Published in Kerala Gazette No. 23 dated 3. 6. 1980. Date of commencement: 5.2.1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, 1 [(a) "Collector" means the Collector of the District Concerned.] 2 [(aa) "Commissioner for local Government" means an officer not below the rank of a Secretary to Government appointed by the Government to perform the functions of the commissioner for Local Government under this Act in respect of 3 [xxx] local Governments.] (b) "Director of Elections" means the Chief Electoral Officer as defined in the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of 1951). (c) 4 ["District" means a revenue district, excluding the area within the limits of a cantonment declared under the Cantonment Act, 1924 (Central Act 2 of 1924]; (d) "District Council" means a district council constituted under section 3; (e) 5 [xxx] (f) "Local Government" means 6 [in any District, the District Council 7 [xxx] concerned,] in any city, the municipal corporation of the city concerned, in any municipality, the municipal council concerned, in any Panchayat area, the panchayat concerned and in any area within the jurisdiction of a township, the township committee concerned; 8 (g) 'member' means a member of the district council including an ex-officio and a nominated member;] (h) "Municipal corporation" means the municipal corporation of a city constituted under the Kerala Municipal Corporation Act, 1961 (30 of 1961); (i) "Municipality" means a municipality constituted under the Kerala Municipalities Act, 1960 (14 of 1961); (j) "Panchayat" means the body constituted or deemed to have been constituted for the local administration of a Panchayat area under the Kerala Panchayats Act 1960 (32 of 1960); (k) "Panchayat area" means any local area declared or deemed to have been declared as such under the Kerala Panchayats Act, 1960 (32 of 1960); (l) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (m) "President" means the President of the District Council; (n) "Rank" in relation to an officer means his rank as determined by the Government on the basis of scale of pay or of the precedence assigned to him in the table of precedence ordered by the Governor of Kerala from time to time; (o) "Scheduled Castes" and "Scheduled Tribes" shall have the same meaning as in the Constitution of India; (p) "Secretary" means the secretary of the District Council; 9 [(pp)] (q) 'Township" means the Guruvayoor Township specified in Section 2 of the Guruvayoor Township Act, 1961 (43 of 1961); (r) "Vice-President" means the Vice-President of the District Council; (s) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act, but defined in the Kerala Panchayats Act, 1960 (32 of 1960) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Relettered by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Note: All Rules issued under the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act and Kerala Municipality Act will be incorporated under the respective Acts. Substituted by Act 18 of 1990 w.e.f. 12. 12. 1989. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 55 of 1989. Omitted by Act 55 of 1989. Substituted by Act 55 of 1989. Inserted by Act 35 of 1989 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, constitute a district council for each District with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification. (2) Every district council shall be a body corporate by the name of the District, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, subject to any restriction or qualification imposed by or under this Act, or any other law for the time being in force, by the said name sue and be sued and do all things necessary, proper or expedient for the purpose for which it is constituted.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala [(1) Every district council shall consist of such number of members as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, fix in accordance with the scale of one member for every fifty thousand or part thereof of the population of the district, elected in the manner prescribed:] Provided that the 2 [number of members referred to in this sub-section] in every district council shall be not less than twenty or not more than forty and that for arriving the minimum or maximum it shall be lawful to make such alterations as are necessary to the limit of population specified in this section. 3 (2) The Members of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) representing the State and the Members of the Legislative Assembly of the State, representing any area comprised in one district shall be ex-officio members of the district council of the district: Provided that where the area which a Member of the House of People (Lok Sabha) or a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State represents comprises partly in one district and partly in another district, he shall be an ex-officio member of the district councils of both the districts in which the area he represents is comprised: Provided further that where a Member of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) or a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State is chosen as Speaker, as the case may be. of the House of the People (Lok Sabha) or of the Legislative Assembly of the State, he shall cease to be an ex-officio member. (3) A Member of the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) representing the State shall be an ex-officio member of the district council of the district in which he ordinarily resides, or in case he is not an ordinarily resident of the State, of the district council of the district in which the capital of the State is situated. (4) A member nominated to the Legislative Assembly of the State shall be an ex-officio member of the district council of the district in which he ordinarily resides. (5) Where a Member of either House of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State is appointed as Minister, whether of the Central or State, or where a Member of the Legislative Assembly is recognised as Leader of the Opposition in the Assembly by the Speaker he may nominate a person or persons from the area he represents as such Member to represent him in the district council or district councils of the district or districts of which he is a member ex-officio. (6) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) shall be deemed to prevent any Member of either House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly from standing for election and becoming a member of the district council and in such case he shall cease to be an ex-officio member of the district council. (7) An ex-officio member referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) or a nominated member referred to in sub-section (5) or an elected member referred to in sub-section (6) shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have all the rights of a member provided in this Act.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala (1) In every district council, seats shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes. (2) The number of seats reserved under sub-section (1) shall be determined by the Government and the number of seats so determined shall be ten per cent of the total number of members of the district council 1 [fixed under sub-section (1) of section 4] or shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the district council as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the district bears to the total population of the district, whichever is higher. 1. Renumbered by Act 21 of 1991. 2. Substituted by ibid. 3. Sub-sections (2) to (7) inserted by Act 21 of 1991. 2 [(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall be as one seat in every district council where the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the district is ten thousand or more, or shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the district council as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the district bears to the total population of the district, whichever is higher".] (4) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) and (3) shall be deemed to prevent members of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes from standing for election to the non-reserved seats in the district council. 3 [Provided that the seat reserved for a woman belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes under the proviso to sub-section (1) of S. 6 shall not be taken into account while determining the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes under this section: Provided further that reservation for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes under this section shall be to such seats where the population of such castes or tribes is the largest.] Substituted by Act 35 of 1989 and Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala [(1) There shall be reserved in every district council seats for women as have the largest number of women voters and the seats so reserved shall not be less than thirty per cent of the number of members 2 [notified under 1 Sub-section (1) of Section 4;] Provided that out of the seats so reserved one seat having the largest number of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes shall be for a woman belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes 3 [as the case may be;] Provided further that where seats to which women are eligible for reservation under this section happen to be the same seats where the population of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes is the largest for the purpose of reservation under S. 5, Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be. shall be given preference to such seats and instead equal number of other seats where the women voters are the largest next in order shall be reserved for women under this section. (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent women from standing for election to seats not reserved for women or to prevent women belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes from standing for election to seats reserved for women.] Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala (1) For the purpose of the election of the members of the district council, the Director of Elections shall, by notification in the Gazette,- (a) Divide the district into as many divisions as there are seats and fix the boundaries of such divisions in such manner that no Panchayat area or ward of a Municipality or the division of a city is split into two or more parts: Provided that the population of the divisions shall, as far as practicable, be equal; and (b) Determine in such manner as may be prescribed the division or divisions which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes 1 [xxx] (2) The Director of Elections shall- (a) Publish his proposals in regard to the matters mentioned in sub-section (1) in the Gazette together with a notice specifying the date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by him and inviting objections and suggestions with respect to the proposals before a date specified in the notice: (b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by him before the date so specified: and (c) make an order delimiting the divisions specifying therein the division or, divisions which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes 2 [xxx] 3 [(2A) The Director of Elections shall after the publication of an order under clause (c) of sub-section (2) and after finalising the electoral rolls of all divisions in a district council,- (a) determine the division or divisions to be reserved for women under section 6 and publish his proposals regarding the reservation of those seats in the Gazette together with a notice specifying the date on or after which the said proposals will be further considered by him and inviting objections and suggestions with respect to the proposals before a date specified in the notice: (b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by him before the date specified: and (c) make an order specifying therein the seats reserved for women under section 6". (3) An order made by the Director of Elections under this section shall not be called in question in any court of law. Added by Act 35 of 1989 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Added by Act 35 of 1989 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala The Director of Elections may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette, correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 7 or any error arising therein from an inadvertent slip or omission.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala 1 [A person shall not be qualified to be elected or nominated as member of the district council unless he,-] (a) is an elector of Many division in the district and in case of election] makes and subscribes before the Returning Officer or any other person authorised by the Director of Elections in that behalf an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Second Schedule: (b) is not less than twenty one years of age; and (c) in the case of a seat reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, belongs to any Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe, as the case may be. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala 1 (1) The Persons entitled to vote at the election of members shall be the persons registered as voters in the electoral rolls prepared or revised in respect of the Local Governments or the Assembly Constituencies or Parliamentary constituencies whichever is the latest as on the date of publication of the notice of election. Explanation:- Where an election is to be held on the basis of the electoral rolls of the Local Governments, the persons entitled to vote in the Guruvayoor Township area shall be those in the electoral roll prepared or revised in respect of the Assembly Constituency or Parliamentary Constituency of the area whichever is the later as on the date of publication of the notice of election.] 2 [(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the electoral roll referred to in sub-section (1) is not the one prepared or revised in the year in which the notice of election to the district council is to be published or where the said electoral roll is the one revised without conducting an intensive revision subsequently, there shall be prepared by the authority prescribed under sub-section (2), an electoral roll for each district council under the superintendence, direction and control of the Director of Elections. Every person who is ordinarily resident within the district and is not less than eighteen years of age on the first day of January of the year in which the electoral roll is so prepared shall, if he is not disqualified for registration in an electoral roll under section 16 of the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1950 (Central Act 43 of 1950), be eligible to be included in the electoral roll so prepared. (1B) The provisions of the Registration of Electors Rules, 1960 issued by the Central Government under the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1950 (Central Act 43 of 1950) for an intensive revision, except the provisions under Part IV of the said rules, shall together with all the directions, instructions, forms and guidelines issued by the Election commission of India in the matter apply mutatis mutandis for the purpose of sub-section (1A)]. (2) The authority prescribed shall periodically publish, at such intervals as may be prescribed by the Government the electoral rolls for the divisions or portions of divisions of the district. Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala Every person whose name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll of a division or portion of a division published under sub-section (2) of section 10, shall be entitled to vote at the election of a member from that division.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala No employee of a district council or the State Government or the Central Government or a Corporation controlled by the Government or a local Government 1 [or any Company where the State or Central Government holds more than fifty per cent of the shares or a Statutory Board or any University in the State,] shall be qualified for election or for holding office as a member of a District Council. 2 [xxxx] Inserted by Act 35 of 1989. Omitted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala [Omitted by Act 35 of 1989. KGE No. 814 dt. 29-8-89].
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala (1) A person who has been sentenced by a criminal court to imprisonment for a period of more than two years for any offence involving moral delinquency (such sentence not having been reversed) shall be disqualified for election as a member while undergoing the sentence and for five years from the date of the expiration thereof. (2) 1 [A person shall be disqualified for election or nomination as a member if at the date of election or nomination, he-] (a) has been adjudged to be of unsound mind; or (b) has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State; or (c) has been sentenced by a criminal court for any electoral offence punishable under the law relating to elections to local Government or has been disqualified from exercising any electoral right on account of corrupt practice in connection with an election, and 2 [six years] have not elapsed from the date of such sentence or disqualification; or (d) is an applicant to be adjudicated an insolvent or an undischarged insolvent; or (e) is interested in a subsisting contract made with, or any work being done for, the district council except as a share holder (other than a director) in a company or except as permitted by rules made under this Act. 3 [(ee) is disqualified under S. 12; or;] Explanation:- A person shall not by reasons of his being a director, member or office bearer of a co-operative society or of his having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the district council may be inserted, or by reason of his holding a debenture or being otherwise concerned in any loan raised by or on behalf of the district council, be disqualified under this section; or (f) is engaged as a legal practitioner on behalf of the district council; or (g) is an Honorary Magistrate or a Judge of a Village Court with jurisdiction over part of the district; or (h) is already a member of the district council whose term of office will not expire before his fresh election can take effect or has already been elected as a member of the district council whose term of office has not yet commenced; or 4 [(hh) is in arrears of any amount due by him to the district council in respect of which a bill or a notice has been duly served upon him, and the time, if any, specified therein to clear the arrears has expired; or"] (i) is dismissed from the service of the Government or any other service recognised by the Government, for corruption and five years have not elapsed from the date of such dismissal; (j) is debarred from practising as an Advocate or Vakil; or 5 [(k) is a deafmute.] 6 [(3) Every person convicted of an offence punishable under chapter IX A of the Indian Penal Code or under any law or rule relating to the infringement of the secrecy of an election shall be disqualified from being elected in any election to which this Act applies or from holding the office of member for a period of five years from the date of his conviction or for such shorter period as the court may by order determine: Provided that in the case of a person holding the office of member, a disqualification under this sub-section shall not take effect until three months have elapsed from the date of his conviction or if within that period an appeal or application on for revision is filed in respect of his conviction until that appeal or application is disposed of by the court.] 7 [(4) A person who is subject to any disqualification, other than that relating to age, for being chosen as a member of the Legislative Assembly shall also be disqualified for being elected as a member.] 8 ((5) No person shall be entitled to stand for election for more than one seat in the district council. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 35 of 1991. Inserted by Act 35 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Sub-sections (3) and (4) added by Act 35 of 1989. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala subject to the rules made in this behalf by the Government, the Director of Elections shall regulate the procedure for the conduct of elections.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala 1 [(1) The term of office of members of the district council shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be as follows, namely:- (a) in the case of an elected member five years from the date of constitution or re-constitution of that district council; (b) in the case of an ex-officio member for such period until he ceases to hold the office by virtue of which he has become an ex-officio member; and (c) in the case of a nominated member for such period during which the person by whom he was nominated holds the office by virtue of which the nomination was made or on the expiry of the term of the district council in which he was nominated, whichever is earlier. Provided that the person by whom a member was nominated may, at any time by letter in writing, addressed to the district council, withdraw the member nominated by him and nominate another person in his place in that district council". [(2) 2 [xxxx] (3) Ordinarily vacancy in the office of [elected members] shall be filled at ordinary elections which shall be fixed by the Government to take place on such day or days within three months before the occurrence of the vacancies as they think fit. 3 [(4) A casual vacancy in the office of an elected member shall be filled at a bye-election which shall be fixed by the Director of Elections in consultation with the Government]; (5) No bye - election shall be held to fill a vacancy occurring within three months before the ordinary date of retirement of members by efflux of time. (6) A member of the district council elected at a bye-election shall enter upon office forthwith, but shall hold office only so long as the member in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred. (7) 4 [xxx] Omitted by Act 35 of 1989. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala If at any ordinary election or bye-election no person is elected to fill the vacancy a fresh election shall be held for such vacancy on such day as the Director of Elections may fix.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala A district council shall be deemed to be constituted only when the majority of the members are duly elected, and until then the previous district council shall continue in office: Provided that the term of office of a district council continuing in office under this section shall not in any case exceed one year from the date of expiration of the period referred to in sub-section (1) of S. 16.] Substituted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala 1 ["Subject to the provisions of sections 21 to section 21H a member other than an ex-officio member shall cease to hold office as such if he,-"] (a) is sentenced by a criminal court to such punishment and for such offence as is described in sub-section (1) of section 14: Provided that a disqualification under this clause shall not take effect until three months have elapsed from the date of the sentence, or if within that period an appeal or application for revision is filed in respect of the sentence, until that appeal or application is disposed of by the Court; or (b) has been adjudged to be of unsound mind; or (c) has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of a foreign State; or (d) has been sentenced by a criminal Court for any electoral offence punishable under any law 2 [xxxx] or has been disqualified from exercising any electoral right on account of corrupt practices in connection with an election; or (e) has applied to be adjudicated or is adjudicated an insolvent; or (f) acquired any interest in any subsisting contract made with, or work being done for, the district council except as a share-holder (other than a director) in a company or except as permitted by rules made under this Act. 3 [(ff) is in arrears of any pecuniary nature due by him to the district council in respect of which a bill or a notice has been duly served upon him and the time, if any, specified therein to clear the arrears has expired; or;] Explanation:- A person shall not by reason of his being a director, member or office bearer of a co-operative society or of his having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of such district council may be inserted, or by reason of his holding a debenture or being otherwise concerned in any loan raised by or on behalf of the district council be disqualified under this clause; or (g) is engaged as a legal practitioner on behalf of the District council or accept engagement as a legal practitioner against the council; or (h) ceases to reside in the district. Explanation:- A person shall be deemed to have his "residence" or to: "reside" in any house if he sometimes uses any portion thereof as a sleeping apartment as of right and a person is not deemed to cease to reside in any such house or portion thereof merely because he is absent from it or has elsewhere another dwelling in which he resides if he is at liberty to return to such house at any time and has not abandoned his intention of returning; or (i) is debarred from practising as a Advocate or Vakil; or (j) [Omitted by Amendment Act 35 of 1989.] (k) absents himself without the permission of the district council from three consecutive meetings of the district council: Provided that no meeting from which a member absents himself shall be counted against him under this clause if- (i) due notice of that meeting was not given to him; or (ii) the meeting was held after giving shorter notice than that prescribed for an ordinary meeting; or (iii) the meeting was held on a requisition of members. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala Where a person ceases to be a member under clause (k) of section 19, the Secretary shall at once intimate the fact in writing to such person and to the President and report the same to the district council at its next meeting. If such person applies for restoration to the district council on or before the date of its next meeting or within fifteen days of the receipt by him of such intimation, whichever is later, the district council may at the meeting next after the receipt of such application restore him to his office of member.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21--> State(s): Kerala No election to fill a seat or seats in a district council shall be called in question except by an election petition presented in accordance with the provisions contained in sections 21A to 21G. Ss. 21, 21A to 21H Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21A--> State(s): Kerala Every election petition shall be tried by the District Court having jurisdiction over the area in which the office of the district council concerned is situated.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21B--> State(s): Kerala (1) An election petition calling in question any election may be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in section 21C by any candidate at such election or any elector within forty-five days from, but not earlier than, the date of election of the returned candidate, or if there are more than one returned candidate at the election and the dates of their election are different, the later of those two dates. Explanation. - In this sub-section,- (i) 'elector; means a person who was entitled to vote at the election to which the election petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not; (ii) 'returned candidate' means a candidate who has been declared as duly elected. (2) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition. (3) At the time of presenting an election petition, the petitioner shall deposit in the Court a sum of one thousand rupees as security for the costs of the petition.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21C--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the District Court is of opinion,- (a) that on the date of his election, a returned candidate was not qualified, or was disqualified, to be chosen as a member under this Act; or (b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his agent; or (c) that any nomination paper had been improperly rejected; or (d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected,- (i) by the improper acceptance of any nomination; or (ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by an agent; or (iii) by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or reception of any vote which is void; or (iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder, the District Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void. (2) If in the opinion of the District Court, any agent of a returned candidate has been guilty of any corrupt practice, but the District Court is satisfied.- (a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate and every such corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders and without the consent of the candidate; (b) that the candidate took all reasonable measures for preventing the commission of corrupt practices at the election; and (c) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the candidate or any of his agent, then the District Court may decide that the election of the returned candidate is not void.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21D--> State(s): Kerala The provisions of sections 82, 83, 84, 87, 94, 96, 98. 99, 101, 102, 109, 110, 112, 116 and 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (Central Act 43 of 1951), shall apply mutatis mutandis in respect of election petitions under this Act.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21E--> State(s): Kerala The District Court shall, as soon as may be after the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, intimate the substance of the decision to the Director of Elections and the Government and, as soon as may be thereafter, shall send to them authenticated copies of the decision for appropriate action.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21F--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every Order of the District Court shall take effect as soon as it is pronounced by it. (2) Where, by an order, the election of a returned candidate is declared to be void, acts and proceedings in which that returned candidate has, before the date thereof, participated as a member of the district council shall not be invalidated by reason of that order, nor shall such candidate be subjected to any liability or penalty on the ground of such participation.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21G--> State(s): Kerala (1) Any person aggrieved by the final order of the District Court on an election petition may, within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the High Court. (2) Every appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), when trying a suit.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 21H--> State(s): Kerala (1) Whenever a question arises as to whether a member has become disqualified under section 12 or section 19 after having been elected as a member, such member or any other member or any other person entitled to vote at the election in which the member was elected, whether such person has voted at such election or not, may file a petition before the District Court having jurisdiction over the area in which the office of the district council is situated, for decision. (2) The District Court, after making such enquiry as it considers necessary, shall decide whether or not such member has become disqualified and the decision shall be final, however that pending such decision, the member shall be entitled to act as if he were not disqualified. (3) Every petition referred to under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), when trying a suit.]
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall, for the purpose of convening the first meeting of the district council, nominate a member who shall, before convening such meeting, 1 [make and subscribe before the collector] an oath or affirmation in the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. (2) Every other member, 2 [other than an ex-officio member] shall, before taking his seat make and subscribe before the member nominated under sub-section (1), an oath or affirmation in the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule: 3 [Provided that a member who was not able to make and subscribe the oath or affirmation under sub-section (2) or a member elected at a bye-election shall make and subscribe such oath or affirmation before the President.] (3) 4 [No member, other than an ex-officio member who has not taken an oath] who has not taken an oath or affirmation under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall vote or take part in the proceedings of any meeting of the district council nor shall he be included as a member of any committee constituted by the district council. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 22A--> State(s): Kerala 1 [xxxx] Inserted by Act 35 of 1989 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 23--> State(s): Kerala There shall be a President and a Vice-President for every District Council.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 24--> State(s): Kerala (1) The 1 [members other than nominated members] of every district council shall elect one among them to be the President and another among them to be the Vice-President. 2 [Provided that ex-officio and nominated members shall not be eligible to be elected as, or to hold the office of, President or Vice-President of a district council: Provided further that where the President or Vice-President of a Panchayat or the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly is elected as President or Vice-President of the district council he shall cease to hold such office of President or Vice-President unless within fifteen days from the date of election as such he vacates the office of the President or the Vice-President of a Panchayat or a Chairman or Vice Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or as Member of Parliament or as Member of the Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, by resignation or otherwise; Provided also that where the President or the Vice-President of a District Council is elected as the President or the Vice-President of a Panchayat or the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or. Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State he shall cease to hold the Office of President or Vice-President as the case may be of the District Council immediately on his entering upon office of Member of Parliament or of Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State, and in other cases on the expiry of fifteen days from the date of election unless within that time he vacates the office to which he is elected, by resignation.] 3 [(1A) Nothing contained, in sub-section (1) shall prevent a Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, who has nominated a person or persons under sub-section (5) of section 4 to represent him in a district council or district councils, from voting or from taking part in the proceedings for election of the President and Vice-President of that district council or district councils.] 4 [(2) The Collector shall be the Returning Officer for the election of the President and the Vice-President of a district council.] (3) It shall be the duty of the Returning Officer to do all such acts and things as may be necessary for effectively conducting the election in the manner prescribed. (4) If in an election held under sub-section ((2) no President or Vice-President is elected, a fresh election shall be held for electing the President or Vice-President, as the case may be (5) A President shall be deemed to have vacated his office on the expiry of his term of office as member or on his being sentenced by a criminal court for imprisonment for any offence involving moral delinquency or on his otherwise ceasing to be a member. (6) A Vice-President shall be deemed to have vacated his office- (a) on the expiry of his term of office as member or on his being sentenced by a criminal court for imprisonment for any offence involving moral delinquency or on his otherwise ceasing to be a member, or (b) on his election as President. 5 [(7) Where a dispute arises as to the validity of an election as President or Vice-President, any member, other than a nominated member, may file a petition before the District Court having jurisdiction over the area in which the office of the district council is situated, for decision and such decision shall be final.] 6 [(8) Every petition referred to in sub-section (7) shall be disposed of in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), when trying a suit.] Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Proviso inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 25--> State(s): Kerala (1) The President and the Vice-President shall before entering upon their office, make and subscribe an oath or affirmation 1 [before the collector] in the form set out in the Third Schedule. (2) The President or the Vice-President filling a casual vacancy shall also make and subscribe an oath or affirmation in the form set out in the Third Schedule before entering upon his office. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 26--> State(s): Kerala The President shall be the executive head of the district council and shall perform all the duties imposed and exercise all the powers conferred on the President by this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 27--> State(s): Kerala The Vice-President shall,- (a) Perform all the duties imposed and exercise all the powers conferred on the Vice-President by this Act and the rules made thereunder: and (b) exercise such of the powers and perform such of the duties of the President as are delegated to him by order in writing by the President from time to time subject to the rules made under this Act in that behalf.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 28--> State(s): Kerala (1) When the office of the President is vacant, the Vice-President shall exercise the functions of the President until a new President assumes office. (2) If the President is continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated, his functions, during such absence or incapacity shall, except in such circumstances as may be prescribed, devolve on the Vice-President. (3) When the office of the President is vacant and there is either a vacancy in the office of the President or the Vice-President is continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated, the functions of the President shall, except in such circumstances as may be prescribed devolve on the Chairman of the Standing Committees in the following order of preference, namely:- (a) Finance Standing Committee; (b) Development Standing Committee; (c) Welfare Standing Committee; (d) Public Works Standing Committee: (e) Education Standing Committee. (4) If the office of the Vice-President is vacant or the Vice-President is continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated, his function and powers, shall, except in such circumstances as may be prescribed, devolve on the Chairman of the Standing Committees in the order of preference specified in sub-section (3). (5) The person on whom functions of the President or the Vice-President devolve under sub-sections (1), (2), (3) or (4) shall perform such functions subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed until a new President or Vice-President, as the case may be, is elected and assumes office, or returns to jurisdiction or recovers from incapacity, as the case may be. (6) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Government in this behalf, the President may, by an order in writing, delegate any of his functions to the Vice-President or, in case there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice-President or the Vice-President is absent from jurisdiction or is incapacitated, to the Chairman of any Standing Committee subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified by him and for such period as he may decide. (7) The President may at any time cancel any order issued by him under sub-section (6) and thereupon the Vice-President or the Chairman of the Standing Committee, as the case may be, shall cease to perform the functions of the President.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 29--> State(s): Kerala The President may, in case of emergency, in consultation with the Chairman of the Standing Committee concerned, direct the execution of any work or the doing of any act which requires the sanction of the district council and the immediate execution or doing of which is, in his opinion, necessary for the safety of the public and may direct that the expenses of executing such work or doing such act shall be paid from the funds of the district council; Provided that,- (a) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any decision of the district council prohibiting the execution of any particular work or the doing of any particular act; (b) he shall report the action taken under this section and the reason thereof to the district council at its next meeting; and (c) he shall not direct the execution of any work or the doing of any act which involves an expenditure of more than one lakh rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 30--> State(s): Kerala (1) In each district council there shall be the following standing committees, namely; (a) General Standing Committee dealing with establishment matters, legal matters, local authorities, 1 [xxxx] and all miscellaneous and residuary matters; (b) Finance Standing Committee dealing with finance; (c) Development Standing Committee dealing with industries, agriculture, animal husbandry, 2 [rural development] dairy development, inland fisheries and soil conservation; (d) Welfare Standing Committee dealing with 3 [development of the Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes] health services, indigenous medicines and social welfare; (e) Public Works Standing Committee dealing with irrigation 4 [xxxx] roads, buildings and bridges; and (f) Education Standing Committee dealing with education, culture and sports and games. (2) Each Standing Committee shall consist of such number of members not exceedings six, excluding the Chairman; as specified by the district council, 5 [elected by the members, other than nominated members] of the district council from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. (3) The Vice-President shall be the ex-officio member and Chairman of the General Standing Committee. (4) The Chairman of every other Standing Committee shall be elected to that office by the elected 6 [members other than nominated members] of the district council from among themselves. 7 [Provided that ex-officio and nominated members shall not be eligible to be elected as, or to hold the office of Chairman of a Standing Committee: Provided further that where that President or Vice-President of a Panchayat or a Chairman or a Vice-Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly is elected as Chairman of a Standing Committee of the district Council he shall cease to hold office of the Chairman of the Standing Committee unless within fifteen days from the date of election as such, he vacates the office of the president or Vice-President of a Panchayat or the Chairman or Vice-President of a Panchayat or the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or as a Member of Parliament or as a Member of Legislative Assembly as the case may be, by resignation or otherwise: Provided also that where a Chairman of the Standing Committee is elected as the President or the Vice-President of a Panchayat or the Chairman or the Vice-Chairman of a Municipality or the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Corporation or a Member of Parliament or a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the State he shall cease to hold the Office of Chairman of the Standing Committee immediately on his entering upon the Office of Member of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of the State and in other cases on the expiry of fifteen days from the date of election unless within that time he vacates the office to which he is elected, by resignation.] 8 [(4A) Nothing contained in sub-section (4) shall prevent a Minister, or the Leader of the Opposition who has nominated a person or persons under sub-section (5) of section 4 to represent him in a district council or district councils, from voting or from taking part in the proceedings for election of the Chairman of a Standing Committee of that district council or district councils.] (5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of any Standing Committee shall not be elected, or shall not continue, as a member of any other Standing Committee. (6) The powers and functions of the Standing Committees shall be such as may be prescribed in this behalf. (7) Subject to such rules as may be made by the government in this behalf, a district council may delegate any of the powers or functions of a Standing Committee to its Chairman. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Added by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 31--> State(s): Kerala 1 [(1) The President, Vice-President and Chairman of each of the Standing Committees and the members of the district council shall be paid such fixed monthly allowances as may be prescribed.] 2 [(2) The President shall be entitled, without payment of rent, to the use of a furnished residence, at the headquarters of the district council throughout his term of office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter and no charge shall fall upon him personally in respect of the maintenance of the residence: or in lieu of the use of such furnished residence and its maintenance to such house rent allowance as may be prescribed.] 3 [(3) The district council shall provide suitable conveyance, for the use of the President throughout his term of office and for a period of fifteen days immediately thereafter subject to such bye-laws as regards its maintenance and repairs as may be made by the district council.] (4) The President, the Vice-President and the Chairman of the Standing Committees shall be entitled while touring on public business to travelling and daily allowances at such rates as first class officers of the Government shall be entitled to from time to time. (5) Every member of the district council other than the President and the Vice-President shall be entitled to receive- (a) travelling and daily allowances at such rates as First Class Officers of the Government shall be entitled to from time to time for attending the meetings of the district council or of any committee thereof; and 4 [(b) a sitting fee at such rate as may be prescribed for attending the meetings of the district council or any committee thereof.] Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 32--> State(s): Kerala (1) 2 [The Deputy Collector General] be the ex-officio Secretary of the district council concerned and its Chief Executive Officer and Government may appoint such number of officers of appropriate rank from Government Service as Joint Secretaries for the district council in such manner as may be prescribed to assist the Secretary in the administration of the district council concerned.] (2) The Secretary shall- (a) attend the meetings of the district council and of the General Standing Committee and Finance Standing Committee and may take part in the discussions threat purely in an advisory capacity, but shall have no right to move any resolution or to vote; (b) subject to section 34, attend any meeting of a committee of the district council if required to do so by the person presiding thereon; (c) carry into effect the resolutions of the district council; (d) control the officers and employees working under the district council subject to the general superintendence and the control of the President and subject to such rules as may be made by the Government: and (e) discharge all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or conferred on the Secretary by or under this Act. (3) The Secretary may, in the case of any standing committee, other than those referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) authorise a joint Secretary to attend the meeting thereof. Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 33--> State(s): Kerala The Government may by general order or special order, authorise any Joint Secretary appointed under Section 32 or any other officer to exercise all or any of the functions of the Secretary in the absence of the Secretary.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 34--> State(s): Kerala The Secretary may with the permission of the President delegate by order in writing any of his functions to any Joint Secretary or any other officer of the district council, subject to such restrictions and control as he may specify.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 35--> State(s): Kerala (1) All official correspondence by or addressed to the district council shall be in the name of the Secretary. (2) All correspondence from the Government or officers working under the Government to the employees working under a district council or vice versa shall only be through the district council except to the extent otherwise permitted by the bye-laws of the district council and the rules made by the Government in this regard.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 36--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, the Government may lend the services of such of their officers and servants to a district council as may be necessary for the functioning of that district council. (2) The officers and servants referred to in sub-section (1) shall continue to be Government servants for all purposes and their terms and conditions of service shall continue to be the same as applicable to them under the Government, their transfer and postings shall be made by the Government, their salary, allowances and other benefits shall be met from the Consolidated Fund of the State and notwithstanding anything contained in the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1960, the Government shall have the powers of Appointing Authority for the purpose of placing them under suspension and of the Disciplinary Authority for the purpose of taking disciplinary proceedings against them. (3) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby, clarified that the authority competent to impose penalties under the Rules referred to in sub-section (2) on an officer or servant in Government Service shall be competent to impose such penalties on him in respect of his work and conduct while in the service of a district council irrespective of the fact of lending his service to the district council: Provided that such authority shall inform the district council of the action taken by him against an employee under the services of that district council. (4) An appeal under sub-section (3) shall be in such form and shall be presented with in such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed. (5) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (3) the President shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, confirm, cancel or modify the order appealed against or pass such other order as he deems fit. (6) Subject to such rules as may be made under sub-section (7) the Government shall fix, and may alter, the number, designations and grades of, and the salaries, fees and allowances payable to, the employees of every district Council. (7) The Government may make rules regarding- (a) the authorities who may appoint the employees of the district council and the classification, methods of recruitment, pay and allowances, discipline and conduct and conditions of service of such employees: (b) the constitution of any class of employees of the district council into a separate service; (c) reservation of appointments in favour of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 37--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every district council shall meet at such time and place and shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), observe such rules of procedure in regard to transactions of business at its meetings (including quorum of meetings) as may be prescribed: Provided that not more than thirty-one days shall elapse between any two meetings of the district council. (2) Every meeting of a district council shall be presided over by the President or in his absence by the person on whom the powers of the President devolve under section 28, or in the absence of the President and such person by a member chosen by the members present at the meeting to preside over the occasion. (3) The President or any other person presiding under sub-section (2) shall preserve order and decide all points of order arising at or in connection with the President or other persons presiding on the point of order shall be final.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 38--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every member shall have the right to move resolutions and to inter-pellate the President and other office bearers on matters falling within the administrative jurisdiction of the district council subject to such rules as may be made by the Government. (2) Every members shall have access during office hours to the records of the district council after giving due notice to the President: Provided that the President may, for reasons given in writing, refuse such access.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 39--> State(s): Kerala A copy of the minutes of the proceedings of every meetings of a district council shall be submitted by the Secretary with the approval of the President to the Government within 10 days of the date of the meeting.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 40--> State(s): Kerala A district council or President may require the Secretary of that council to produce any document which is in his custody in his capacity as Secretary, and the Secretary shall, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, comply with every such requisition.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 41--> State(s): Kerala The proceedings of every district council or Standing Committee thereof shall be governed by such rules as may be made by the Government in this behalf and bye-laws (not inconsistent with such rules or the provisions of this Act) made by the district council with the approval of the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 42--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a motion expressing want of confidence in the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee may be made in accordance with the procedure laid down herein. (2) Written notice in such form as may be prescribed of the intention to make any motion referred to in sub-section (1) signed by 1 [such number of members other than nominated members] of the district council as shall constitute not less than one fifth of the sanctioned strength of the district council, together with a copy of the motion which is proposed to be made shall be delivered in person by any of the members of the district council signing the notice to the Secretary. (3) The Secretary shall convene meeting of the members of the district council for the consideration of the motion, to be held at the office of the district council at a time appointed by him which shall not be later than fifteen days from the date on which the notice under sub-section (2) is delivered to him. (4) The Secretary shall give to the members of the district council notice of not less than 10 clear days of any meeting held under this section and of the time appointed therefor. (5) A meeting convened under this section shall be presided over by- (a) the President where the motion is against the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee; (b) the Vice-President where the motion is against the President: and (c) a Chairman of Standing Committee in the order of preference mentioned in sub-section (3) of section 28, if the President or the Vice-President. as the case may be, is unable to preside over the meeting as provided in clause (a) or clause (b) due to absence or otherwise: Provided that a Chairman of a Standing Committee shall not be entitled to preside over a meeting under this clause if the motion is against that Chairman. 2 [(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), if the majority of the members present at any meeting held under this section are of opinion that a person elected from among them shall preside over such meeting instead of the order of preference mentioned in the said sub-section, they shall elect a member from among themselves, to preside over the meeting; Provided that such election shall be conducted in the same meeting before considering the motion: Provided further that no notice shall be necessary for the conduct of such election.] (6) A meeting convened for the purpose of considering the motion under this section shall not be adjourned except for reasons beyond human control. (7) As soon as the meeting convened under this section has commenced, the person presiding shall read at the meeting the motion for the consideration of which it has been convened and declare it to be open for debate. (8) No debate on any motion under this section shall be adjourned except for reasons beyond human control. (9) A debate on any motion shall automatically terminate on the expiry of four hours from the time appointed for the commencement of the meeting if it is not concluded earlier and upon the conclusion of the debate or upon the expiry of such period of four hours as the case may be, the motion shall be put to vote. (10) The person presiding shall not speak on the merit of the motion, but he shall be entitled to vote thereon, without the right to exercise any second or casting vote. (11) The copy of the minutes of the meeting together with the copy of the motion and the result of the voting thereon shall forthwith, on the termination of the meeting, be forwarded to the Government by the Secretary. (12) If the motion is, carried with the support of the majority of the elected 3 [members other than nominated members] of the district council holding office on the date of the meeting, the Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, remove the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee, as the case may be. 4 [(12A) Nothing contained in sub-section (12) shall-prevent a Minister, or the Leader of the Opposition, who has nominated a person or persons under sub-section (5) or section 4 to represent him in a district council or district councils, from voting or from participating the meeting to consider a motion of no confidence in the President or Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee, as the case may be, of that district council or district councils.] (13) If the motion is not carried by such majority as aforesaid or the meeting cannot be held for want of quorum, no notice of any subsequent motion expressing want of confidence in the same President Vice-President or Chairman of Standing Committee shall be received until after the expiry of six months from the date of the meeting or the date fixed for the meeting, as the case may be. (14) No notice of a motion under this section shall be received within six months of the assumption of office by the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee, as the case may be. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 43--> State(s): Kerala (1) The President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of any Standing Committee or any member other than an ex-officio member may resign his office as such President or Vice-President or Chairman or member by giving notice in writing to the district council and the notice shall be delivered to the Secretary who shall place the same before the district council at its next meeting. Where the notice of resignation is not delivered personally to the Secretary, he shall, on receipt of the notice of resignation, obtain confirmation from the person concerned as to its genuineness, before it is placed before the district council. (2) A resignation under sub-section (1) shall take effect on and from the date on which the notice is placed before the meeting of the district council, unless it is withdrawn by the person concerned before the close of that meeting.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 44--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and to such conditions and restrictions may be prescribed, the administration of the district in respect of the matters enumerated in the First Schedule shall with effect from such date as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, specify, be vested in the district council: Provided that different dates may be specified for each matter enumerated in the said Schedule or for different subjects comprised in any such matter. 1 [(1A) The Government may, if they consider it necessary so to do. by notification in the Gazette, amend or modify any entry in or add any entry to the First Schedule.] (2) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, from time to time delegate to the district councils any of the powers and functions of the Government as may be specified in the notification in respect of any matter subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified therein. (3) 2 [The Government may, transfer to the district council or any of the institutions] projects, holdings and other properties and assets and liabilities connected with the matters referred to in sub-section (1): Provided that the Government shall not transfer to the district councils any training or research institutions or any programme, project or schemes of State-wide importance. (4) If any question arises to whether any institution, programme, project or scheme falls within the scope of the proviso to sub-section (3), the question shall be decided by the Government and their decision thereon shall be final. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 45--> State(s): Kerala 1 [x x x x] Omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 46--> State(s): Kerala A district council may accept donations for, or trusts relating exclusively to, the furtherance of any purpose to which its funds may be applied and shall apply the same solely for such purpose.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 47--> State(s): Kerala Any immovable property which is required by a district council for a public purpose connected with the discharge of the functions imposed on it under this Act, or the rules or bye-laws made thereunder,, or any other law may be acquired under the provisions of 1 [the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, (Central Act 1 of 1894)] and on payment of compensation awarded under that Act in respect of such property and of any other charges incurred in acquiring it, that said property shall stand transferred to and vest in the district council. Substituted by Act 18 of 1990.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 48--> State(s): Kerala [The President shall have supervisory control over the officers of the Government appointed under section 32 and the officers and servants whose service have been lent to the district council under section 36]. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 49--> State(s): Kerala 1 [x x x x] Omitted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 50--> State(s): Kerala The Government shall subject to the rules made in this behalf, make such grants as are necessary to the district councils for the proper discharge of their functions under this Act.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 51--> State(s): Kerala (1) 1 [The Government may at such times as they may consider necessary in this behalf] by order, constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and two other members. (2) The Finance Commission shall go into the problems of income and expenditure in respect of the district councils and it shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendations to the Government as to- (a) The patterns of assistance from the Government to the district council; (b) The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid from Government to the district councils; (c) The date from which the grants-in-aid or assistance is to be given effect to; (d) The possibility of assigning to the district councils a percentage of the proceeds from any tax levied and collected by the Government from that district; and (e) Any other matter referred to the Commission by the Government in the interests of sound finance and efficient functioning of the district councils. (3) The Chairman or a member of the Finance Commission may resign his office by writing under his hand and addressed to the Finance Secretary to Government, but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by the Government. (4) A casual vacancy created, by the resignation of a member or Chairman under sub-section (3), for any other reason, may be filled by fresh appointment and a member or chairman so appointed shall hold office for the remaining period for which the member or Chairman in whose place he was appointed would have held office. (5) The Finance Commission shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be provided by rules made under this Act. (6) The recommendations of the Finance Commission shall be accepted by the Government with such suitable modifications as are deemed necessary with effect from such date as is notified in the Gazette. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 52--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may make such further grants and loans to the district councils as they consider necessary for the execution of specific schemes, projects, programmes or plans relating to any of the matters administrated by the district council under such terms and conditions as may be Fixed by the Government in this behalf. (2) Every district council shall utilise such grants or loans under this section only of specific purpose or purposes for which such grants or loans are given. (3) In respect of loans given by Government under this section, the provisions of the Kerala Local Authorities Loans Act, 1963 (30 of 1963) and the rules made thereunder shall apply.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 53--> State(s): Kerala A district council may, subject to the provisions of the Kerala Local Authorities Loans Act, 1963 (30 of 1963) and the rules made thereunder, borrow any sums of money which may be required for the purpose for which the funds of the district council may be applied under the provisions of this Act or any other law in force.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 54--> State(s): Kerala [(1) The district council may, collect such fees from the beneficiaries of the institutions which are run or financed wholly or partially by them at such rates as may be fixed by them subject to the rules made by the Government for the purpose.] 2 [Provided that the fees from the beneficiaries of the institutions transferred under sub-section (3) of section 44 shall be collected by the district council and remitted to the Government account concerned for a period of two years or for such further period as may be extended by Government.] 3 [(2) The district council may collect such fees as may be prescribed for issuing copies of any minutes, documents or other records to the public.] Renumbered by Act 21 of 1991. Proviso added by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 55--> State(s): Kerala (1) All monies received by the district council except those received on behalf of the Central Government or the State Government, shall constitute a fund which shall be called "The District Council Fund" and shall be applied and disposed of subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules as may be prescribed in this behalf. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Government may direct the district council to constitute separate funds to which shall be credited such receipt as may be specified by the Government and such funds shall be applied and disposed of in the manner prescribed. 1 [(3) The amounts at the credit of the District Council, Fund referred to in sub-section (1) and of other funds referred to in sub-section (2) shall be kept in the account "8448-Deposits of Local Funds" in the District Treasury concerned or in such other account as may be notified by the Government in this behalf]" Inserted by Act 35 of 1989 and Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 56--> State(s): Kerala (1) The District Council Fund may be applied for the purpose of carrying out the functions of the district council, under this Act. subject to such rules as the Government may make from time to time. (2) If the expenditure incurred by any local Government in the district for any purpose for which the District Council Fund may be applied under sub-section (1) is such as to benefit the inhabitants of the district, the district council may with the sanction of the Government, and shall, if so directed by them, make a reasonable subsidy towards such expenditure. (3) A district council may, out of its funds and subject to the rules as may be made, grant financial assistance for the furtherance of its activities to such persons, institutions or societies subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 57--> State(s): Kerala 1 [(1) The Secretary shall in each year prepare and place before the Finance Standing Committee a budget showing the probable receipts and expenditure during the following year with in such period, as may be fixed, and in such form and manner as may be determined, by the Government, from time to time, in this behalf] (2) After the Finance Standing Committee has considered and modified the budget to the extent necessary, the Chairman of the Finance Standing Committee shall place the budget before the district council in a meeting of the district council which shall be called 2 [within such period as may be fixed by the Government from time to time in this behalf]. (3) The district council shall sanction the budget with such modification as it thinks fit. (4) The district council shall finally pass the budget estimate 3 [before such period as the Government may fix from time to time in this behalf] and forthwith submit copies thereof to the Government 4 [x x x x]. 5 [(4A) The period for the purpose of sub-section (1) sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) shall be so fixed by the Government to enable them to consider the budget estimates of the district councils while preparing the budget proposals of the State). (5) If in the course of the year, a district council finds it necessary to alter the figures shown in the budget with regard to receipts or the distribution of the amount to be expended on the different services undertaken by it, a supplemental or revised budget may be framed and sanctioned in the manner provided in sub-sections (1) and (2) and copies thereof submitted forthwith to the Government 6 [x x x x x], (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, it shall be lawful for the Government to prepare and approve the first budgets of all the district councils. Substituted by Act 21 of 1981. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 58--> State(s): Kerala The Government may, direct a district council to modify its estimates to be in keeping with the provisions of this Act.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 59--> State(s): Kerala Save in the case of a pressing emergency, no sum shall be expended by or on behalf of a district council unless such sum is included in the budget estimates sanctioned under section 56. and in force at the time of incurring the expenditure.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60--> State(s): Kerala (1) The district council shall keep such accounts and submit such statements to the Government as may be prescribed. (2) Accounts of receipts and expenditure of every district council shall be maintained for every financial year in such form as may be prescribed. (3) An abstract of every annual account of a district council showing its income under each head of receipt, the charges for the establishment, work under taken, the sum expended on each work, the balance. If any, remaining prepared by the district council in such form as may be prescribed and submitted to the Government not later than the fifteenth day of the second month of the next financial year. S. 60 and Sub-section 60A to 60E substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60A--> State(s): Kerala (1) The accounts of the district council shall, from time to time, and at least once in every year, be audited by the Accountant General, Kerala (hereinafter referred to as the "auditor") in such manner as he may prescribe. (2) The auditor shall, for the purpose of audit, have access to all the accounts and other records of the district council.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60B--> State(s): Kerala (1) The auditor may,- (a) require in writing the production before him of such vouchers statements, returns, correspondence, notes or other documents which he may consider necessary for the proper conduct of his audit; (b) require in writing any person accountable or having the custody or control of any such vouchers, statements, returns, correspondence, notes or documents or any person having directly or indirectly by himself or his partner any share or interest in any contract with or under the district council to meet him at the office of the district council; (c) require such person to make and sign a declaration with respect to such vouchers, statements, returns, correspondence, notes or documents or to answer any question or prepare and furnish any statement; (d) in the event of an explanation being required from any office bearers of the district council or other officer or member of the district council in writing invite such person to meet him and shall in writing specify, the point on which his explanation is required. (2) Any person who wilfully neglects or refuses to comply with any requisition lawfully made under sub-section (1) shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees; Provided that no proceedings under this sub-section shall be instituted without the sanction of the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60C--> State(s): Kerala (1) The auditor shall, as soon as after completion of the audit for a year or for any shorter period or for any transaction or series of transactions, send a report to the district council and duplicate copies thereof to the Government. (2) The auditor shall specify in the report under sub-section (1) all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of failure to recover moneys or other property due to the district council or any loss or waste of money or other property thereof caused by neglect or misconduct of the officers and authorities of the district council. (3) The District council shall forthwith remedy any defect or irregularity pointed out by the auditor and report the action taken to the auditor and the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60D--> State(s): Kerala (1) Where, during the course of an audit, the auditor has reason to believe that any expenditure incurred is contrary to law or deficiency of any amount or loss or unprofitable outlay occasioned is due to the negligence or misconduct of any person or any sum which ought to have been brought into account has not been brought into account by any, person, the auditor may prepare a report specifying the amount under each item and the person responsible therefore and send, the same to an officer authorised by the Government in this behalf (hereinafter in this section referred to as the "authorised officer"), with his recommendation to disallow the expenditure incurred contrary to law and to surcharge or charge, as the case may be, of that person together with a certificate of the amount due from such person: Provided that no recommendation under this sub-section shall be made after the expiry of a period of four years the date on which the expenditure in question was incurred. Explanation. - It shall not be open to any person whose negligence or misconduct has caused or contributed to any such deficiency or loss, to contend that notwithstanding his negligence or misconduct, the deficiency or loss would not have occurred, but for the negligence or misconduct of some other person. (2) The authorised officer shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the person concerned to explain his case, disallow every item of expenditure incurred contrary to law and surcharge the same on the person incurring, or authorising the incurring of, such expenditure and may charge against any person responsible therefor the amount of any deficiency, loss or unprofitable outlay occasioned by the negligence or misconduct of that person or of any sum which ought to have been but is not brought into account of that person. (3) The authorised officer shall state in writing, the reasons for his decision in respect of every disallowance, surcharge or charge and a copy of manner laid down for the service of summons in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908). (4) Any person aggrieved by any disallowance, surcharge or charge may within fourteen days after the date of service, on him of the decision of the auditor, either- (a) make an application to the District Court to set aside such disallowance, surcharge or charge and the court, after taking such evidence as is necessary, may confirm modify or remit such disallowance, surcharge or charge with such orders as to costs as it may think proper in the circumstances; or (b) In lieu of such application, may appeal to the Government who shall pass such orders as they think fit. (5) Where an application is made to the court under clause (a) of sub-section (4) the authorised officer shall be the sole respondent thereto and the applicant shall not make the auditor or any other person a party to the proceedings. (6) Where an appeal under clause(b) of sub-section (4) is made to the Government by any of their officers or servants whose services have been lent to the district council, the Government shall in dealing with the same follow the procedure for an appeal preferred against an order of penalty of recovery from pay. (7) From the decision of the District Court under clause (a) of sub-section (4), an appeal shall lie to the High Court. (8) Every sum certified by the auditor to be due from a person under this Act shall be paid by such person to the Secretary within thirty days after the date of service on him of the decision of the authorised officer unless within that time such person has made an application to the court or an appeal to the Government, against the decision: and such sum, if not so paid, or such sum as the court or the Government declares or declare to be due shall be recoverable as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 60E--> State(s): Kerala The district council shall, within such time as may be specified by the Government in this behalf, furnish to the Government a copy of the audited statement of accounts together with a report and the Government shall, as soon as may be after it is received, cause the same to be laid before the Legislative. Assembly].
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 61--> State(s): Kerala Subject to such restrictions and control as may be prescribed, a district council may write off any amount whatsoever due to it, whether under a contract or otherwise or any sum payable in connection therewith if in its opinion such amount or sum is irrecoverable: Provided that where the Government are responsible for the collection of any amount due to the district council, the power to write off such amount payable in connection therewith on the ground of its being irrecoverable, shall be exercised by or only with the sanction of, the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 62--> State(s): Kerala (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Kerala Local Authorities Loans Act, 1963 (30 of 1963), the Government may, by order, direct any person having custody of the funds of the district council to pay to them in priority to any other charges against such fund, except charges for the service of authorised loans, any loan or advance made by them to the district council for any purpose to which its funds may be applied under this Act. (2) The person to whom the order referred to in sub-section (1) is addressed shall be bound to comply with such order.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 63--> State(s): Kerala [Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall be lawful for the Government to issue directions to the district councils in matters relating to State and National policies or, on matters relating to the performance of functions, exercise of powers and discharge of duties by a district council or on such other matters as the Government may consider it necessary so to do in furtherance of the object of the Act and the district councils shall be bound to comply with such directions.] Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 64--> State(s): Kerala 1 [x x x x] Omitted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 65--> State(s): Kerala Nothing in this Act shall affect the power of the Government to prepare for the whole State or 1 [any area comprising one or more districts] any plan or programme relating to 2 [any economic, welfare or any other activity] which is assigned by this Act to a district council or to undertake any such project or programme concerning the whole State or any part of the State or any such area. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 66--> State(s): Kerala The Government may- (a) call for any record, register or other documents the possession, or under the control of any district council; (b) require any district council to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics; (c) require any district council to furnish any information or report on any matter connected with such district council; (d) require any district council to obtain their previous sanction before giving up a claim or closing down any institution which is a source of income; and (e) record in writing for the consideration of any district council any observations in regard to its proceedings or duties.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 67--> State(s): Kerala (1) As soon as may be after the 1 [first day of April] every year and not later than such date as may be fixed by the Government, every district council shall submit to the Government a report of its administration including the administration report of Local Governments within its jurisdiction during the preceding financial year in such form and with such details as may be prescribed. (2) The Secretary shall prepare the report in consultation with the President and it shall be submitted to the Government after due consideration by the district council and with its resolution thereon. 2 [(2A) The Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the administration report, cause the same to be laid before the Legislative Assembly]. (3) The report and the resolution referred to in sub-section (2) shall be published in such manner as the district council may direct subject to the rules made by the Government in this behalf. Substituted by 35 of 1989. Inserted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 68--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by order in writing, cancel any resolution passed or decision taken or action initiated by a district council or any Committee thereof if in their opinion such resolution, decision or action (a) is not legally passed, taken or initiated: or (b) is in excess or abuse of the powers conferred by this Act or any other law. (2) The Government shall, before taking action under sub-section (1) give the district council an opportunity for explanation and reconsideration.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 69--> State(s): Kerala (1) If at any time it appears to the Government that a district council or its President has made default in performing any duty imposed by or under this Act or in carrying out any orders lawfully issued by the Government, they may, by order in writing, fix a period for the performance of such duty, or the carrying out of such order. (2) If such duty is not performed or such order is not carried out within the period fixed under sub-section (1), the Government may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the district council or its President, as the case may be, to explain why further action under this section may not be pursued, appoint any officer or authority to perform the duty or to carry out the functions, and may direct that the expenses incurred therefor shall be paid from the fund of the district council within such time as may be specified by the Government. (3) If the expenses which the Government may direct under sub-section (2) to be paid from the fund of the district council are not paid as provided in that sub-section the Government may make an order directing the person having the custody of the said fund to pay it in priority to any other charges against that, fund, except charges for the service of authorised loans. (4) The person referred to in sub-section (3), of Section 69 shall so far as the funds to the credit of the district council admit, be bound to comply with the order made by the Government under that sub-section.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 70--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette and with effect from a date to be specified therein, remove any President or Vice-President or Chairman of a Standing Committee who in their opinion wilfully omits, or refuses to carry out, or disobeys, the provisions of this Act, or any rules, bye-laws, regulations or lawful orders issued thereunder or abuses the power vested in him. (2) The Government shall when they propose to take action under sub-section (1)- (a) arrange for an enquiry to be conducted into the matter by the Commissioner for Local Government; (b) give the President or Vice-President or Chairman of the Standing Committee, as the case may be, an opportunity for explanation; and (c) specify their reasons for the action proposed to be taken. (3) Any person removed under sub-section (1) from the office of President or Vice-President or Chairman of a Standing Committee shall not be eligible for election to any of the said offices until the date on which notice of the next ordinary election to the district council is published in the manner prescribed or the expiry of six months from the date of removal, whichever is earlier.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 71--> State(s): Kerala (1) If the district council persistently makes default in performing the duties imposed on it by law or in carrying out the orders lawfully issued by the Government or exceeds or abuses its power, the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, direct that the district council shall be dissolved and reconstituted on such date as may be specified in the notification; or, the Government may if they think necessary, by notification in the Gazette, supersede the district council for a period not exceeding six months. Every notification under this sub-section shall be accompanied by a notification appointing an administrative committee under sub-section (5). (2) Before publishing a notification under sub-section (1), the Government shall communicate to the district council concerned the grounds on which they proposed to do so, fix a reasonable period for the district council to show cause against the proposal and consider its explanations or objections, if any. (3) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), all the members of the district council including the President and the Vice-President and the Vice-President shall forthwith be deemed to have vacated their offices as such, and fresh election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (4) The members of a reconstituted district council shall enter upon their offices on the date fixed for the reconstruction of the district council. (5) During any interval between the dissolution and the reconstruction of a district council or during the period of its supersession, as the case may be all the powers and duties of the district council and of its President and Vice-President shall be exercised and discharged by an Administrative Committee and a Chairman and Vice-Chairman thereof 1 [appointed by the Government by notification in the Gazette]. 2 [x x x] (6) When a district council is dissolved or superseded under sub-section (1), the Administrative Committee appointed by the Government until the date of reconstitution thereof, and the reconstituted district council thereafter shall be entitled to all the assets and be subject to all the liabilities of the district council as on the date of dissolution or supersession and on the date of reconstitution respectively. (7) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions; and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following the Legislative Assembly makes any modification in the notification or decides that the notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or have no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification. Substituted by Act 35 of 1989. Omitted by Act 35 of 1989.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 72--> State(s): Kerala The Government or any other person lawfully taking action on behalf of default of a district council under this Act shall have powers as are necessary for the purpose and shall be entitled to the same protection under this Act as the district council or its employees whose powers are exercised; and Compensation shall be recoverable from the district council's Fund by any person suffering damage from the exercise of such powers to the same extent, as if the action had been taken by the district council or its employees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 73--> State(s): Kerala (1) Any person aggrieved by any notice or order issued or other action taken by or on behalf of the district council under the provisions of this Act or the rules or bye-laws made thereunder may file, a petition for review to the district council, and the district council shall review such notice, order or action and pass any further order as it deems fit: Provided that there shall be only one review against any such notice or order issued or action taken. (2) A petition for review under sub-section (1) shall be prescribed within thirty days from the date of the Act or the service of the order or notice complained of: Provided that the time occupied in obtaining copies of the order or notice complained against shall be excluded from the computation of the said period of thirty days: Provided further that a petition may be presented after the said period of thirty days if the aggrieved person satisfies the appropriate authority that he was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the petition within the said period. (3) When a petition for review has been presented under this section the President may, if felt necessary, stay the operation of the order or the action complained against, pending consideration of the petition: Provided that the President shall place every such order issued by him before the next meeting of the district council.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may suo moto at any time examine the record of a district council in respect of any proceedings to satisfy themselves as to the regularity of such proceedings or the legality of any decision or order passed therein; and, if, in any case, the Government are satisfied that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or reversed or remitted for reconsideration on the ground of procedural irregularity or illegality, they may pass orders accordingly: Provided that the Government shall not pass any order affecting any party unless such party has had an opportunity of making a representation. (2) The Government may stay the execution of any such decision or order pending the exercise of their powers under sub-section (1) in respect thereof if there is prima facie case of procedural irregularity or illegality. (3) The Government may suo moto at any time review any order under sub-section (1), if it was passed by them under any mistake, whether of fact or of law, or in ignorance of any material fact. (4) The provisions contained in the proviso to sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of any proceeding under sub-section (3) as they apply to a proceeding under sub-section (1).
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74A--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public meeting within the district in connection with an election to the district council of that district during the period of forty-eight hours ending with the hour fixed for the conclusion of the poll. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74B--> State(s): Kerala Any person who at a public meeting in connection with the district council election acts or incites others to act in a disorderly manner for the purpose of preventing the transaction of business for which the meeting was held shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74C--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall on the date or dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station- (a) use or operate within or at the entrance of the polling station or any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof, a tape recorder or a video cassette recorder or a video cassette player or any apparatus for amplifying or re-producing the human voice, such as a megaphone or a loud speaker, or (b) shout or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, within or at the entrance of the polling station or in any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof, so as to cause any annoyance to any person visiting the polling station for the poll or so as to interfere with the work of the officers and other persons on duty at the polling station. (2) Any person who contravenes or wilfully aids or abets the contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. (3) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or has committed an offence punishable under this section, he may direct any police officer to arrest such person and thereupon the police officer shall arrest him. (4) Any police officer may take such steps, and use such force as may be reasonably necessary for preventing any contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) and may seize any apparatus used for such contravention.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74D--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall, on the date or dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station commit any of the following acts within the polling station, or in any public or private place within a distance of one hundred metres of the polling station, namely:- (a) canvassing for votes; or (b) soliciting the vote of any elector; or (c) persuading any elector not to vote for any particular candidate; or (d) persuading any elector not to vote at the election; or (e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an official notice) relating to the election. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74E--> State(s): Kerala (1) Any person, who at any election fraudulently takes or attempts to take a ballot paper or a ballot box out of a polling station or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. (2) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or has committed an offence punishable under sub-section (1), such offencer may, before such person leaves the polling station, attest or direct a police officer to arrest such person and may search such person or cause him to be searched by a police officer: Provided that when it is necessary to cause a woman to be searched, the search shall be made by another woman with strict regard to decency. (3) Any ballot paper found upon the person arrested on search shall be made over to a police officer for safe custody by the presiding officer, or when the search is made by a police officer, shall be kept by such officer in safe custody.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74F--> State(s): Kerala (1) A person shall be guilty of an electoral offence, if at any election he- (a) fraudulently defaces, or fraudulently destroys any nomination paper, or (b) fraudulently defaces, or destroys or removes any list, notice or other documents affixed by or under the authority of an Election officer; or (c) fraudulently defaces, or fraudulently destroys any ballot paper or the official mark on the ballot paper or any declaration or identity; or (d) without due authority supplies any ballot paper to any person; or (e) fraudulently puts into any ballot box anything other than the ballot paper which he is authorised by law to put in; or (f) without due authority destroys, takes, opens or otherwise interferes with any ballot box or ballot papers then in use for the purposes of the election; or (g) fraudulently or without due authority, as the case may be, attempts to do any of the foregoing acts or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such acts. (2) Any person guilty of any electoral offence under this section shall- (a) if he is a returning officer or a presiding officer at a polling station or any other officer or clerk employed on official duty in connection with the election, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both; (b) if he is any other person, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. (3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be on official duty if his duty is to take part in the conduct of an election or part of an election including the counting of votes or to be responsible after an election for the used ballot papers and other documents in connection with such election, but the expression "official duty" shall not include any duty imposed otherwise than by or under this Act.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74G--> State(s): Kerala Every presiding or polling officer, or other person in attendance at the polling room who, except for some purpose authorised by law, communicates to any person any information indicating directly or indirectly for which candidate any voter has voted and every person who by any improper means procures any such information, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74H--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person who is a returning officer, or an assistant returning officer, or a presiding or polling officer at an election, or an officer or clerk appointed by the returning officer or the presiding officer to perform any duty in connection with an election shall, in the conduct or the management of the election do any act (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of a candidate. (2) No such person as aforesaid and no member of a police force shall endeavour- (a) to persuade any person to give his vote at an election; or (b) to dissuade any person from giving his vote at an election; or (c) to influence the voting of any person at an election in any manner. (3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74I--> State(s): Kerala If any person is guilty of any corrupt practice of hiring or procuring, whether on payment or otherwise, of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or by any other person, for the conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself, the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling station, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees: Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to and from any such polling station shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical power. Provided further that the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from any such polling station shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this section. Explanation:- In this section, the expression 'vehicle or vessel' means any vehicle or vessel used or capable of being used for the purpose of road or water transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or vessels or otherwise.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74J--> State(s): Kerala (1) Every head of office and department including educational institutions of the Government and every local authority or other authority shall, on requisition by the Director of elections, furnish to him a list of officers and staff of such office or authority within such time as may be specified in the requisition, for performing any duty in connection with an election to a district council. Explanation:- For the purpose of this section 'local authority' means a Municipal Corporation or a Panchayat or a Township Committee and 'other authority' means any authority by whatever name called, constituted by the Government under any law or established by or under any State enactment for the time being in force.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74K--> State(s): Kerala If any person, appointed to perform any duty in connection with election to a district council, refuses such appointment or without reasonable cause neglects or fails to perform such duties, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74L--> State(s): Kerala (1) If it appears to the Director of elections that in connection with an election to a district council, (a) any premises are needed or are likely to be needed for the purpose of being used as a polling station or for the storage of ballot boxes after a poll has been taken, or (b) any vehicle or vessel is needed or is likely to be needed for the purpose of transport of ballot to or from any polling station, or transport of members of the police force for maintaining order during the conduct of such election, or transport of any officer or other person for the performance of any duties in connection with such election, the direction of election may, by order in writing, requisition such premises or such vehicle or vessel, as the case may be, and may make such further orders as may appear to him to be necessary or expedient in connection with the requisitioning: Provided that no vehicle or vessel which is being lawfully used by a candidate or his agent for any purpose connected with the election of such candidate shall be requisitioned under this sub-section until the completion of the poll at such election. (2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing addressed to the person deemed by the Director of elections to be the owner or person in possession of the property. (3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub-section (1), the period of such requisition shall not extend beyond the period for which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in that sub-section. (4) If any person contravenes any order made under this section, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine or with both. (5) In this section,- (a) 'premises' means any land, building or part of a building and includes a hut. shed or other structure or any part thereof: (b) 'vehicle' means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise: (c) 'vessel' means any vessel used or capable of being used for the purpose of water transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74M--> State(s): Kerala Any person who in connection with an election to a district council promotes or attempts to promote on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 74N--> State(s): Kerala No person shall print or publish or cause to be printed or published any election pamphlet or poster which does not bear on its face the names and address of the printer and publisher thereof and any person who contravenes this provision shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both].
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 75--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may by notification in the Gazette 1 [make rules either prospectively or retrospectively] for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session or in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative Assembly decides that the rule should be either modified or annulled, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or have no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Substituted by Act 21 of 1991.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 76--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder a district council may, with the approval of the Government, make byelaws for carrying out any of the purposes for which it is constituted. (2) The Government may remit for reconsideration and resubmission any bye-law or part thereof to the district council or add to, omit or alter any bye-law which contravenes the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder. (3) In making a bye-law, the district council may provide that any person who commits a breach thereof shall be liable to pay by way of penalty such sums as may be fixed by the district council not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees or in case of a continuing breach, fifty rupees for every day during which the breach continues after a penalty has been levied for the first breach. (4) The Government shall have power to make rules regarding the procedure for the making of bye-laws, the publication thereof, and the date on which they shall come into effect.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 77--> State(s): Kerala (1) Whoever acts as a member of a district council knowing that under this Act or the rules made thereunder, he is not entitled or has ceased to be entitled to hold office as such, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two hundred rupees for every such offence. (2) Whoever acts as the President or the Vice-President of a district council or exercises any of his functions as such, knowing that under this Act or the rules made thereunder, he is not entitled or has ceased to be entitled to hold office as such or to exercise such functions, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such offence. (3) Any person who having been the President, or the Vice-President or a Chairman of any Standing Committee of a district council fails to hand over any document or other property vested or belonging to the district council which are in, or have come into his possession or control, to his successor in office or other prescribed authority,- (a) In every case, as soon as his term of office as such President or Vice-President or Chairman expires: (b) in the case of a person who was the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee also on demand by the President, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such breach.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 78--> State(s): Kerala If any employee of a district council knowingly acquires directly or indirectly by himself or by partner, employer or employee any personal share or interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf of, the district council, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45 of 1860): Provided that no person shall be reason of being a shareholder in, or a member of, any company be held to be interested in any contract entered into between such company and the district council unless he is a director of such company: Provided further that no person shall, by reason of his being a director, member or office bearer of a co-operative society, be held to be interested in any contract entered into between such co-operative society and the district council.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 79--> State(s): Kerala Any person who is required by this Act or the rules made thereunder or by any notice or other proceedings issued or taken under this Act or the rules made thereunder to furnish any information, and omits to furnish such information or knowingly furnishes false information shall be punishable with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 80--> State(s): Kerala Any person who without authority in that behalf removes, destroys, defaces or otherwise obliterates any notice or any sign or mark erected by or under the orders of a district council shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 81--> State(s): Kerala Any person obstructing a district council or obstructing or molesting the President or a member of a district council or any person employed by the district council or any person with whom a contract has been entered into by or on behalf of the district council in the discharge, of its or his duty or of anything which it or he is empowered or required to do by virtue, or in consequence, of this Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made thereunder shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 82--> State(s): Kerala All the fines imposed under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder shall, on realisation, be credited to the fund of the district council.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 83--> State(s): Kerala (1) A district council shall exercise all the powers conferred on, and perform all the functions entrusted to. that council by or under this Act or any other law and shall also exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be conferred on or entrusted to it by the Government for carrying out the purpose of this Act. (2) A district council shall have power to do all acts necessary for, and incidental to, the carrying out of the functions entrusted or delegated to it.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 84--> State(s): Kerala (1) A district council may, and if so required by the Government shall, join with one or more than one other district council or other local Government in constituting a joint committee for any purpose for which they are jointly responsible. (2) The constitution, powers and procedure of a joint committee and the method of settling differences of opinion arising in the committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 85--> State(s): Kerala (1) When a dispute exists among two or more district councils or between a district council and one or more than one. local Government in regard to any matter arising under the provisions of this or any other Act and the district council or the district councils and the local Government or the local Governments, as the case may be. are according to their own admission or in the opinion of the Government unable to settle it amicably, any officer of and above the rank of an Additional Secretary to Government authorised by the Government in this behalf by general or special order, may take such action as is necessary to settle the dispute by himself or if it cannot be so settled, refer it with a report to the Government for decision. (2) Any decision of the Government under sub-section (1) shall be binding on the district councils and the local Government or each of the local Governments, as the case may be, and shall not be liable to be questioned in any court of law. (3) The powers of the Government under this section shall, where one of the local Governments concerned is a cantonment authority or the port authority of a major port, be exercisable only with the concurrence of the Central Government. Explanation:- For the purpose of this section, a local Government shall include a Government authority and the port authority of a major port.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 86--> State(s): Kerala No act of a district council or of a Standing Committee thereof or any person acting as the President or the Vice-President of a district council or as the Chairman of any Standing Committee shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of any defect in the establishment of that district council or Standing Committee or on the ground that the President. Vice-President or any member of the district council or Chairman of any Standing Committee was not entitled to hold or continue in such office by reason of any disqualification or by reason of any irregularity or illegality in his election or appointment or by reason of such act having been done during the period of any vacancy in the office of the President, Vice-President or member of such district council or of the Chairman or member of the Standing Committee.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 87--> State(s): Kerala (1) All notices, orders and requisitions issued under the provisions of this Act or the rules, bye-laws made thereunder shall be in writing. (2) Whenever by any notice, requisition, or order issued under the provisions of this Act or the rules or bye-laws made thereunder, any person is required to execute any work, or to take any measure or to do anything, a reasonable time shall be specified in such notice, requisition or order within which the work shall be executed, or the measure taken or the thing done. (3) If such notice, requisition or order is not complied with within the time so specified- (a) The Secretary may in consultation with the President, cause such work to be executed, or may take any measure or do anything which may, in this opinion be necessary for giving due effect to the notice, requisition or order, and (b) if no penalty has been specifically provided in this Act. for failure to comply with such notice, requisition or order, the said person shall be punishable with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees for every such offence: Provided that if any loss or damage is caused to the district council by the non-compliance by the person of such notice, requisition or order within the time specified he shall pay compensation to the district council for such loss or damage notwithstanding any punishment in which he may have been sentenced for the said non-compliance. In the event of dispute, the amount of compensation payable by the said person shall be determined by the Court before which he was convicted of the said offence on application made to it for the purpose by the Secretary not later than three months from the date of conviction and in default in payment of the amount of compensation so determined, it shall be recovered under a warrant from the said court as if were a fine inflicted by it on the person liable therefor.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 88--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the President or the Vice-President or the Secretary or any person authorised by the President or the Secretary may enter on or into any place, building or land with or without assistants or workmen to make any enquiry, inspections, test, examination, survey, measurement or valuation or to execute any other work, which is authorised by the provisions of this Act or of any rule, bye-law or order made under it or which it is necessary to make or execute for any of the purposes of this Act or in pursuance of any of the said provisions. (2) No claim shall be against any person for any damage or inconvenience necessarily caused by the exercise of the powers under sub-section (1) or the use of any force necessary for effecting an entrance under that sub-section.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 89--> State(s): Kerala All arrears of sums due to a district council under this Act or of loans granted by it shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 90--> State(s): Kerala Whenever in exercise of any power conferred on it by this Act, or the rules issued thereunder a district council has sanctioned to any institution or individual a subsidy or grant of money for any specified purpose and the whole or any portion of such subsidy or grant is found not to have been utilised for that purpose in accordance with the conditions subject to which the subsidy or grant was sanctioned, the same or the unutilised portion thereof shall be recoverable by the district council from such institution or individual as an arrear of land revenue.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 91--> State(s): Kerala No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie or be instituted against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or under the rules made thereunder.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 92--> State(s): Kerala (1) No suit or other civil proceedings against a district council or against the President, the Vice-President or any other member, or employee thereof or against any other person acting under the direction of the district council or any member, or employee thereof for anything done or purporting to be done under this Act in it is or his official capacity:- (a) shall be instituted until the expiration of one month after notice in writing, stating the cause of action, the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff and the nature of the relief which he claims, has been, in the case of a district council delivered or left at the office of the district council and in the case of a member, employee or person as aforesaid delivered to him or left at his office or at his usual place of abode and the plaint shall in each case contain a statement that such notice has been delivered or left: or (b) shall be instituted, unless it is a suit for the recovery of immovable property or for the declaration of title thereto otherwise than within six months next after the accrual of the alleged cause of action. (2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) when it is intended for a district council, shall be addressed to the Secretary. (3) If any district council or person to whom notice is given under sub-section (1) tenders or amends to the plaintiff before the proceedings is commenced and if the plaintiff does not in such proceedings require more than the amount so tendered he shall not recover any costs incurred by him after such tender, and the plaintiff shall also pay all costs incurred by the district council after such tender.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 93--> State(s): Kerala (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no person shall be tried for any offence against this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder unless complaint is made within one year of the commission of the offence, by the police, the Secretary or a person expressly authorised by the Secretary in this behalf but nothing herein shall affect the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), in regard to the power of certain Magistrates to take cognizance of offences upon information received or upon their own knowledge or suspicion. (2) Every person other than the Secretary making a complaint shall immediately report the fact to the Secretary. (3) Every prosecution instituted shall be reported by the Secretary to the district council at its next meeting.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 94--> State(s): Kerala The Secretary may subject to such restrictions and control as may be prescribed and with the approval of the President, compound any offence against this Act or any rules or bye-laws made thereunder which may be rules be declared compoundable: Provided that every offence compounded by the Secretary shall be reported by him to the district council at its next meeting.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 95--> State(s): Kerala When the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman or member of a Standing Committee or any other member of a district council or the Secretary or other employee of the district council who is not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to Act in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of that offence except with the previous sanction of the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 96--> State(s): Kerala Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908) or any other law for the time being in force, no Court shall grant any permanent or temporary injunction or make any interim order restraining any proceeding which is being or about to be taken under this Act for the conduct of any election or for the conduct of any meeting for the consideration of a no-confidence motion against the President or the Vice-President or the Chairman of a Standing Committee.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 97--> State(s): Kerala (1) The President, the Vice-President, the Secretary or any member of a district council shall be personally liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property of the district council which has been caused or facilitated by his misconduct or willful negligence. (2) If after giving the President, the Vice-President, the Secretary or member concerned a reasonable opportunity for showing cause to the contrary, the Government are satisfied that the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property of the district council is a direct consequence of misconduct on his part, the Government shall, by an order in writing, direct such President, Vice-President, Secretary or member to pay to the district council before a fixed date, the amount required to be reimbursed to it for such loss, waste or misapplication. (3) If the amount is not so paid it shall be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue and credited to the Fund of the district council. (4) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (2) may, within one month from the receipt by him of the order, apply to the District Court to modify or set aside such order and that court after taking such evidence as it thinks necessary may confirm, modify or remit such amount recovered and made such order as to costs as it thinks proper in the circumstances of the case.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 98--> State(s): Kerala (1) No assessment or demand made and no charge imposed, under the authority of this Act shall be impeached or affected by reason of any clerical error or by reason of any mistake in respect of,- (a) the name, residence, place of business or occupation of any person; or (b) the description of any property or thing; or (c) the amount assessed, demanded or charged: Provided that the provisions of this Act have in substance and effect been complied with: Provided further that no proceedings under this Act shall, merely for defect in form, be set aside by any Court law. (2) No distraint or sale under this Act shall be deemed unlawful, nor shall any person making the same be deemed to be a trespasser, on account of any error, defect or want of form in the bill, notice, schedule form, summons, notice of demand, warrant of distraint, inventory or other proceeding relating thereto, if the provisions of this act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder have in substance and effect been complied with.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 99--> State(s): Kerala It shall be the duty of every police officer,- (a) to communicate without delay to the appropriate officer of the district council any information which he receives of the design to commit, or of the commission of, any offence under this Act or any rule or bye-law made under it: and (b) to assist the President, the Secretary or any person acting under the orders of the district council demanding his aid for the lawful exercise of any power vesting in the President or the Secretary of such person under this Act or any rule or bye-law made thereunder, or for the performance of any function entrusted to any of them.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 100--> State(s): Kerala Every employee, every agent for the collection of any sum due to a district council and every person employed by such agent for the collection of such sum shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45 of 1860).
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 101--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette delegate all or any of their powers under this Act, except those conferred upon them by section 75 to any person or authority and may, in like manner, withdraw any power so delegated. (2) The exercise of any power delegated under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions and to such control and revision by such authority, as may be specified in the notification. (3) The exercise of any power delegated under sub-section (1) shall be subject to control and revision by the Government. (4) A district council or any person exercising or performing any power or function by or under the provisions of this Act or any other law may delegate it or his powers or functions in writing to any person or authority subject to such rules and also to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be prescribed and subject to control and revision by the Government.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 102--> State(s): Kerala [(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appear to them to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of the first constitution of the district councils. (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly within fourteen days after it is made if the assembly is in session, or if the Assembly is not in session it shall be laid at its next session.] Inserted by Act 18 of 1990.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section 103--> State(s): Kerala On the coming into force of the Act in any area, the enactments specified in column (1) of the Table below shall apply to that area, subject to the modifications mentioned in the schedule noted against each. TABLE  (1) (2) (1) 1 [OMITTED] 2 [OMITTED] (2) 3 [x x x] 4 [x x x] (3) 5 [x x x] 6 [x x x] (4) 7 [x x x] 8 [x x x] (5) 9 [x x x] 10 [x x x] (6) 11 [x x x] 12 [x x x] (7) 13 [x x x] 14 [x x x] (8) 15 [x x x] 16 [x x x] (9) 17 [x x x] 18 [x x x] (10) The Travancore Cochin Public Health Act, 1995 (16 of 1955) Thirtieth Schedule (11) The Madras Public Health Act, 1939 (Madras Act 3 of 1939) Fourteenth Schedule (12) 19 [x x x] 20 [x x x] (13) 21 [x x x] 22 [x x x] (14) 23 [x x x] 24 [x x x] (15) 25 [x x x] 26 [x x x] (16) 27 [x x x] 28 [x x x] (17) 29 [x x x] 30 [x x x] (18) 31 [x x x] 32 [x x x] (19) 33 [x x x] 34 [x x x] (20) 35 [x x x] 36 [x x x] (21) The Travancore Public Canals and Public Ferries Act, 1096 (6 of 1096) Twenty-fourth Schedule (22) The Madras Canals and Public Ferries Act, 1890 (Madras Act 2 of 1890) Twenty-fifth Schedule (23) The Cochin Ferries and Tolls Act, 1082 (3 of 1082) Twenty-sixth Schedule (24) The Kerala Education Act, 1958 (6 of 1959) Twenty-seventh Schedule (25) [Omitted by Amendment Act 18 of 1990. K.G. E. No. 629 dt. 23-6-1990] (26) The Cochin Vagrancy Act, 1120 (21 of 1120) Twenty-ninth Schedule (27) The Kerala Land Development Act, 1964 (17 of 1964) Thirtieth Schedule (28) 37 [x x x] 38 [x x x] (29) 39 [x x x] 40 [x x x] 41 (30) 42 [x x x] Inserted by Act 18 of 1990 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991.(31) 43 [x x x] 44 [x x x] Inserted by Act 18 of 1990 and omitted by Act 21 of 1991.(32) The Kerala Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 1957 (9 of 1957) Thirty-fifth Schedule] 45 (33) The Kerala Public Libraries (KeralaGranthasala Sanghom) Act, 1989 (15 of 1989) Thirty-sixth Schedule] Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Omitted by Act 21 of 1991. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990. Inserted by Act 18 of 1990.
Kerala District Administration Act, 1979_Section Sch.--> State(s): Kerala Schedules 
