Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An act to provide for the improvement of live-stock in the State of Kerala. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the improvement of live-stock in the State of Kerala. Be it enacted in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961. 1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (3) This section shall come into force at once, and the Government may, from time to time by notification in the Gazette, apply all or any of the remaining provisions of this Act to the whole or any portion of the state of Kerala from such date and for such period, if any, as may be specified in the notification, and may cancel or modify any such notification. Received the assent of the Governor on 28-06-1961 and published in the Kerala gazette extraordinary No 74 dated 28-06-1961.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "bull" includes a buffalo-bull; (b) "cow" includes a buffalo-cow and a heifer; (c) 'Director' means the officer appointed by the Government as the Director of Animal Husbandry for the State of Kerala and includes any other person on whom the powers or duties of the Director under this Act have been conferred or imposed under section 3; (d) "licence" means a licence granted under section 4; (e) "Licencing Officer" means the Director or any other officer person authorised to grant licences under section 4; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (g) a person is said to "keep a bull" if he owns the bull or has the bull in his possession or custody; and (h) a bull is said to be "castrated" if it is rendered incapable of propagating its species.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala The Government may by general or special order confer or impose on any person all or any of the powers or duties of the Director under this Act.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala (1) No person shall keep a bull which has attained the prescribed age except under and in accordance with the terms, conditions and restrictions of a licence granted under this section, unless it is certified by the prescribed officer that the bull has been effectively castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director. Explanation.- Where a person keeps more than one bull, he shall obtain a separate licence in respect of each bull. (2) Every licence under this section shall be granted by the Director or any officer or person authorised by him by general or special order. It shall be in such form, for such period, and subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed. No fee shall be charged for the grant of the licence.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the licensing officer may refuse to grant or may revoke a licence in respect of any bull if in his opinion the bull appears to be - (a) of defective or inferior conformation and consequently likely to beget defective or inferior progeny, or (b) suffering from an incurable contagious or infectious disease or from any other disease rending the bull unsuitable for breeding purposes, or (c) of a breed which it is undesirable to propagate in the State of Kerala (2) The licensing officer may also after giving a reasonable opportunity to the licensee to be heard revoke a licence granted in respect of any bull kept within his jurisdiction (whether such licence was granted by himself or by any other officer) if in his opinion,- (a) the licence was grated under circumstances of which the licensing officer was not aware at the time of granting the licence and such licence would not have been granted if he had been aware of such circumstances, or (b) there has been a breach of any of the terms, conditions or restrictions of the licence (3) If a licence is revoked under this section, the officer revoking the licence shall give notice thereof to the person keeping the bull or to the person stated in the licence to be the owner of the bull. The notice shall set out the grounds for the revocation. (4) No person shall be entitled to any compensation for the refusal or revocation of any licence under this section.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala A licence granted in respect of a bull shall be surrendered without delay to the licensing officer, if - (a) the period specified in the licence expires, or (b) the licence is revoked under this Act, or (c) the bull dies, or is certified by the prescribed officer to have been effectively castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala The licensing officer may by order require any person keeping a bull to submit it for inspection by himself or by any officer or person deputed by him for the purpose, at any reasonable time, either at the place where the bull is kept for the time being or at any other reasonable place specified in the order not being farther than 1 [three kilometer] from the place where the bull is ordinarily kept, and thereupon it shall be the duty of the person keeping the bull to submit it for inspection accordingly, and render all reasonable assistance in connection with such inspection to the officer concerned. Substituted by Act No.28 of 1968.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Kerala (1) The licensing officer may by order require any person keeping a bull which in his opinion has attained the prescribed age, and in respect of which no licence is for the time being in force under this Act, to have it castrated within one month from the date of the service of the order by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and specified in the order. (2) Such castration shall be performed or caused to be performed by the licensing officer free of charge, unless the owner or other person keeping the bull desires to make his own arrangements for complying with the order. 1 [(3) A person keeping a bull, who has been required by an order under sub-section (1) to have it castrated, and the owner of the bull where such person is not the owner thereof, shall not part with the possession or custody, or transfer the ownership, of the bull until it is castrated: Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in the case of an owner who is not the person keeping the bull, if notice of the said order had not been given to him.] Inserted by Act No.28 of 1968.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Kerala If any notice or order is served under section 5, section 7, or section 8, on any person who is not the owner of the bull, it shall be the duty of that person forthwith to take all reasonable steps to inform the owner of the contents of such notice or order, and if he fails to do so, he shall be liable to indemnify the owner against any loss the owner may sustain by reason of such failure.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Kerala It shall be the duty of any person who for the time being keeps a bull in respect of which a licence has been obtained and is in force, to produce such licence - (a) within a reasonable time, at any place where the bull is for the time being, on demand made by a licensing officer or an officer of the Animal Husbandry Department not below the rank of Veterinary Surgeon, or an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank of Deputy Tahsildar or such other officer as may be authorised in this behalf by the Government by general or special order or (b) before a cow is served by the bull, on demand made by the person in charge of the cow.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Kerala 1 [(1)] Whoever - (a) keeps a bull in contravention of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder, or of any terms, conditions or restrictions of a licence, or (b) neglects or fails to submit a bull for inspection when required to do so under section 7, or (c) neglects or fails to comply with an order served under section 8, or (d) neglects or fails to produce a licence when required to do so under section 10,. shall be punishable with fine which may extend to twenty-five rupees and in the case of a second or any subsequent offence with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. 2 [(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 8 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees and, in the case of a second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.] Renumbered by Act No. 28 of 1968. Inserted by Act No.28 of 1968.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Kerala (1) If a person who keeps a bull neglects or fails to submit it for inspection or to have it castrated when required to do so under section 7, or section 8, the licensing officer may direct that the bull shall be castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and marked with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner, free of charge. (2)(a) If it is not known in whose ownership, possession or custody a bull is for the time being and the fact cannot be ascertained after an inquiry in the prescribed manner, the licensing officer may seize the bull or cause to be seized, and if he is of opinion that the bull has attained the prescribed age and is unsuitable for breeding purposes on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of section 5, may direct that the bull shall be castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and marked with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner, free of charge (b) Every bull seized under clause (a) shall, after it has been castrated and marked as aforesaid where necessary, be sold by public auction or sent to a pinjrapole or infirmary recognised by the Government in this behalf. (c) In case the owner of any bull seized under clause (a) appears before the licensing officer within such time as may be prescribed in this behalf and proves to the satisfaction of such officer that the bull is owned by him- (i) in case the bull has been sold by public auction, the proceeds of such sale shall be paid to the owner after deducting therefrom the costs, charges and expenses incurred for the maintenance and sale of the bull; and (ii) in any other case, the bull shall be delivered to the owner on payment of the costs, charges and expenses incurred for its maintenance. (d) The costs, charges and expenses referred to in sub-clause (i) and (ii) of clause (c) shall be determined in the prescribed manner.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Kerala For the purposes of this Act, a licensing officer or any officer or person authorised by him in this behalf shall have power at all reasonable times- (a) to inspect any bull; (b) to make any bull with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner; and (c) subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed, to enter any premises or other place where he has reason to believe that a bull is kept.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Kerala It shall be the duty of all village officers and servants and of all officers of the Animal Husbandry, Agricultural and Revenue Departments and officers and servants of Panchayats and Municipalities and other officers notified by the Government in this behalf - (a) to give immediate information to the nearest licensing officer of the commission of any offence, or of the intention or preparation to commit any offence, punishable under this Act, which may come to their knowledge; (b) to take all reasonable measures in their power to prevent the commission of any such offence which they may know or have reason to believe is about or likely to be committed; and (c) to assist any licensing officer in carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Kerala No Magistrate shall take cognizance of any office under this Act except upon a complaint made by a licensing officer or any person authorised by such officer in this behalf.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Kerala All officers and servants specified in, or notified under section 14 shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Kerala (1) No suit, prosecution or other proceedings shall lie against any officer or servant of the Government for any act done or purporting to be done under this Act without the previous sanction of the Government (2) No officer or servant of the Government shall be liable in respect of any such act in any civil or criminal proceeding if the act was done in good faith in the course of the execution of duties or the discharge of functions imposed by or under this Act.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Kerala No suit shall be instituted against the Government and no suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted against any officer or servant of the Government in respect of any act done or purporting to be done under this Act, unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding is instituted within six months from the date of the act complained of.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Kerala The Government may at any time either suo motu or on application, call for and examine the record of any order passed by, or any proceedings recorded by, any officer or person under this Act, for the purpose of satisfying themselves as to the legality or propriety of such order or as to the regularity of such proceeding, and may pass such order in reference thereto as they think fit. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the orders or proceedings of any Court or Magistrate.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may after previous publication by notification in the Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) the circumstances in which duplicates of licences may be granted, the fees which may be charged for the grant of such duplicates and the conditions, restrictions and limitations subject to which they may be granted; (c) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by officers appointed under this Act, and the procedure to be followed by such officers; and (d) the service of notices and orders issued under this Act. (3) In making a rule under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the Government may provide that a person guilty of a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine, which may extend to twenty-five rupees. (4) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may be after they are made be laid before the Legislative Assembly for a period of not less than fourteen days and shall be subject to such modifications, by way of repeal or amendment, as the Legislative Assembly may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following. 1 [21. Saving.- Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to a bull dedicated to a religious institution in accordance with any religious usage or custom and directly maintained by that institution. Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "religious institution" means a math or temple.] Substituted by Act No.28 of 1968.
Kerala Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Kerala The Madras Live-stock Improvement Act, 1940 (Act XV of 1940), as in force in the Malabar District referred to in sub-section (2) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 and the Travancore-Cochin Live-stock Improvement Act, 1954 (Act XII of 1954) are hereby repealed. 
