Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act to provide for ceiling on Government guarantees and other matters connected there with or incidental thereto. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for ceiling on Government guarantees issued on behalf of the Government departments, public sector undertakings, local authorities statutory boards corporations and co-operative institutions and for promoting fiscal discipline of the State; BE it enacted in the fifty fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may by notification in the Gazette, appoint.
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In this Act unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Government" means the "Government of Kerala" (b) Government guarantees includes the guarantees given by the State Government on behalf of the Government departments, Public sector undertakings local authorities statutory boards corporations and co-operative institutions; (c) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under the Act. (d) "State" means the State of Kerala
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala The total out standing Government guarantees as on the first day of April of any year shall not exceed rupees fourteen thousand crore.
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force no Government guarantee shall be given in respect of a loan of any private individual, Institution or company.
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall charge a minimum of 0.75 percent annum as guarantee commission, which shall not be waived under any circumstances. (2) Depending on he default risk of any project, the Government may, by notification in he Gazette, specify commission a an enhanced rate. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section 'default risk' means the probability of default by he borrower on whose behalf the Government guarantee is given, depending on the amount borrowed the type of industry and the economic situations. (3) The guarantee given shall not be extended on the expiry of the guarantee period unless the borrower had paid in full the guarantee commissions due tot eh government.
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 6--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, constitute a fund called the Guarantee Redemption Fund. (2) The guarantee commission charged under section 5 shall form the corpus of the Guarantee Redemption fund and it shall be remitted in the Public. Accounts of the State. (3) The administration of Guarantee Redemption Fund shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
Kerala Ceiling on Government Guarantees Act, 2003_Section 7--> State(s): Kerala (1) The Government may, by notification in the gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days, which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative assembly makes any modification in the rule, or decided that there should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
