Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Finance Act, 2000. (2) Sub-section (5) of section 2 and sub-section (2) of section 5 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1993, sub-section (4) of section 5 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1991, sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of section 5 shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 2001 and the remaining provisions shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 2000.
Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 (15 of 1963), - (1) in section 5, - (i) in clause (v) of sub-section (1) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided also that where no tax is payable by a dealer effecting the first sale within the State, to a registered dealer for sale then the dealer effecting the subsequent sale within the State shall pay tax at the rates shown in column (4) of the Fifth Schedule and where there are no two points of sale in the State for any goods coming under the Fifth Schedule And the subsequent sale is to a person other than a registered dealer, or to a registered dealer other than for sale the rate specified in column (8) of that Schedule shall apply to such sales"; (ii) in sub-clause (a) of clause (i) of sub-section (2C), for the words and figures "serial number 97" the words and figures "serial number 108", shall be substituted; (iii) in sub-section (3), - (a) in clause (i), - (i) the first proviso shall be omitted; (ii) in the second proviso, the word "further", shall be omitted; (b) in clause (ii), - (i) for the words "second proviso" the word "proviso", shall be substituted; (ii) the words "or uses the same in the manufacture of any goods which are not liable to tax under this Act", shall be omitted. (2) in sub-section (1) of section 7, - (i) in clause (a), after the existing provisos the following proviso shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided also that where such a dealer acquires any running business or a branch of a business with respect to gold, silver ornaments or wares during the year, the amount of compounding tax payable in respect of such business shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this clause as if it were an independent business, taking into account the turnover conceded in the return or accounts thereof for the previous year with respect to that business or on the basis of the quantum of compounded tax fixed for the previous year in accordance with the second and third provisos, as the case may be"; (ii) in clause (b), - (a) in item (i) for the letters and figures, "Rs. 12,500", the letters and figures "Rs. 15,000", shall be substituted; (b) in item (ii) for the letters and figures "Rs. 25,000" the letters and figures "Rs. 30,000", shall be substituted; (c) in item (iii) for the letters and figures "Rs. 50,000" the letters and figures "Rs. 60,000", shall be substituted. (3) in section 14, - (i) in sub-section (1), - (a) for the words "one hundred" against item (a) the words "Two hundred and fifty", shall be substituted; (b) for the words "Two hundred and fifty" against item (b) the words "Five hundred", shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (3), for the words "fifty rupees" the words "one hundred rupees", shall be substituted. (4) in section 15, - (i) in sub-section (4), for the words "fifty rupees" the words "one hundred rupees", shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-section (6), for the words "fifty rupees" the words "one hundred rupees", shall be substituted. (5) after section 17, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "17A. Assessment or reassessment of certain cases treated as pending. - Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17 or section 18, or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, Tribunal or other authority any assessment or reassessment for any year shall be deemed to have been pending completion if, in the case of original assessment, return or turnover for the year or any period of the year relating to any period prior to 1st April, 1993, has been filed or due to be filed subsequent to the 1st day of April, 1993 and/or a notice in the prescribed form had been served upon the dealer and the assessment in respect of which had not been completed and in the case of a reassessment, the order of the appellate or revisional authority giving rise to such reassessment had been received and such reassessment has not been completed." (6) in section 40, for the words and figures, "by the Board of Revenue under section 37", the words and figures, "under section 37 or section 59A", shall be substituted. (7) after section 42, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "42A. Fee for interlocutory petitions.- Every interlocutory application prescribed by the Government and filed before the authorities under this Act specified below, other than those filed by officers empowered by Government, shall be accompanied by the following fees :- (a) Before the Appellate Assistant : One hundred rupees Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner. (b) Before the Commissioner or the : Two hundred and fifty rupees." Appellate Tribunal. (8) in section 45A, in sub-section (5A), for the words "one hundred" and "two hundred and fifty" the words "two hundred" and "five hundred", shall respectively be substituted. (9) after section 45AA, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "45B. Penalty for transport of goods without records. - (1) If any officer empowered under sub-section (1) of section 29A finds on inspection of any vehicle or vessel that any transporting agency or contract carriage transporting any goods without the documents required under sub-section (2) of section 29, such officer may without prejudice to any action that may be taken under section 29A, impose by an order in writing on such transporting agency, or contract carriage, or the owner of the vehicle a penalty equal to twice the amount of the tax due on such goods subject to a minimum of five thousand rupees; (2) Where a transporting agency or contract carriage or the owner of the vehicle or vessel is subsequently guilty of the offence under sub-section (1) for more than one occasion, the officer referred to in that sub-section may, in addition to the penalty that may be imposed under the said sub-section, by an order in writing detain the vehicle or vessel for a period of 30 days from the date of inspection of the vehicle or vessel, whether the vehicle or vessel used for the commission of the offence on subsequent occasion is the same or not. (3) The vehicle or vessel detained under sub-section (2) shall be kept in safe custody by the officer detaining the vehicle in a place notified by the Government. (4) No order under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be passed unless such person affected by such order shall be given an opportunity of being heard. (5) The vehicle or vessel detained under this section shall after the expiry of thirty days from the date of detention release to the person from whom it was detained. Explanation. - Transporting agency for the purposes of the section shall include parcel agency.". (10) for section 59A, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "59A. Power of Commissioner of Commercial Taxes to issue clarification. - (1) If any dispute arises, otherwise than in a proceedings before any appellate or revisional authority or in any court or Tribunal, as to whether, for the purpose of this Act, - (a) any person is a dealer; or (b) any transaction is a sale; or (c) any particular dealer is required to be registered; or (d) any tax is payable in respect of any sale or purchase, or if tax is payable, the point and the rate thereof; or (e) any activity carried out in any goods amounts to or results in the manufacture of goods; such dispute shall be decided by the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes on application by a dealer or any other person. (2) The Commissioner of Commercial Taxes shall decide the question after giving the parties to the dispute a reasonable opportunity to put forward their case and produce evidence and after considering such evidence and hearing the parties. (3) Every application by a dealer or any other person other than an officer acting on behalf of the Government under sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a fee of five hundred rupees. (4) Where any question arises from any order already passed or any proceedings recorded under this Act, or any earlier law no such question shall be entertained for determination under sub-section (1). (5) Every order issued by the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes under sub-section (1) shall, subject to the provisions of section 40, be final and binding on the applicant, and all authorities subordinate to the Commissioner including an Appellate Assistant Commissioner : Provided that the decision of the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes shall not affect the liabilities of any person under this Act as respects any sale or purchase effected prior to such determination." (11) in the First Schedule, - (i) after serial number 1 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "1A. Aeronautics do. 12"; (ii) in the entry against serial number 13, in column (4), for the figures "12" the figures "15", shall be substituted; (iii) the Explanation to serial number 25, shall be omitted; (iv) in the entry against serial number 27, in column (4), for the figures "12", the figures "15", shall be substituted; (v) in the entry against serial number 31, in column (4), for the figure "8", the figure "4", shall be substituted; (vi) in the entry against serial number 37, - (a) in column (2), for the words "Cloves, nutmeg and mace", the words "Cloves and nutmeg", shall be substituted; (b) in column (4), for the figure "8" in both the places, the figure "4", shall be substituted; (vii) for the entries against serial number 54, in columns (2), (3) and (4) the following entries shall respectively be substituted, namely :- "(i) Electrical goods, instruments, apparatus, do. 8 appliance, hot plates, lighting bulbs, electrical earthernware, porcelain and all other accessories and component parts either sold as a whole or in parts (other than those specifically mentioned in this Schedule) (ii) Electrical appliance, that is to say, fans, do. 12 grinders, mixers, cooking ranges, water heaters. (iii) Electrical wiring cables and ACSR do. 12"; conductors. (viii) after serial number 36 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "36A. Cigarette cases and lighters do. 12" (ix) in the entries against serial number 78, in column (4), for the figure "8", in both the places the figure "4", shall be substituted; (x) after serial number 83 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall respectively be inserted, namely :- "83A. Mace (a) Purchased within At the point of first purchase the State in the State by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 8 (b) Brought from out- At the point of first sale in the side the State State by a dealer who is liable to tax under section 5 8"; (xi) after serial number 92 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "92A. Molasses do. 20"; (xii) in the entries against serial number 103, - (a) in column (2), for the words "primers, thinners and paint brushes", the words "primers and thinners", shall be substituted; (b) in column (4), for the figures "12", the figures "15", shall be substituted; (xiii) after serial number 103 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall respectively be inserted, namely :- "103A. Paint brushes do. 12"; (xiv) after serial number 120 and the entries against it, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "120A. Rectified spirit do. 20"; (xv) in the entries against serial number 135, in column (2), the words "bulldozers", and "cranes and other earth moving machinery", shall be omitted; (xvi) in serial number 150, - (a) the entry in column (2), shall be numbered as item (i) of that entry and in the entry so numbered, after the words "manufactured tea" the words, figures and brackets "other than that falling under item (ii)", shall be inserted; (b) after item (i) so numbered and the entries against it in columns (2), (3) and (4) and the explanation thereunder, the following item and entries shall respectively be inserted, namely : "(ii) Tea sold under brand name registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 . do. 8 Explanation. - Where a tax has been levied and collected on unbranded tea in the State, the tax payable on branded tea under this item shall be reduced by the amount of tax so paid"; (xvii) for the entries against serial number 157 in columns (2), (3) and (4), the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "(i) Tractor and power tiller do 4 (ii) Truck mounted articulated cranes, pick and carry cranes, bulldozers, escavators and other earth moving machinery, vibratory compactors, pavers, pneumatic tyre rollers, their components, spare parts and accessories. do 4"; (xviii) in the entry against serial number 159, - (a) in column (2), after the existing entry the following explanation shall be inserted, namely :- "Explanation. - Turmeric and turmeric powder shall be treated as a single commodity for the purpose of taxation" and (b) in column (4), for the figure "8" the figure "4", shall be substituted. (12) in the Third Schedule, for the entry against serial number 38, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "Meat other than poultry meat and those coming under the First Schedule.". (13) in the Fifth Schedule, - (i) in the entries against serial number 3 in columns (4), (6) and (8), for the figures "10", "2" and "12", the figures "12", "4" and "16", shall respectively be substituted; (ii) in the entry against serial number 4 in column (2), for the words "plywood, veneer plywood, particle board", the words "plywood, veneer plywood, particle board, hard board", shall be substituted; (iii) in the entries against serial number 6 in columns (4), (6) and (8), for the figures "10", "2" and "12", the figures "12", "4" and "16', shall respectively be substituted; (iv) in the entries against serial number 7 in columns (4), (6) and (8) for the figures "10", "2" and "12" the figures "12", "4" and "16', shall respectively be substituted; (v) in the entries against serial number 10 in columns (4), (6) and (8), for the figures "10", "2' and "12", the figures "12", "4" and "16", shall respectively be substituted.
Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, Tribunal or other authority, any assessment or reassessment made or purported to have been made under the second proviso to sub-section (6) or the proviso to sub-section (8) of section 17 of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 (15 of 1963), shall be deemed to be effective as if such assessment or reassessment, had been made under those sub-sections read with section 17A of that Act and accordingly, - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by an officer or authority in connection with the assessment, levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court, Tribunal or before any authority for the cancellation of any such assessment or reassessment as the case may be or for the refund of any such tax so collected; (c) no court, Tribunal or any authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the cancellation of any such assessment or reassessment or refund of any tax collected thereunder; (d) any tax assessed or reassessed under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 (15 of 1963), before the 1st day of April, 2000, but not collected before that date shall be recovered in the manner provided under the said Act and the Rules made thereunder; and (e) where any amount which had been received or realised in pursuance of any assessment or reassessment by way of tax is refunded after the 1st day of April, 1993, and such refund would not have been allowed if the provisions of section 17A had been in force on the date on which the order for such refund was passed, the amount so refunded may be recovered as an arrear of tax under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 . (2) For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as preventing any person from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 . (3) Where a dealer who was in arrears of tax or other amount under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 (15 of 1963) relating to any period up to 31st day of March, 1997 has paid tax or such other amount with reduced interest as specified in sub-section (1) of section 23A on or before the 31st day of March, 2000, he shall be deemed to have made the payments in accordance with the provisions of section 23A as it stood as on the 20th day of March, 2000.
Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala In the Kerala Tax on Luxuries Act, 1976 (32 of 1976), after section 8, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "9. Fee for interlocutory applications. - Every interlocutory application prescribed by the Government and filed before the authorities under this Act specified below, other than those filed by officers empowered by Government, shall be accompanied by the following fees, namely :- (a) Before the appellate authority : One hundred rupees (b) Before the revisional authority : Two hundred and fifty rupees."
Kerala Finance Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Kerala In the Kerala Tax on Entry of Goods into Local Areas Act, 1994 (15 of 1994), - (1) after section 9, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "9A. Inspection of vehicle - (1) Subject to the provisions contained in section 3 of the Act, any officer, not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of the Commercial Taxes Department, authorised in this behalf by the Government, may intercept any motor vehicle, and verify the documents relating to the vehicle to satisfy himself that there is no evasion of tax due under this Act. (2) The driver of the vehicle, when so required by the officer authorised under sub-section (1) shall stop the vehicle at any place for the purpose of enabling such officers to verify the documents. (3) If on verification of such documents, the authorised officer is satisfied that there is an attempt to evade the tax due under this Act, such officer may require the owner of the vehicle either directly or through the driver of the vehicle to adduce such other evidence to show that there is no attempt to evade the tax due under this Act. (4) If on consideration of such evidence the authorised officer is satisfied that tax under this Act is payable on such motor vehicle, he shall by an order in writing direct the owner of the vehicle to pay the tax due on the motor vehicle : Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the owner of the vehicle or any person duly authorised by him has been afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. Explanation.-The expression 'owner' for the purpose of this section shall be the owner as defined in clause (30) of section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (Central Act 5 of 1988)." (2) in section 13, in sub-section (3) after the words 'appealed against by the assessee" the words "accompanied by a fee of rupees two hundred", shall be inserted. (3) for section 14, the following sections shall be substituted, namely :- "14. Revision by the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes suo motu- (1) The Commissioner of Commercial Taxes may suo motu call for and examine the records of the proceedings or any order made by any authority subordinate to him which in his opinion is prejudicial to revenue collection and pass such orders thereon as he thinks just and proper. (2) The Commissioner shall not pass any order under sub-section (1) if, - (a) the time for filing appeal against the order of the assessing authority has not expired, (b) on any point which has been made the subject of an appeal before the appellate authority or the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax, (c) more than four years have elapsed after the passing of the order referred to therein. (3) No order under this section adversely affecting any person shall be passed under this section unless that person has been afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 14A.Powers of revision of the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes on application--(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax under sub-section (4) of section 13 may, within a period of 30 days from the date of receipt of the order, file an application for revision of such order to the Commissioner of Commercial Taxes : Provided that, the Commissioner may admit an application presented after the expiry of the said period if he is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not presenting the application within the said period. (2) Such application for revision shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner and be accompanied by a fee of rupees five hundred. (3) On admitting an application for revision, the Commissioner may call for and examine the records of the order against which the application has been preferred and may make or cause an enquiry to be made and subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such order thereon as he thinks just and proper. (4) Every application shall be accompanied by the tax, fee or other amount payable in accordance with the order against which the application has been preferred : Provided that the Commissioner may in his discretion, give such directions as he thinks fit in regard to the payment of such tax, fee or other amount if the applicant furnishes sufficient security to his satisfaction in such manner as may be prescribed. (5) No order under this section adversely affecting any person shall be passed unless that person has been afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 14B--Fee for interlocutory applications--Every interlocutory application prescribed by the Government and filed before the authorities under this Act specified below, other than those filed by officers empowered by Government, shall be accompanied by the following fees, namely :- (a) Before the Appellate Authority : One hundred rupees (b) Before the Deputy Commissioner : One hundred rupees (c) Before the Commissioner of : Two hundred and fifty Commercial Taxes rupees." (4) In the Schedule, after serial number 21 and the entries against it, the following serial numbers and entries shall respectively be inserted, namely :- "22. Chassis of motor vehicle 23. Body built on chassis of motor vehicles 24. Furniture-whether assembled or unassembled 25. Paints of all descriptions." 
