Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act further to amend the Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1961. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1961, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, appoint.
Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In section 2 of the Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1961, (20 of 1961) (Hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (4), the words "but does not include any magic performance" shall be inserted at the end.
Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the word and figure "section 4", the words, figure and letter "and section 6A" shall be inserted.
Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1969_Section 4--> State(s): Kerala After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "6A. Entertainments tax on dramatic and circus performance. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 and 6, the entertainments tax leviable by a local authority- (a) on dramatic performances to which persons are admitted for payment shall be twenty-five rupees on each performance; and (b) on circus performances to which persons are admitted for payment shall be fifteen rupees on each performance. (2) The tax referred to in sub-section (1) shall be recoverable from the proprietor of the dramatic performance or circus performance, as the case may be. Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, the expression "dramatic performance" means any play, pantomime or other drama." 
