Plantations Labour (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> State(s): Kerala An Act further to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951, in its application to the State of Kerala. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Plantations Labour Act, 1951, in its application to the State of Kerala, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Plantations Labour (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 1--> State(s): Kerala (1) This Act may be called the Plantations Labour (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1969. 1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Kerala. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette, appoint. Published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 137, dated 3.6.1969.
Plantations Labour (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 2--> State(s): Kerala In section 18 of the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (Central Act 69 of, 1951) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(1A) If in any plantation, welfare officers are not employed as required by the rules made under sub-section (1), the chief inspector may appoint the required number of welfare officers and thereupon such officers shall be deemed to have been employed by the employee under sub-section (1) : Provided that before appointing welfare officers under this sub-section the employer shall be given an opportunity of being heard.".
Plantations Labour (Kerala Amendment) Act, 1969_Section 3--> State(s): Kerala After section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "18A. Chief Inspector to provide facilities on default by employer:- (1) If in any plantation, facilities are not provided or maintained by the employer as required by section 8 or section 9 or section 12 or section 15 or the rules made under section 11 or section 14 or section 17, the chief inspector may cause to be provided or maintained therein such facilities and recover the cost thereof from the defaulting employer: Provided that before providing or maintaining such facilities the employer shall be given an opportunity of being heard. (2) For the purpose of the recovery of the cost under sub-section (1.} the chief inspector may certify the amount to be recovered to the Collector, who may thereupon recover such amount as an arrear of land revenue.". 
