Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the establishment of Food Corporations for the purpose of trading in foodgrains and other foodstuffs and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called The Food Corporations Act, 1964 . (2) It extends to the whole of India 1 [...], (3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir", omitted by Act 67 of 1972 , with effect from 15.12.1972. Notification No. GSR 1808, dt. 16.12.1964 Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p.869.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - (a) "Corporation" means the Food Corporation of India established under section 3; (b) "Food Corporation" means the Food Corporation of India established under section 3 or a State Food Corporation established under section 17; 1 [(bb) "Foodstuffs" includes edible oilseeds and oils;] (c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (d) "schedule bank" means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 ; (e) "State Food Corporation" means a State Food Corporation established under section 17; (f) "year" means the financial year. Inserted by Act 67 of 1972 with effect from 15.12.1972.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 3--> (1) With effect from such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the Central Government shall establish for the purposes of this Act a Corporation known as the Food Corporation of India. (2) The Corporation shall be body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued. The Food Corporation was established with effect from . 01.01.1965 vide Notification No. General Statutory Rules (G.S.R.) IK09, Gazette of India dated 17.12.1964.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 4--> (1) The head office of the Corporation shall be at Madras or at such other place 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 2 [(2) The Corporation may establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside India. Provided that no such office or agency shall be established at any place outside India without the previous approval of the Central Government.] The head office of the Corporation has been shifted to New Delhi on and from 01.07.1967 vide Notification No. General Statutory Rules (G.S.R.) 958, Gazette of India dated 20.06.1967. Substituted by Act 67 of 1972 with effect from 15.12.1972.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 5--> (1) The original capital of the Corporation shall be such sum not exceeding one hundred crores of rupees as the Central Government may fix. (2) The Central Government may from time to time increase the capital of the Corporation to such extent and in such manner as that Government may determine. (3) Such capital may be provided by the Central Government from time to time after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the purpose and subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by that Government.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 6--> (1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the Corporation shall vest in a board of directors which may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Corporation under this Act. (2) The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act on business principles having regard to the interests of the producer and consumer and shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the Central Government. (3) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 7--> (1) The board of directors of the Corporation shall consist of the following, namely: - (a) a chairman; (b) three directors to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central Government dealing with- (i) food, (ii) finance, and (iii) co-operation; (c) the managing director of the Central Warehousing Corporation established under Section 3 of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 , ex officio; (d) a managing director; (e) six other directors. (2) All the directors of the Corporation other than the director referred to in 'Clause (0) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government. (3) The managing director, shall- (a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the board of directors may entrust or delegate to him and (b) receive such salary and allowances as the board of directors may, with the approval of the Central Government, fix: Provided that the first managing director shall receive such salary and allowances as the Central Government may fix. (4) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the directors of the Corporation, other than the director referred to in Clause (c) of sub-section (1), and the other terms and conditions of appointment of the directors of the Corporation shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be such as may be prescribed.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 8--> A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as and for being, a director of the Corporation- (a) if he is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors; or (b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; or (c) if he is or has been convicted of any offence which in the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or (d) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a corporation owned or controlled by the Government; or (e) except in the case of the Chairman or the managing director, if he is a salaried official of the Food Corporation of India or a State Food Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 9--> (1) The Central Government may, at anytime, after consultation with the Corporation, remove the managing director from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal. (2) The board of directors may remove any director from office who- (a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 8; or (b) is absent without leave of the board of directors from more than three consecutive meetings thereof without cause sufficient, in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence. (3) A director of the Corporation may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 10--> (1) The board of directors of the Corporation shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act. (2) The Chairman of the Board or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting, any other director elected by the directors present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. (3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the directors present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 11--> (1) The Central Government may. in consultation with the Corporation, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Advisory Committees consisting of such persons and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. (2) It shall be the duty of any such Advisory Committee to advise the Central Government or the Corporation in regard to any matter connected with the purposes of this Act in respect of which its advice is sought by the Central Government, or, as the case may be, by the Corporation. (3) The expenses in relation to the Advisory Committees shall be met by the Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 12--> (1) The Central Government shall after consultation with the Corporation, appoint a person to be the Secretary of the Corporation. (2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Corporation may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its Junctions. (3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of the officers and other employees of the Corporation shall- (a) as respects the Secretary, be such as may be prescribed; (b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such as may be determined by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 12A--> (1) Where the Central Government has ceased or ceases to perform any functions which under section 13 are functions of the Corporation, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer, by order and with effect from such date or dates (which, maybe either retrospective to any date not earlier than the 1st January, 1965, or prospective) as may be specified in the order, to the Corporation any of the officers or employees serving in the Department of the Central Government dealing with food or any of its subordinate or attached offices and engaged in the performance of those functions: Provided that no order under this sub-section shall be made in relation to any officer or employee in such Department or office who has, in respect of the proposal of the Central Government to transfer such officer or employee to the Corporation, intimated within such time as may be specified in this behalf by that Government, his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation. (2) In making an order under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, as far as maybe, take into consideration the functions which the Central Government has ceased or ceases to perform and the areas in which such functions have been or are performed. (3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub-section (1) shall, on and from the date of transfer, cease to be an employee of the Central Government and become an employee of the Corporation with such designation as the Corporation may determine and shall, 2 [subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4), (4A), (4B), (4C), (5) and (6)], be governed by the regulations made by the Corporation under this Act as respects remuneration and other conditions of service including pension, leave and provident fund, and shall continue to be an officer or employee of the Corporation unless and until his employment is terminated by the Corporation. (4) Every officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub-section (1) shall, within six months from the date of transfer, exercise his option in writing to be governed. - (a) by the scale if any applicable to the post held by him under the Government immediately before the date of transfer or by the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which he is transferred, (b) by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to employees of the Central Government in accordance with the rules and others of the Central Government as amended from time to time or the leave, provident fund or other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Corporation under the regulations made by the Corporation under this Act, and such option once exercised shall be final: Provided that the option exercised under clause (a) shall be applicable only in respect of the post to which such officer or employee is transferred to the Corporation and on appointment to a higher post under the Corporation, he shall be eligible only for the scale of pay applicable to such higher post. Provided further that if immediately before the date of his transfer any such officer or employee is officiating in a higher post under the Government either in a leave vacancy or in any other vacancy of a specified duration, his pay, on transfer, shall be protected for the unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Government to which he would have reverted or to the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever he may opt: Provided also that when an officer or other employee serving in the Department of the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with food or in any of its attached or subordinate offices is promoted to officiate in a higher post, in the Department or office subsequent to the transfer to the Corporation of any other officer or employee senior to him in that Department or office before such transfer, the officer or other employee who is promoted to officiate in such higher post shall, on transfer to the Corporation, be entitled only to the scale of pay applicable to the post he would have held but for such promotion or the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Corporation to which he is transferred, whichever he may opt. 3 [4-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), (a) every officer or other employee in respect of whom an order of transfer under sub- section (1) had been made before the date of commencement of the Food Corporations(Amendment) Act, 1977 (hereafter in this section referred to as the appointed day) shall, whether or not he had exercised the option under sub-section (4) before the appointed day, exercise such option within six months from the appointed day; and (b) every officer or other employee in respect of whom an order of transfer under sub- section (1) may be made after the appointed day shall, within six months from the date of such order, exercise his option under sub-section (4),and in each such case such option once exercised shall be final: Provided that where an officer or other employee having-exercised an option under sub-section (4) before the appointed day- (i) has died or retired before the appointed day, or dies or retires after the appointed day, before exercising the option as required by this sub-section, or (ii) does not exercise the option as required by this sub-section, the option already exercised by him shall be deemed to have been validly exercised by him under sub-section (4). (4-B) Where an officer or other employee (a) has died or retired, or dies or retires, after an order of transfer under sub-section (1) in respect of such officer or other employee is made but before exercising the option under sub-section (4) or, as the case may be, as required by sub-section (4-A); or (b) has died or retired, or dies or retires, before an order of transfer under sub-section (1) in respect of such officer or other employee is made. he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) or sub-section (4-A), (i) in a case falling under Clause (a), be deemed to have exercised an option under sub- section (4); and (ii) in a case falling under Clause (b), be deemed to have been transferred under sub-section (1) and exercised an option under sub-section (4), to be governed by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Central Government in accordance with the rules and orders of the Central Government as amended from time to time: Provided that nothing in Clause (a) of this sub-section shall apply to an officer or other employee who has, before the appointed day been paid the terminal benefits as admissible to the employees of the Corporation under the regulations made by the Corporation under this Act, unless such officer or other employee refunds in a lump sum within six months from the appointed day the amount of contributions made by the Corporation towards such terminal benefits; Provided further that nothing in Clause (b) of this sub-section shall apply to an officer or other employee who has intimated, under the proviso to sub-section (1), his intention of not becoming an employee of the Corporation. (4-C) Where an officer or other employee has exercised an option under sub-section (4), or exercises, or is deemed to have exercised, an option under that sub-section, read with sub-section (4-A) or sub-section (4-B), to be governed by the leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal benefits admissible to the employees of the Central Government, such benefits shall be calculated on the basis of the pay and allowances drawn by him in the Corporation.] (5) No officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub-section (1), - (a) shall be dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that competent to make a similar or equivalent appointment under the Corporation as may be specified in the regulations made by the Corporation under this Act: 4 [(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges, Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed.] 5 [Provided further that] this clause shall not apply, - (i) where an officer or employee is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or (ii) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove an officer or employee or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry, or (iii) to an officer or employee who, after transfer to the Corporation, is appointed to a higher post under the Corporation in response to an open advertisement and in competition with outsiders. (6) If, in respect of any such officer or employee as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to holds such inquiry as is referred to in sub-section (5), the decision there-on of the authority empowered o dismiss or remove him or to reduce him in rank shall be final. (7) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to the members of the Central Secretariat Service or any other service or to persons on deputation to the Department referred to in that sub- section or to any of its attached or subordinate offices from any Ministry of the Central Government or from any State Government or from any organisation.] inserted by Food Corporations ( Amendment)Act, 1968 Substituted for the words "subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6)", by Act 12 of 1977 w.r.e.f. 31.12.1976. Inserted by Act 12 of 1977 w.r.e.f. 31.12.1976. Substituted by Food Corporations (Amendment) ActAct 53 of 1982 with effect from 21.10.1989. Substituted for the words "Provided that", by Food Corporations (Amendment) Act (Act 53 of 1982) with effect from 21.10.1982.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 13--> (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the primary duty of the Corporation to undertake the purchase, storage, movement, transport distribution and sale of food grains and other foodstuffs. (2) Subject as aforesaid, the Corporation may also, with the previous approval of the Central Government, - (a) promote by such means as it thinks fit the production of food grains and other foodstuffs; (b) set up, or assist in the setting up of, rice mills, flour-mills and other undertakings for the processing of food grains and other foodstuffs, and (c) discharge such other functions as may be prescribed or as are supplemental, incidental or consequential o any of the functions conferred on it under this Act.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 14--> (1) The board of directors of the Corporation may constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of- (a) the Chairman of the Board; (b) the Managing director; and (c) three other directors, of whom one shall be a non-official. (2) The Chairman of the Board of Directors shall be the Chairman of the Executive Committee. (3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of the board of directors, the, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the Corporation. (4) The board of directors may constitute such other committees, whether consisting wholly of directors or wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of other persons as it thinks fit for such purposes as it may decide. (5) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in reward to the transaction of business at its meetings(including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act. (6) The members of a committee (other than the directors of the board) shall be paid by the Corporation such fees and allowances as may be fixed by it by regulations made under this Act for attending the meetings of the committee and for attending to any other work of the Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 15--> A member of the Board of directors of the Corporation or a committee thereof who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the board of directors or committee thereof, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature, of his interest at such meeting and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the board or the committee, as the case may be, and recorded in the minutes of the board or the committee, as the case may be, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the board or committee with respect to that matter.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 16--> (1) The Central Government may, on a request received in this behalf from the State Government or Governments concerned or otherwise, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Board of Management for a State" or two or more contiguous States, if no State Food Corporation is functioning in such State or States. (2) The head office of the Board of Management shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, (3) The Board of Management shall consist of- (a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Board of directors of the Food Corporation of India; (b) the senior most executive officer of the said Corporation employed at the head office of the Board of Management; and (c) not more than ten other members to be appointed by the board of directors of the said Corporation. (4) The members of a Board of Management referred to in clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (3) shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment and the other terms and conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be prescribed. (5) The Board of Management shall advise the Corporation on such matters as may be generally or specifically referred to it and shall perform such other functions as the Corporation may delegate to it. (6) The provisions of sections 20,21and 25 shall, so far as may be apply in relation to the members of a Board of Management as they apply in relation to the members of the board of directors of a State Food Corporation. Provided that the reference to the General Manager in clause (e) of section 20 shall be construed as a reference to the officer of the Corporation referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3). (7) The Food Corporation of India may, after consultation with a Board of Management, appoint such staff as it considers necessary to enable that Board to perform its functions under this Act. (8) The Board of Management may, by order in writing, authorise any one or more of its members to exercise and perform, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions as it may think fit. (9) The Board of Management shall follow such procedure as may be provided by regulations made by the Food Corporation of India under this Act. (10) Where a Board of Management has been established- (i) for a State, or (ii) for two or more States, then such Board shall stand dissolved- (a) in the case referred to in clause (i), on the establishment of a Food Corporation for that State, and (b) in the case referred to in clause (ii), on the establishment of such Corporation for any one or more of such States. (11) Where a Board of Management stands dissolved under clause (b) of sub-section (10), the Central Government may establish a new Board of Management for the State or States for which no Food Corporation has been established. (12) The expenses of the Board of Management in the discharge of its functions under this Act shall be met by the Food Corporation of India.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 17--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and after consultation with the Government of a State, establish a Food Corporation for that State under such name as may be specified in the notification. (2) A State Food Corporation established under sub-section (1) shall be a body corporate by the name notified under that sub-section, having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by the said name sue and be sued. (3) The head office of a State Food Corporation shall be at such place within the State as may notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. (4) Subject to the provisions of this Act a State Food Corporation may perform such of the functions of the Food Corporation of India as that Corporation may delegate to it.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 18--> (1) The Capital of a State Food Corporation shall be such sum not exceeding ten crores of rupees as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Food Corporation of India, fix. (2) The Central Government may, after such consultation, from time to time, increase the capital of the State Food Corporation to such extent and in such manner as that Government may determine. (3) Such capital shall be provided- (a) by the Central Government after due appropriation made by Parliament by law for the purpose, and (b) by the Food Corporation of India, in such proportion and subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Central Government.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 19--> (1) the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a State Food Corporation shall vest in a board of directors which shall consist of a Chairman, a General Manager and not more than ten other members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Food Corporation of India after consultation with the Central Government and the State Government. (2) The General Manager shall- (a) exercise such powers and perform such duties as the board of directors may entrust or delegate to him; and (b) receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and conditions of service as the board of directors may, in consultation with the Food Corporation of India, fix. (3) The board of directors, in discharging its functions, shall act on business principles having regard to the interests of the producer and consumer and shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to it by the Food Corporation of India. (4) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the matter shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be final. (5) The members of the board of directors, other than the General Manager, shall be entitled to receive by way of remuneration or fees such sums as may be prescribed: Provided that no official member shall be entitled to receive any remuneration other than any allowances admissible to him under the rules regulating his conditions of service. (6) The term of office of and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members of the Board of directors shall be such as may be prescribed.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 20--> A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as, and for being, a member of the board of directors of a State Food Corporation, - (a) if he is, or at any time has been adjudicated insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his creditors; or (b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or (c) if he is or has been convicted of any offence which in the opinion of the Central Government involves moral turpitude; or (d) if he has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a Corporation owned or controlled by the Government; or (e) except in the case of the chairman or the General Manager, if he is a salaried official of the Food Corporation of India or a State Food Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 21--> (1) The Food Corporation of India may, at any time, after consultation with the State Food Corporation, remove the General Manager from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed removal. (2) The board of directors of a State Food Corporation may remove from office any member of that board who- (a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 20, or (b) is absent without leave of the board of directors from more than three consecutive meetings thereof without cause sufficient, in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence. (3) a member of such board may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Food Corporation of India and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 22--> (1) The board of directors of a State Food Corporation shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by that Corporation under this Act. (2) The Chairman of the board of directors or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting, any other member of the board elected by the members of the board present at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. (3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the board of directors shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman or in his absence, the person presiding shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 23--> (1) A State Food Corporation may appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions. (2) Every person employed by a State Food Corporation under this Act shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regulations made by the Corporation under this Act.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 24--> (1) The board of directors of a State Food corporation may constitute an Executive Committee which shall consist of (a) the Chairman of the board of directors; (b) the General Manager; and (c) three other members of the board of directors, of whom one shall be a non-official. (2) the Chairman of the Board of Directors shall be the Chairman of the Executive Committee. (3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence of the board of directors, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence of the State Food Corporation. (4) The board of directors may constitute such other committees, whether consisting wholly of members of the board or wholly of other persons or partly of such members and partly of other persons as it thinks fit for, such purposes as it may decide. (5) A committee constituted under this section, shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations made by the State Food Corporation under this Act. (6) The members of a committee (other than the directors of the board) shall be paid by the State Food Corporation such fees and allowances as may be fixed by it by regulations made under this Act, for attending the meeting of the committee and for attending to any other work of that Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 25--> A member of the board of directors of a State food Corporation or a committee thereof who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the board of directors or committee thereof, shall as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of the board or the committee, as the case may be, and the member shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision of the board or the committee with respect to that matter.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 26--> (1) A Food Corporation shall, before the commencement of each year, prepare a statement of programme of its activities during the forthcoming year as well as a financial estimate in respect thereof. (2) The statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall not less than three months before the commencement of each year, be submitted for approval- (a) in the case of Food Corporation of India, to the Central Government; (b) in the case of a State Food Corporation, to the Food Corporation of India. (3) The statement and the financial estimate of a Food Corporation referred to in sub-section (1) may, with the approval of the Central Government, in the case of the Food Corporation of India, or with the approval of the Food Corporation of India in the case of a State Food Corporation, be revised by the Food Corporation.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 27--> 1 [(1) A food corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act- (a) take advances against stocks of food grains or other foodstuffs held by it, or borrow money- (i) from any scheduled bank, or (ii) from any other bank or financial institution approved by the Central Government in this behalf, or (iii) from any other authority, organisation or institution or from the public on such terms and conditions as may be approved by the Central Government; or (b) issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying interest at such rates as may be fixed by the Central Government at the time the bonds or debentures are issued: 2 [Provided that the amount borrowed by a Food Corporation under clause (b) shall not at any tune exceed ten times the paid-up capital and the reserve fund established under section 33.] (2) The Central Government may guarantee the loans and advances taken by a Food Corporation under sub-section (1) as to the repayment of principal and the payment of interest thereon and other incidental charges. 3 [(3) A food Corporation may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act, also borrow money from the Central Government; and that Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Food Corporation such sums of money by way of loan on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine.] Inserted by Act 67 of 1972 , with effect from 16.12.1972. Substituted by the Food Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2001 with effect from . 22.05.2001. Prior to its substitution the proviso read as under: "Provided that the amount borrowed by a Food Corporation under this sub-section shall not at any time exceed ten times the paid-up capital and the reserve fund established under Section 33." Substituted by Food Corporations (Amendment) Act ( Act 36 of 1988 ) with effect from 20.08. 1988.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 28--> A Food Corporation may lend or advance money to any person engaged in the production of food grains upon the security of food grains or such other security as may be prescribed, for any purpose connected with such production.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 29--> (1) A Food Corporation may enter into agreement with any grower of food crops for the purchase of food grains after the harvest of such crops and any such agreement may provide that any sum payable by the Corporation to the grower under such agreement shall be payable to any scheduled bank or other financing agency nominated by the grower in this behalf to such extent as may be specified in the agreement. (2) The scheduled bank or other financing agency referred to in sub-section (1), may, on the basis of any agreement referred to in that sub-section, lend money to a grower of food crops who has entered into such agreement.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 30--> A Food Corporation may, upon such terms and conditions as it may think fit. guarantee any loan referred to in sub-section (2) of section 29, and also any other loan raised by a grower of food crops, which is repayable within a period not exceeding five years.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 31--> (1) A Food Corporation shall have its own fund and all receipts of the Corporation shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Corporation shall be met there from. (2) Such fund shall be applied for meeting all administrative expenses of the Food Corporation and for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 32--> A Food Corporation may invest its funds in the securities of the Central Government or any state government or in such other manner as may be prescribed.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 33--> (1) A Food Corporation shall establish a reserve fund to which shall be credited every year such portion of its annual net profits as that Corporation thinks fit. (2) After making provision for such reserve fund and for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation in assets and all other matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 , the balance of its annual net profits shall be paid- (a) in the case of the Food Corporation of India, to the Central Government, and (b) in the case of a State Food Corporation, to the Central Government and the Food Corporation of India in the same proportion as the capital provided by them.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 34--> 1 [(1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (2) The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Food Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of a Food Corporation shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any office of the Food Corporation. (4) The accounts of a Food Corporation as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to, - (i) the Food Corporation concerned; (ii) where the accounts relate to a State Food Corporation, also to the Food Corporation of India; (iii) the Central Government, and that Government shall, as soon thereafter as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".] Substituted by the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, 2000. Prior to substitution section 34 read as under: "(1) A Food Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed. (2) The accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 . (3) The auditors shall be appointed annually by the Food Corporation from among a list of auditors approved by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (4) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance sheet and the profit and loss account of the Food Corporation and it shall be their duty to examine them together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto and they shall have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the Corporation and shall at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts and other documents of the Corporation and may require from any officer of the Corporation such information and explanations as the auditors may think necessary for the performance of their duties as auditors. [5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall have power (a) to direct the manner in which the accounts of a Food Corporation shall be audited by the auditors appointed under sub-section (3) and to give such auditors instructions in regard to any matter relating to the performance of their functions as such, (b) to conduct a supplementary or test audit of the accounts of a Food Corporation by such person or persons as he may authorise in this behalf; and for the purpose of such audit, to require information or additional information to be furnished to any person or persons so authorised, on such matters, by such person or persons, and in such form, as the Comptroller and Auditor-General may, by general or special order,-direct. (6) The auditors shall send a copy of their report together with an audited copy of the accounts-(a) to the Food Corporation concerned: (b) where the accounts relate to a State Food Corporation, also to the Food Corporation of India, (c) to the Central Government: and (d) to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall have the right to comment upon, or supplement the audit report in such manner as he may think fit. (7) Any comments upon, or supplement to, the audit, report, made by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India under clause (d) of sub-section (6) shall be placed by the Food Corporation concerned before the Central Government, and where the accounts relate lo a State Food Corporation, also before the Food Corporation of India."
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 35--> (1) A food Corporation shall, as soon as possible after the end of each year, submit to the Central Government an annual report on the working and affairs of the Corporation. (2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of such report, cause such report and the audit report received under section 34 1 [together with any comments thereon or supplement thereto by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India] to be laid before both Houses of Parliament. Inserted by Act 67 of 1972 , with effect from 15.12.1972.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 36--> (1) No act or proceeding of a Food Corporation or a committee thereof or a Board of Management shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the board of directors of the Food Corporation or such Committee or Board of Management. (2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a member of a board of directors of a Food Corporation or of a Board of Management shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of his disqualification for being appointed as, or for being, a member of such board of directors or Board of Management.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 37--> A Food Corporation may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairman or any other member of the board of directors or the Secretary or other officer of the Corporation, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 38--> Every director, member of an Advisory Committee or other committee, auditor, officer or other employee of a Food Corporation and every member of a Board of Management and its staff shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 39--> (1) Every member of the board of directors of a Food Corporation and of a Board of Management shall be indemnified by the Corporation against all losses and expenses incurred by him in the discharge of his duties except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default. (2) A member of the board of directors of a Food Corporation or a Board of Management shall not be responsible for any other member or for any officer or other employee of the Corporation or Board of Management or for any loss or expense resulting to the Corporation from the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation in good faith, or by the insolvency or wrongful act of any person under obligation to the Corporation or by anything done in good faith, in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 40--> No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against a Food Corporation or any member of the board of directors thereof or any officer or other employee thereof or any member of a Board of Management or its staff or any other person authorised by a Food Corporation or a Board of Management to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 41--> (1) Whoever, without the consent in writing of a Food Corporation, uses its name in any prospectus or advertisement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under sub-section (1) except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this behalf by the Food Corporation concerned.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 42--> For the purposes of the Income-tax Act. 1961 , or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, super tax or any other tax on income, profits or gains, a Food Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of Income-tax Act, 1961 , and shall be liable to tax accordingly on its income, profits and gains.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 43--> No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies or corporations shall apply to a Food corporation and it shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as that Government may direct.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 44--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rule may provide for- (a) the term of office of. and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, and the other terms and conditions of appointment of, the directors of the Corporation; (b) the composition of Advisory Committees and the terms and conditions of service of members thereof; (c) the additional functions which the Corporation may perform; (d) the remuneration or fees payable to the members of the board of directors of a State Food Corporation and the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among, such members; (e) the securities (other than food grains) upon which a Food Corporation may lend or advance money; (f) the manner in which a Food Corporation may invest its funds; (g) the form of the annual statement of accounts and the balance sheet to be prepared by a Food Corporation; (h) any other matter which has to be or may by prescribed. (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 1 [which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Substituted for the words "which may he comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the sessions immediately following", by the Food Corporations (amendment) Act (Act 53 of 1992) with effect from 21.10.1982.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 45--> (1) A Food Corporation may with the previous sanction of the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there under, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 1 [1A) The power to make regulations under this section shall include the power to give retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable.] (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulation may provide for- (a) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay of the officers and employees of a Food Corporation, other than the Secretary of the Food Corporation of India; (b) the duties and conduct of officers and employees of a Food Corporation, other than the Secretary aforesaid; (c) the functions and duties which may be entrusted or delegated to the managing director or, as the case may be, the General Manager, or a Food Corporation: (d) the times and places at which meetings of a Food Corporation or any committee thereof shall be held and the procedure to be followed thereat; (e) the fees and allowances payable to the members of a committee under sub-section (6) of section 14-or sub-section (6) of section 24; (f) generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of a food Corporation. (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned and thereupon such regulation shall cease to have effect. (4) Any regulation which may be made by the Food Corporation of India under this Act may be made by the Central Government within three months from the establishment of that Corporation and any regulation which may be made by a State Food Corporation under this Act may be made by the Food Corporation of India within three months from the establishment of such State Food Corporation, and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the Food Corporation concerned in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 2 [(5) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which maybe comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.] Inserted by Food Corporation (Amendment) Act ( Act 53 of 1982 ) with effect from 21.10.1982. Inserted by Food Corporation (Amendment) Act ( Act 53 of 1982 ) with effect from 21.10.1982.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section 46--> No regulation made or purporting to have been made with retrospective effect, under section 45 before the commencement of the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1982 shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid merely on the ground that such regulation was made with retrospective effect and accordingly every such regulation and any action taken or thing done there under shall be as valid and effective as if the provisions of section 45-, as amended by the Food Corporations (Amendment) Act. 1982 . were in force at all material times when such regulation was made or action or thing was taken or done.
Food Corporations Act, 1964_Section Sch.1-->  THE SCHEDULE (See Section 38) Declaration of fidelity and Secrecy I.- declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my judgment, skill and ability execute and perform the duties which are required of me as director. Member of Food Corporation of India committee, officer, employee or auditor (as the case may be of the or as member Food Corporation of the Hoard of Food Corporation Management at - under the Food Corporation of India and which properly relate to the office or position in or in relation to that Corporation held by me. I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the said Corporation or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Corporation nor will I allow any person not legally entitled as aforesaid to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to, or in the possession of, the said Corporation and relating to the business of the said Corporation or the business of any person having any dealing with the said corporation (Signature Signed before me. 
