Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the exercise of certain 1 [foreign jurisdiction] of the Central Government. WHEREAS by treaty, agreement, grant, usage, sufferance and other lawful means, the Central Government has, and may hereafter acquire, jurisdiction in and in relation to areas outside 2 [...]India; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial". The words "the Provinces of" omitted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 1--> This Act may be called the 1 [Foreign Jurisdiction] Act, 1947. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial".
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 2--> In this Act,- (a)1 ["foreign jurisdiction"] means any jurisdiction which by treaty, agreement, grant, usage, sufferance or other lawful means the Central Government has for the time being in or in relation to any area outside 2 [India]; (b) "jurisdiction" includes rights, power and authority. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial". Substituted by Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "the Provinces".
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 3--> (1) It shall be lawful for the Central Government to exercise 1 [foreign jurisdiction] in such manner as it thinks fit. (2) The Central Government may 2 [delegate] any such jurisdiction as aforesaid to any officer or authority in such manner and to such extent as it thinks fit. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial". For such delegation, see Gazette of India, 1948, Part I, pp.358 and 431.
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 4--> (1) The Central Government may, by 1 [notification] in the Official Gazette, make such orders as may seem to it expedient form the effective exercise of any 2 [foreign jurisdiction] of the Central Government. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), any order made under that sub-section may provide- (a) for determining the law and procedure to be observed, whether by applying with or without modifications all or any of the provisions of any enactment in force in any State or otherwise; (b) for determining the persons who are to exercise jurisdiction, either generally or in particular cases or classes of cases, and the powers to be exercised by them; (c) for determining the Courts, Judges, Magistrates and authorities by whom, and for regulating the manner in which, any jurisdiction auxillary or incidental to or consequential on the jurisdiction exercised under this Act is to exercised within any State; and (d) for regulating the amount, collection and application of fees. For such notifications, see Gazette of India, 1948, Part I, pp.44, 80, 201, 248 285, 335, 336, 433, 454, 455, and ibid., Extraordinary, P.75. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial".
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 5--> Every act and thing done, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, in pursuance of any 1 [foreign jurisdiction] of the Central government area outside 2 [India] shall be a valid as if it had been done according to the local law them in force in that area. Substituted by Act Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial". Substituted by ibid., for "the Provinces".
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 6--> (1) If any proceeding, civil or criminal, in a Court established in 1 [India] or by the authority of the Central Government outside 2 [India] any question arises to the existence or extent of any 3 [foreign jurisdiction] of the Central Government, the jurisdiction to the government of India in the appropriate department shall, on the application of the Court, send to the Court the decision of the Central Government on the question, and that decision shall for the purposes of the proceedings be final. (2) The Court shall send to the said Secretary, in a document under the seal of the Court or signed by a Judge of the court, questions framed so as properly to raise the question and sufficient answers to those questions shall be returned to the Court by the Secretary and those answers shall on production thereof be conclusive evidence of the matters therein contained. Substituted by Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, for "the Provinces". Substituted by Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, for "the Provinces". Substituted by Act Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "extra-provincial".
Foreign Jurisdiction Act, 1947_Section 7--> (1) The Extra-Provincial Jurisdiction Ordinance, 1947, hereby repealed. (2) Any order made, anything done or any action taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken in exercise of powers conferred by or under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 27th day of August, 1947. 
