Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946, and the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of January, 1957.
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 2--> In the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) (hereinafter referred to as the Foreigners Act), in section 2, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely.- '(a) "foreigner" means a person who is not a citizen of India;'
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 3--> In section 3 of the Foreigners Act, - (a) in sub-section (2), the brackets, letter and words "(g) shall be arrested and detained or confined;" shall be omitted; (b) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and letters "clause (f) or clause (g)", the words, brackets and letter "or clause (f)" shall be substituted.
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 4--> After section 3 of the Foreigners Act, the following section shall be inserted namely - "3A.Power to exempt citizens of Common wealth countries and other persons from application of Act of certain cases.- (1) The Central Government may, by order, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act or any order made thereunder shall be apply, or shall apply only in such circumstances or with such expenses or modifications or subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order, to or in relation to - (a) the citizens of any such Commonwealth country as may be so specified; or (b) any other individual foreigner or class or description of foreigner. (2) A copy of every order made under this section shall be placed on the table of both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after it is made."
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 5--> In section 4 of the Foreigners Act, - (a) sub-section (1) shall be omitted; (b) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted namely : - "(3) No person shall - (a) knowingly assist a person on parole to escape from the place set apart for his residence or knowingly harbour any such person, or (b) give a person or parole any assistance with intent thereby to prevent, hinder or interfere with the apprehension of such person. (4) The Central Government may, by order, provide for regulating access to, and the conduct of persons in, places where persons on parole are restricted, and for prohibiting or regulating the despatch or conveyance from outside such places to or for such persons therein of such articles as may be prescribed."
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 6--> In section 5 of the Foreigners Act, in sub-section (5), the word "Royal" shall be omitted.
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 7--> Section 10 of the Foreigners Act shall be omitted.
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 8--> In the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (15 of 1939), in section 2, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely : - '(a) "foreigner" means a person who is not a citizen of India;'.
Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Act, 1957_Section 9--> (1) The Foreigners Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 1957 hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any powers conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the date on which such thing was done or action was taken. 
