Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir An Act further to provide for levy of Entry Tax on Goods in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Be it enacted by the Jammu and Kashmir State Legislature in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000. (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Government may, by notification in the Government Gazette appoint.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Check post" means any notified area declared as check post under section 15-A of the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962; (b) "goods" means all kinds of moveable property, materials, articles and commodities brought into the State of Jammu and Kashmir for use or consumption; (c) "Government" means the Government of Jammu and Kashmir; (d) "importer" means a person who brings or causes to be brought goods into the State of Jammu and Kashmir from any place outside the State for use or consumption within the State; (e) "persons" means an individual or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, and also a Hindu undivided family, a firm, a society, a club, an individual, a company, an association, a local authority or a State Government; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (g) "schedule" means the schedule appended to this Act; (h) "scheduled goods" means the goods specified in the Schedule I appended to this Act; (i) "State means the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (2) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have the same meaning as assigned to them under the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, there shall be levied a tax on the entry of scheduled goods into the State, to be called "entry tax" at the rates prescribed in the Schedule II as amended from time to time, and such tax shall be charged and collected at the check post by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that no entry tax shall be levied or collected on scheduled goods - (i) which are imported by any person in consequence of transfer of residence into the State; or (ii) imported into the State in connection with tourism or pilgrimage. (2) The Government may subject to such conditions as may be prescribed exempt wholly or in part any class or description of goods by quantity or value, or both form payment of entry tax.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir (1) No person shall import scheduled goods exceeding such quantity or value, or both, as may be prescribed by the Government unless he/she is in possession of,- (i) a bill of sale or delivery note or declaration or certificate of ownership containing such particulars as may be prescribed; or (ii) a way bill in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed; or (iii) a building permission for Municipal Committee, Notified Area Committee or any other authority, as the case may be, in cases where the goods are meant for consumption in construction; or (iv) documents of ownership of motor vehicle. (2) If a person liable to pay entry tax under this Act fails to pay such tax the officer incharge of the check post may, after hearing the said person and for reasons to be recorded in writing, order seizure of such goods. The goods seized shall be released only on payment of tax leviable under this Act. (3) Any person carrying the goods with documents specified in sub section (1), which are fake or false in respect of any particulars containing therein, shall be liable to penalty, which shall be equal to double the amount of entry tax payable on such goods: Provided that before levying penalty, the affected person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. A certified copy of the order levying penalty or dropping the proceedings shall be issued to the said person.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir In case any person claims that he is not entitled to pay entry tax under this Act, the burden of proof shall be on that person.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 6--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir The provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962 relating to appeal, revisions, appellate tribunal, power to withdraw and transfer cases, recovery of fines, taxes or penalty refund of taxes and penalties, power to take evidence on oath] powers by authorised person, powers to give instructions and determination of issues shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to all such proceedings under this Act.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 7--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir The Government may, by notification in the Government Gazette form time to time- (a) add or delete from the Schedule I any goods; and (b) change the rate of entry tax on any goods in he Schedule II. and thereupon such Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section 8--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir The Government may, by notification in the Government Gazette makes rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir SCHEDULE I [See Clause (1) of Sub Section (1) of Section 2] 1. Computers and accessories thereof. 2. Marble & ; its products. 3. Paint. 4. Hardware. 5. All type of sanitary goods and fittings thereof. 6. Tiles. 7. Furniture and furnishings. 8. Motor tyres and tubes, spare parts and accessories and other articles including seats if not fitted in the vehicle in which being carried. 9. Teakwood, plywood and laminated sheets & ; other synthetic sheets. 10. Refrigerator /Air Conditioners. 11. Cement. 12. All kinds of timber. 13. Electric and Electronic goods. 14. Earthmoving equipment including Earthmovers. 15. Plaster of Paris. 16. Mixers, Loaders and Road Rolers. 17. All surgical goods and various kinds of Diagnostic equipment. 18. Ice Cream/Softy making machines. 19. All types of Compressors. 20. Stone Crushers and their accessories. 21. Painting Machines and Lather Machines. 22. Hydraulic Cranes. 23. Generator sets. 24. Motor vehicles of all types. 25. Bodies built on chassis of motor vehicles.
Jammu and Kashmir Entry Tax on Goods Act, 2000_Section Sch.2--> State(s): Jammu and Kashmir SCHEDULE II [See Section 3(1)] S.No. Items Rate 1. Computers and accessories thereof Same as applicable under J & ;K General Sales Tax 2. Marble & ; its products -do- 3. Paints -do- 4. Hardware -do- 5. All Types of Sanitary goods & ; fitting thereof -do- 6. Tiles -do- 7. Furniture & ; Furnishings -do- 8. Teakwood, plywood and laminated sheets & ; other synthetic sheets. -do- 9 Motor Tyres and Tubes, Spare parts and accessories and other articles including seats, if not fitted in the vehicles in which being carried -do- 10. Refrigerator/Air conditioners -do- 11 Cement -do- 12 All kinds of timber -do- 13 Electric & ; Electronic goods -do- 14 Earthmoving equipments including Earthmovers -do- 15 Plaster of Paris -do- 16 Mixers, Loaders and Road Rolers. -do- 17 All surgical goods and various kinds of Diagnostic equipment. -do- 18 Ice Cream/Softy making machines. -do- 19 All types of Compressors. -do- 20 Stone Crushers and their accessories -do- 21 Painting Machines and Lather Machines -do- 22 Hydraulic Cranes. -do- 23 Generator sets. -do- 24 Motor Vehicle of all types -do- 25 Bodies built on chassis of Motor Vehicles. -do- 
