Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the formation of the new State of Himachal Pradesh by uniting the existing States of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur, and for matters connected therewith. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954. (2) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. 1st July, 1954,
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--(a) "article" means an article of the Constitution ; 1 [(b) *****] (c) "existing States" mean the States specified as Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh in Part C of the First Schedule to the Constitution immediately before the commencement 2 of this Act, and "existing State" means either of the existing States; (d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, rule, scheme, notification, bye-law or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or in any part of either of the existing States; (e) "Order" means an order published in the Official Gazette; (f) "Parliamentary constituency" has the same meaning as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 ; (g) "sitting member" in relation to either House of Parliament or in relation to the Legislature of the existing State of Himachal Pradesh, means a person who immediately before the commencement of this Act is a member of that House or that Legislature, as the case may be. Clause (b) was omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956. 1st July, 1954,
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 3--> As from the commencement of this Act there shall be formed by uniting the existing States a new Part C State to be known as the State of Himachal Pradesh (hereafter in this Act referred to as the "new State").
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 4--> In the First Schedule to the Constitution , in Part C-- (a) under the heading, "Names of States,"--(i) entry "3. Bilaspur" shall be omitted; and (ii) entries 4 to 10 shall be renumbered as entries 3 to 9, respectively; (b) under the heading "Territories of States," after the first paragraph, the following paragraph shall he inserted, namely:-- "The territory of the State of Himachal Pradesh shall comprise the territories which immediately before the commencement of the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954, were comprised in the State of Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh."
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 5--> (1) There shall be allotted one seat to the new State in the Council of States. (2) The sitting member of the Council of States representing the group of States comprising the existing States shall on and from the commencement of this Act represent the new State in the Council but the term of such sitting member shall remain unaltered, that is to say, shall expire on the 2nd of April, 1958.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 6--> In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution , in the Table of Seats relating to the representatives of States specified in Part C of the First Schedule-- (i) for entries 4 and 5, the entry "4. Himachal Pradesh......1" shall be substituted; and (ii) entries 6 to 10 shall be renumbered as entries 5 to 9, respectively.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 7--> In section 27A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 . (i) in sub-section (5), for the word "Delhi," the words "Delhi, Himachal Pradesh" shall be substituted; and (ii) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. House of the People
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 8--> Until other provision is made by way law there shall be allotted 4 seats to the new State in the House of the People.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 9--> In the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 , in the part relating to Part C States,-- (i) entry 3 shall be omitted; (ii) entries 4 to 12 shall be renumbered as entries 3 to 11, respectively; and (iii) for the figure "3" in column 2 against Himachal Pradesh, the figure "4" shall be substituted.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 10--> (1) The new State shall, until other provision is made by law, consist of the following three Parliamentary constituencies, namely:-- (i) the constituency of Bilaspur comprising the existing State of Bilaspur, and (ii) the two constituencies into which the existing State of Himachal Pradesh has been divident. (2) The Delimitation of Parliamentary Constituencies (Part C States) Order, 1951a shall, until other provision is made by law, have effect subject to the amendments made in the First Schedule.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 11--> (1) The sitting member of the House of the People representing the existing State of Bilaspur shall on and from the commencement of this Act represent the Bilaspur constituency of the new State and shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency. (2) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency of the existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, represent the constituency of the same name in the new State and shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency. Legislative Assembly of the new Stale
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 12--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]and their delimitation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 13--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]and their delimitation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 14--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]and their delimitation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 15--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]and their delimitation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 16--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]and their delimitation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 17--> In section 13 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 , in clause (b) of sub-section (1), the word "Bilaspur" shall be omitted.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 18--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 19--> The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order, 1951, shall be amended as shown in the Second Schedule.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 20--> In section 9 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952 , in sub-section (3), for the words "and the orders made under any of the said Acts," the words, brackets and figures "the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954 and the orders made under any of the said Acts" shall be substituted.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 21--> Any reference to Himachal Pradesh in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 , 1 [...] as amended by this Act shall be construed as a reference to the new State. Words, letter and figures "and the Government of Part C States Act, 1951 "were omitted by 3 A.L.O.. 1956.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 22--> (1) The electoral rolls of the constituencies of the existing States shall, on and from the commencement of this Act, be deemed to be the electoral rolls of the constituencies of the same name in the new State and shall continue in force until such rolls are revised, or fresh rolls are prepared, in accordance with law. 1 [(2) *****] Sub-section (2) was omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 23--> For the purpose of determination of the number of seats to be allotted to the new State in the House of the People in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), and distribution of those seats as well as the seats allotted to the Legislative Assembly of the new State to territorial constituencies and delimitation thereof in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 8 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1952 , it shall be lawful for the Delimitation Commission, notwithstanding anything contained in that Act, to amend, vary or rescind any of its final orders published under section 9 of that Act in so far as any such order relates to any or both of the existing States.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 24--> [Omitted by 3 A.L.O., 1956.]
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 25--> As from the commencement 2 of this Act,-- (a) the Courts of the Judicial Commissioner for the existing States (hereafter in this Part referred to as "the existing Courts") shall be amalgamated and shall constitute the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the new State (hereafter in this Part referred to as "the new Court"); (b) the Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial Commissioner, if any, for the, existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall be respectively the Judicial Commissioner and the Additional Judicial Commissioner for the new State; (c) every person who immediately before the commencement 3 of this Act, is an officer or servant of either of the existing Courts shall be an officer or servant, as the case may be, of the new Court deemed to have been appointed on the same terms and conditions of service (or on terms and conditions as similar thereto as the changes effected by this Act permit) as were applicable to him immediately before such commencement 4 : Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the new Court from altering the designation or the duties of any office or post; (d) the new Court shall have all such original, appellate and other jurisdiction as under any law is exercisable immediately before the commencement 5 of this Act by either of the existing Courts in respect of any area forming part of the new State; (e) the new Court shall have the same powers to admit, suspend and remove advocates, vakils and pleaders and to make rules with respect to advocates, vakils and pleaders in the whole of the new State as are immediately before the commencement 6 of this Act, exercisable by either of the existing Courts: Provided that subject to any rules made by the new Court in exercise of the powers conferred by this clause, any person who immediately before the commencement 7 of this Act is an advocate, vakil or pleader entitled to practise in either of the existing Courts shall be recognised as an advocate, vakil or pleader entitled to practise in the new Court; (f) subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the commencement 8 of this Act with respect to the practice and procedure in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall, until varied or altered by a competent authority, apply in relation to the new Court with such modifications as may be made by this Court; (g) the Judicial Commissioners' Courts (Declaration as High Courts) Act, 1950 shall apply to the new Court as if the new Court were in existence at the commencement 9 of that Act; and any other law in force immediately before the commencement 10 of this Act relating to appeals to the Supreme Court, from the Court of the Judicial Commissioner for the existing State of Himachal Pradesh shall, with necessary modifications, apply in relation to the new Court; (h) all proceedings which immediately before the commencement 11 of this Act are pending in either of the existing Courts shall by virtue of this Act stand transferred to the new Court and shall be continued as if they had been proceedings instituted in that Court; (i) any order made by either of the existing Courts in any such proceedings as aforesaid shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of that Court, but also as an order made by the new Court; (j) references in any law to either of the existing Courts by whatever name, shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as references to the new Court. From 1-5-1967 the jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court has been extended to the Union Territory of the Himachal Pradesh and the Court of the Judicial Commissioner was abolished. Since 25.1-1971, Himachal Pradesh has become a State having a separate High Court That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is 26th January, 1956. That is, 1st July, 1954. That is, 1st July, 1954.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 26--> All Courts which immediately before the commencement 1 of this Act were exercising lawful powers, authority and jurisdiction under the superintendence and control of either of the existing Courts in any area forming part of the new State shall, until further provision is made by a competent Legislature or authority, continue to exercise their respective powers, authority and jurisdiction in that area under the superintendence and control of the new Court. That is, 1st July, 1954.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 27--> Save as otherwise provided in this. Act, all authorities and all officers, judicial executive and ministerial, who immediately before the commencement of this Act were exercising lawful functions in any area forming part of the new State, shall, until further provision is made by a competent authority, continue to exercise their respective functions as far as may be, in the same manner and to the same extent as they were doing before such commencement.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 28--> Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all the law in force immediately before the commencement 1 of this Act in any area forming part of the new State shall continue to be in force until repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or authority. 1st July, 1954.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 29--> For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the new State of any law made before the commencement 1 of this Act, any Court, Tribunal or authority may, subject to any express provision of this Act, construe the law with such alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the Court, Tribunal or authority, as the case may be. 1st July, 1954.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 30--> All taxes, duties, cesses and fees which immediately before the commencement 1 of this Act were being lawfully levied in either of the existing States or any part thereof, shall continue to be levied in the same manner and to the same extent and to be applied for the same purposes until other provision is made by a competent Legislature or authority. 1st July, 1954.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 31--> Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to derogate from the powers of the Central Government to make such arrangements or to take such action in relation to the Bhakra-Nangal Project as may, having due regard to the purposes of the Project, be necessary to ensure its proper administration and effective implementation.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section 32--> If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President may make such orders not inconsistent with the said provisions, as appears to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that no such power shall be exercised by the President after the expiry of one year from the commencement of this Act.
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section Sch.1--> THE FIRST SCHEDULE (See section 10) Modifications in the Delimitation of Parliamentary Constituencies (Part C States) Order, 1951a 1. in paragraph 2, omit the words "Bilaspur and." 2. In Table IV, after the entry relating to Chamba Sirmur constituency, insert the following entry namely : "BilaspurBilaspur
Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954_Section Sch.2-->  THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See Section 19) Amendment of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Part C States) Order, 1951a 1. In paragraph 2, for "Parts I to X", substitute I to IX." 2. For paragraph 4, substitute the following, namely :--"4. Any reference in the Schedule to this Order,-- (a) to the State of Himachal Pradesh or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as reference to the State of Himachal Pradesh as formed by the Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur (New State) Act, 1954. or to a district or other territorial division of that.State as so formed; and (b) to any other State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to that State or to that district or other territorial division as constituted on the 26th day of January, 1950." 3. In the Schedule,--(a) omit Part III relating to Bilaspur, (b) renumber "Parts IV to X" as "Parts III to IX," respectively; (c) in Part V as so renumbered relating to Himachal Pradesh, insert the following, namely : "31. Julahe 32. Dumne (Bhanjre) 33. Chuhrc 34. Hese(Turi) 35. Chhimbe(Dhobi) 36. Sarehde 37. Daule." 
