Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the constitution of a Central Council of Homoeopathy and the maintenance of a Central Register of Homoeopathy and for matters connected therewith. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf for such State and different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act. Chapter I, section 12 and Chapter V shall come into force in the whole of India and sections 3 to 11, 13 to 15 in all the States, except Harayana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Megahalaya, Nagaland, Punjab and Tripura and Union Territories of Chandigarh and Delhi, came in to force on 1-8-1974. Chapters II, III, IV came into force in all the States (Except Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Tripura) and the Union Territories of Chandigarh and Delhi on 15-9-1978. Chapters II, III and IV came into force in Meghalaya and Himachal Pradesh on 25-8-1978.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 2--> (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Board" means a Board, Council, Examining Body or Faculty of Homoeopathy (by whatever name called) constituted by the State Government under any law for the time being in force regulating the award of medical qualifications in, and registration of practitioners of, Homoeopathy; (b) "Central Council" means the Central Council of Homoeopathy constituted under section 3; (c) "Central Register of Homoeopathy" means the register maintained by the Central Councilunder this Act; (d) "Homoeopathy" means the Homoeopathic system of medicine and includes the use of Biochemic remedies; (e) "medical institution" means any institution within or without India which grants degrees,diplomas or licences in Homoeopathy; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations; (g) "recognised medical qualification" means any of the medical qualifications, in Homoeopathy, included in the Second or the Third Schedule; (h) "regulation" means a regulation made under section 33; (i) "State Register of Homoeopathy" means a register or registers maintained under any law forthe time being in force in any State regulating the registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy; (j) "University" means any University in India established by law and having a Faculty of Homoeopathy and includes a University in India established by law in which instruction, teaching,training or research in Homoeopathy is provided. (2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that State.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 3--> (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act a Central Council consisting of the following members, namely:- (a) such number of members not exceeding five as may be determined by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule from each State in which a State Register of Homoeopathy is maintained, to be elected from amongst themselves by persons enrolled on that register as practitioners of Homoeopathy; (b) one member from each University to be elected from amongst themselves by the members of the Faculty or Department (by whatever name called) of Homoeopathy of that University: Provided that until any such Faculty or Department of Homoeopathy is started in at least seven Universities, the Central Government may nominate such number of members not exceeding seven as may be determined by the Central Government from amongst the teaching staff of medical institutions within India, so however, that the total number of members so nominated and elected under this clause shall in no case exceed seven; (c) such number of members, not exceeding forty per cent.of the total number of members elected under clauses (a) and (b), as may be nominated by the Central Government, from amongst persons having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of Homoeopathy or other related disciplines: Provided that until members are elected under clause (a) or clause (b) in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Central Government shall nominate such number of members, being persons qualified to be chosen as such under the said clause (a) or clause (b), as the case may be, s that Government thinks fit; and references to elected members in this Act shall be construed as including references to members so nominated. (2) The President and the Vice-President of the Central Council shall be elected by the members of the Central Council from amongst themselves in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that for two years from the first constitution of the Central Council, the President and the Vice-President shall be nominated by the Central Government from amongst the members of the Central Council and the President and the Vice-President so nominated shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 7, hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 4--> (1) An election under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 3 shall be conducted by the Central Government in accordance with such rules as may be made by it in this behalf. (2) Where any dispute arises regarding any election to the Central Council, it shall be referred to the Central Government whose decision shall be final.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 5--> (1) No person shall be eligible for election to the Central Council unless he possesses any of the medical qualifications included in the Second or the Third Schedule, is enrolled on any State Register of Homoeopathy and resides in the State concerned. (2) No person may at the same time serve as a member in more than one capacity.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 6--> The Central Council shall be a body corporate by the name of the Central Council of Homoeopathy having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 7--> (1) The President, Vice-President or a member of the Central Council shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his election or nomination, as the case may be, or until his successor shall have been duly elected or nominated, whichever is longer. (2) A person who holds, or who has held, office as President or Vice-President of the Central Council, shall be eligible for re-election to that office once, but only once. (3) Members of the Central Council shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination. (4) An elected or nominated member shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Central Council, from three consecutive ordinary meetings of the Central Council or, in the case of a member elected under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3, if he ceases to be enrolled on the concerned State Register of Homoeopathy, or in the case of a member elected under clause (b) of that sub-section, if he ceases to be a member of the Faculty or Department (by whatever name called) of Homoeopathy of the University concerned. (5) A casual vacancy in the Central Council shall be filled by election or nomination, as the case may be, and the person elected or nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member whose place he takes was elected or nominated. (6) Where the said term of five years is about to expire in respect of any member, a successor may be elected or nominated at any time within three months before the said term expires but he shall not assume office until the said term has expired.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 8--> (1) The Central Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council. (2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of the total number of members of the Central Council shall form a quorum, and all the acts of the Central Council shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 9--> (1) The Central Council shall constitute from amongst its members an Executive Committee and such other committees for general or special purposes as the Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) (i) The Executive Committee (hereafter in this section referred to as the Committee), shall consist of the President and Vice-President, who shall be members ex officio, and not less than five and not more than seven members who shall be elected by the Central Council from amongst its members. (ii) The President and the Vice-President shall be the President and Vice-President respectively of the Committee. (iii) In addition to the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, the Committee shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Central Council may confer or impose upon it by any regulations which may be made in this behalf.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 10--> (1) The committees constituted under section 9 shall meet at least twice in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by the Central Council. (2) Unless otherwise prescribed, one-third of the total number of members of a committee shall form a quorum and all the acts of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 11--> The Central Council shall- (a) appoint a Register who shall also act as Secretary; (b) employ such other persons as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act; (c) require and take from the Registrar or from any other employee, such security for the dueperformance of his duties as the Central Council deems necessary; and (d) with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the remuneration and allowancesto be paid to the President, Vice-President and members of the Central Council and to the members of the committees thereof and determine the conditions of service of the employees of the Central Council.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 12--> No act or proceeding of the Central Council or any committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Central Council or the committee, as the case may be.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 12A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, (a) no person shall establish a Homoeopathic Medical College; or (b) no Homoeopathic Medical College shall (i) open a new or higher course of study or training (including post-graduate course of study or training) which would enable students of each course or training to qualify himself for the award of any recognised medical qualification; or (ii) increase its admission capacity in any course of study or training (including the post-graduate course of study or training),except with the previous permission of the Central Government obtained in accordance with the provisions of this section. Explanation 1.For the purposes of this section, person includes any University or a trust, but does not include the Central Government. Explanation 2.For the purposes of this section, admission capacity, in relation to any course of study or training (including post-graduate course of study or training) in a medical institution, means the maximum number of students as may be decided by the Central Council from time to time for being admitted to such course or training. (2) (a) Every person or medical institution shall, for the purpose of obtaining permission under sub-section (1), submit to the Central Government a scheme in accordance with the provisions of clause (b) and the Central Government shall refer the scheme to the Central Council for its recommendations. (b) The scheme referred to in clause (a) shall be in such form and contain such particulars and be preferred in such manner and be accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed. (3) On receipt of a scheme from the Central Government under sub-section (2), the Central Council may obtain such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or the medical institution concerned, and thereafter, it may, (a) if the scheme is defective and does not contain any necessary particulars, give a reasonable opportunity to the person or medical institution concerned for making a written representation and it shall be open to such person or medical institution to rectify the defects, if any, specified by the Central Council; (b) consider the scheme, having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (7), and submit it to the Central Government together with its recommendations thereon within a period not exceeding six months from the date of receipt of the reference from the Central Government. (4) The Central Government may, after considering the scheme and the recommendations of the Central Council under sub-section (3) and after obtaining, where necessary, such other particulars as may be considered necessary by it from the person or medical institution concerned, and having regard to the factors referred to in sub-section (7), either approve (with such conditions, if any, as it may consider necessary) or disapprove the scheme and any such approval shall constitute as a permission under sub-section (1) : Provided that no scheme shall be disapproved by the Central Government except after giving the person or medical institution concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard : Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any person or medical institution whose scheme has not been approved by the Central Government to submit a fresh scheme and the provisions of this section shall apply to such scheme, as if such scheme had been submitted for the first time under sub-section (2). (5) Where, within a period of one year from the date of submission of the scheme to the Central Government under sub-section (2), no order is communicated by the Central Government to the person or medical institution submitting the scheme, such scheme shall be deemed to have been approved by the Central Government in the form in which it was submitted, and, accordingly, the permission of the Central Government required under sub-section (1) shall also be deemed to have been granted. (6) In computing the time-limit specified in sub-section (5), the time taken by the person or medical institution concerned in submitting the scheme, in furnishing any particulars called for by the Central Council, or by the Central Government, shall be excluded. (7) The Central Council, while making its recommendations under clause (b) of sub-section (3) and the Central Government, while passing an order, either approving or disapproving the scheme under sub-section (4), shall have due regard to the following factors, namely: (a) whether the proposed medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training, would be in a position to offer the minimum standards of medical education as prescribed by the Central Council under section 20; (b) whether the person seeking to establish a medical institution or the existing medical institution seeking to open a new or higher course of study or training or to increase its admission capacity has adequate financial resources; (c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff, equipment, accommodation, training, hospital and other facilities to ensure proper functioning of the medical institution or conducting the new course of study or training or accommodating the increased admission capacity have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having regard to the number of students likely to attend such medical institution or course of study or training or as a result of the increased admission capacity, have been provided or would be provided within the time-limit specified in the scheme; (e) whether any arrangement has been made or programme drawn to impart proper training to students likely to attend such medical institution or the course of study or training by the persons having the recognised medical qualifications;(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of practice of homoeopathic medicine in the medical institution; and (g) any other factors as may be prescribed. (8) Where the Central Government passes an order either approving or disapproving a scheme under this section, a copy of the order shall be communicated to the person or medical institution concerned. New Chapter II-A inserted by Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002. (w.e.f. 28-1-2003).
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 12B--> (1) Where any medical institution is established without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution shall not be deemed to be a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (2) Where any medical institution opens a new or higher course of study or training (including a post-graduate course of study or training) without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such institution on the basis of such study or training shall not be deemed to be recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act. (3) Where any medical institution increases its admission capacity in any course of study or training without the previous permission of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of section 12A, medical qualification granted to any student of such medical institution on the basis of the increase in its admission capacity shall not be deemed to be recognised medical qualification for the purposes of this Act.'. Inserted by Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002. (w.e.f. 28-1-2003).
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 13--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by any University, Board or other medical institution in India which are included in the Second Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) Any University, Board or other medical institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in the Second Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such qualification recognised, and the Central Government, after consulting the Central Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Second Schedule against such medical qualification only when granted after a specified date.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 14--> (1) The medical qualifications granted by medical institutions outside India which are included in the Third Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act. (2) (a) The Central Council may enter into negotiations with the authority in any State or country outside India, which by the law of such State or country is entrusted with the maintenance of a Register of practitioners of Homoeopathy, for settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of medical qualifications in Homoeopathy, and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Third Schedule so as to include therein any medical qualification which the Central Council has decided should be recognised, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the Third Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date. (b) Where the Council has refused to recommend any medical qualification which has been proposed for recognition by any authority referred to in clause (a) and that authority applies to the Central Government in this behalf, the Central Government, after considering such application and after obtaining from the Council a report, if any, as to the reasons for any such refusal, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that such qualification shall be a recognised medical qualification and the provisions of clause (a) shall apply accordingly.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 15--> (1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any medical qualification included in the Second or the Third Schedule shall be sufficient qualification for enrolment on any State Register of Homoeopathy. (2) No person, other than a practitioner of Homoeopathy who possesses a recognised medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register of Homoeopathy,- (a) shall hold office as Homoeopathy physician or any other office (by whatever designation called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority; (b) shall practise Homoeopathy in any State; (c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate a medical or fitness certificate or any other certificate required by any law to be signed or authenticated by a duly qualified medical practitioner; (d) shall be entitled to give any evidence at any inquest or any court of law as an expert under section 45 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) on any matter relating to Homoeopathy. (3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall affect,- (a) the right of a practitioner of Homoeopathy enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy to practise Homoeopathy in any State merely on the ground that, on the commencement of this Act, he does not possess a recognised medical qualification; (b) the privileges (including the right to practise Homoeopathy) conferred by or under any lawrelating to registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy for the time being in force in any State,on a practitioner of Homoeopathy enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy; (c) the right of a person to practise Homoeopathy in a State in which, on the commencement of this Act, a State Register of Homoeopathy is not maintained if, on such commencement, he has been practising Homoeopathy for not less than five years; (d) the rights conferred by or under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) including the right to practise medicine as defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the said Act or the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (48 of 1970) of persons possessing any qualifications included in the respective Schedules to the said Act. (4) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub-section (2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 16--> Every University, Board or medical institution in India which grants a recognised medical qualification shall furnish such information as the Central Council may, from time to time, require as to the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in order to obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such course of study and examinations are required to be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites for obtaining such qualification.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 17--> (1) The Central Council shall appoint such number of medical inspectors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in Homoeopathy is given, or to attend any examination held by any University, Board or medical institution for the purpose of recommending to the Central Government recognition of medical qualifications granted by that University, Board or medical institution. (2) The medical inspectors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Homoeopathy, as the case may be, or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. (3) The Central Council shall forward a copy of any such report to the University, Board or medical institution concerned, and shall also forward a copy with the remarks of the University, Board or medical institution thereon, to the Central Government.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 18--> (1) The Central Council may appoint such number of visitors as it may deem requisite to inspect any medical college, hospital or other institution where education in Homoeopathy is given or to attend any examination for the purpose of granting recognised medical qualification. (2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Central Council or not, may be appointed as a visitor under this section but a person who is appointed as an inspector under section 17 for any inspection or examination shall not be appointed as a visitor for the same inspection or examination. (3) The visitors shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination, but shall report to the President of the Central Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education in Homoeopathy or on the sufficiency of every examination which they attend. (4) The report of a visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the President of the Central Council otherwise directs: Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a visitor, the Central Council shall furnish the same.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 19--> (1) When upon report by the inspector or the visitor, it appears to the Central Council- (a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination held by, any University, Board or medical institution, or (b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for instruction and training provided in such University, Board or medical institution or in any college or other institution affiliated to the University, do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Central Council, the Central Council shall make a representation to that effect to the Central Government. (2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the Government of the State in which the University, Board or medical institution is situated and the State Government shall forward it along with such remarks as it may choose to make to the University, Board or medical institution, with an intimation of the period within which the University, Board or medical institution may submit its explanation to the State Government. (3) On the receipt of the explanation, or, where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed, then, on the expire of that period, the State Government shall make its recommendations to the Central Government. (4) The Central Government, after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may think fit, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that an entry shall be made in the Second Schedule against the said medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted before a specified date, or that the said medical qualification if granted to students of a specified college or institution affiliated to any University shall be recognised medical qualification only when granted before a specified date or, as the case may be, that the said medical qualification shall be recognised medical qualification in relation to a specified college or institution affiliated to any University only when granted after a specified date.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 20--> (1) The Central Council may prescribe the minimum standards of education in Homoeopathy, required for granting recognised medical qualifications by Universities, Boards or medical institutions in India. (2) Copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Central Council to all State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the regulations or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction, take into consideration the comments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 21--> (1) The Central Council shall cause to be maintained in the prescribed manner, a register of practitioners of Homoeopathy to be known as the Central Register of Homoeopathy which shall contain- (a) in Part I, the names of all persons who are for the time being enrolled on any State Register of Homoeopathy and possess any of the recognised medical qualifications; (b) in Part II, the names of all persons, other than those included in Part I, who are for the time being enrolled on any State Register of Homoeopathy. (2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar of the Central Council to keep and maintain the Central Register of Homoeopathy in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any orders made by the Central Council, and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the Gazette of India and in such other manner as may be prescribed. (3) Such register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 , (1 of 1872) and may be proved by a copy published in the Gazette of India.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 22--> Each Board shall supply to the Central Council three printed copies of the State Register of Homoeopathy as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act and subsequently after the first day of April of each year, and each Board shall inform the Central Council without delay of all additions to, and other amendments in, the State Register of Homoeopathy made from time to time.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 23--> The Registrar of the Central Council may on receipt of the report of registration of a person in a State Register of Homoeopathy or on application made in the prescribed manner by any person, enter his name in the Central Register of Homoeopathy, provided that the Registrar is satisfied that the person concerned is eligible under this Act for such registration.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 24--> (1) The Central Council may prescribe standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of ethics for practitioners of Homoeopathy. (2) Regulations made by the Central Council under sub-section (1) may specify which violations thereof shall constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such provision shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 25--> (1) If the name of any person enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy is removed therefrom in pursuance of any power conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Homoeopathy for the time being in force in any State, the Central Council shall direct the removal of the name of such person from the Central Register of Homoeopathy. (2) Where the name of any person has been removed from a State Register of Homoeopathy on any ground other than that he is not possessed of the requisite medical qualifications or where any application by the said person for restoration of his name to the State Register of Homoeopathy has been rejected, he may appeal in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions, including conditions as to the payment of a fee, as may be prescribed, to the Central Government whose decision, which shall be given after consulting the Central Council, shall be binding on the State Government and on the authorities concerned with the preparation of the State Register of Homoeopathy.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 25A--> If the courses of study to be undergone for obtaining a recognised medical qualification in homoeopathy include a period of training after a person has passed the qualifying examination and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on application made by him in this behalf, be granted provisional registration in a State Register of Homoeopathy by the Board concerned in order to enable him to practice homoeopathy in an approved institution for the purpose of such training and for no other purpose for the period aforesaid. Inserted by Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002 (w.e.f. 28-1-2003).
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 26--> (1) Subject to the conditions and restrictions laid down in this Act regarding practice of Homoeopathy by persons possessing certain recognised medical qualifications, every person whose name is for the time being borne on Part I of the Central Register of Homoeopathy shall be entitled according to his qualifications to practise Homoeopathy, in any part of India and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expenses, charges in respect of medicaments or other appliances or any fees to which he may be entitled. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 15, any person whose name is for the time being borne on Part II of the Central Register of Homoeopathy, may practise Homoeopathy in any State, other than the State where he is enrolled on the State Register of Homoeopathy, with the previous approval of the Government of the State where he intends to practise.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 27--> (1)If any person whose name is entered in the Central Register of Homoeopathy obtains any title, diploma or other qualification for proficiency in Homoeopathy, which is a recognised medical qualification, he shall, on application made in this behalf in the prescribed manner, be entitled to have an entry stating such other title, diploma or other qualification made against his name in the Central Register of Homoeopathy either in substitution for or in addition to any entry previously made. (2) The entries in respect of any such person in a State Register of Homoeopathy shall be altered in accordance with the alterations made in the Central Register of Homoeopathy.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 28--> Every person registered in the Central Register of Homoeopathy shall notify any transfer of the place of his residence or practice to the Central Council and to the Board concerned, within ninety days of such transfer, failing which his right to participate in the election of members to the Central Council or a Board shall be liable to be forfeited by order of the Central Government either permanently or for such period as may be specified therein.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 29--> (1) The Central Council shall furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the Central Government as that Government may require. (2) The Central Government may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract or other information furnished to it under this section or under section 18.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 30--> (1) Whenever it is made to appear to the Central Government that the Central Council is not complying with any of the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may refer the particulars of the complaint to a commission of inquiry consisting of three persons, two of whom shall be appointed by the Central Government, one being a Judge of a High Court, and one by the Central Council, and such commission shall proceed to inquire in a summary manner and to report to the Central Government as to the truth of the matters charged in the complaint, and in case of any charge of default or of improper action being found by the commission to have been established, the commission shall recommend the remedies, if any, which are in its opinion necessary. (2) The Central Government may require the Central Council to adopt the remedies so recommended within such time as, having regard to the report of the commission, it may think fit, and if the Central Council fails to comply with any such requirement, the Central Government may amend the regulations of the Central Council, or make such provision or order to take such other steps as may seem necessary to give effect to the recommendations of the commission. (3) A commission of inquiry shall have power to administer oaths, to enforce the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents, and shall have all such other necessary powers for the purpose of any inquiry conducted by it as are exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908).
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 31--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, the Central Council or a Board or any committee thereof or any officer or servant of the Government or the Central Council or the Board or the committee aforesaid for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 32--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section 33--> 1 The Central Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, 2 make regulations 3 generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and, without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for- (a) the manner of election of the President and the Vice-President of the Central Council; (b) the management of the property of the Central Council and the maintenance and audit ofits accounts; (c) the resignation of members of the Central Council (d) the powers and duties of the President and Vice-President. (e) the summoning and holding of meetings of the Central Council and the committees thereof,the times and places where such meetings are to be held, and the conduct of business thereat and the number of members necessary to constitute a quorum; (f) the functions of the committees constituted under section 9; (g) the tenure of office, and the powers and duties of the Registrar and other officers and servants of the Central Council; 4 [(ga) the form of the scheme, the particulars to be given in such scheme, the manner in which the scheme is to be preferred and the fee payable with the scheme under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 12A; (gb) any other factor under clause (g) of sub-section (7) of section 12A;]. (h) the qualifications, appointment, powers and duties of, and procedure to be followed by, inspectors and visitors. (i) the courses and period of study of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in any University, Boardor medical institution for grant of recognised medical qualification; (j) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for educationin Homoeopathy; (k) the conduct of professional examinations, qualifications of examiners and the conditions ofadmission of such examinations; (l) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by practitioners of Homoeopathy; (m) the particulars to be stated, and the proof of qualifications to be given in applications for registration under this Act; (n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under section 25 may be preferred; (o) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act; and (p) any matter for which under this Act provision may be made by regulations. 5 [(2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.] Section 33, renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof Act 20 of 1983, section 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984). Substituted by Act 20 of 1983, section 2 and Schedule for “make regulation” (w.e.f. 15-3-1984). For some certain Regulations-See the following Gazettes 1. Homoeopathy Central Council (Registration) Regulations, 1982-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 11th May, 1983. 2. Homoeopathy (Graded Degree Course) Regulations, 1983-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 11th May, 1983. 3. Homoeopathy (Diploma Course) Regulations, 1983-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 11th May, 1983. 4. Homoeopathy (Degree Course) Regulations, 1983-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 11th May, 1983. 5. Homoeopathy Central Council (Election of the President and Vice-President) Regulations, 1976-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 30th November, 1935. 6. Central Council of Homeopathy (General) Regulations, 1973-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, PartIII, Section 4, dated 30th November, 1985. 7. Homoeopathy (Post-Graduate Degree Course) M.D. (Horn.) Regulations, 1989-See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4, dated 16th November, 1989. Inserted by Homoeopathy Central Council (Amendment) Act, 2002 (w.e.f. 28-1-2003). Inserted by Act 20 of 1983, section 2 and Schedule (w.e.f. 15-3-1984).
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section Sch.1--> THE FIRST SCHEDULE See sections 3 (1) (a) 1.The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of seats allocated in the Central Council of Homoeopathy in each State on the following basis, namely:- (a) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 100 but does not exceed 10,000 1 seats (b) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 10,000 but does not exceed 20,000 2 seats. (c) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 20,000 but does not exceed 30,000 3 seats (d) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 30,000 but does not exceed 40,000 4 seats. (e) Where the number of persons enrolled on a State Register of Homoeopathy system exceeds 40,000 5 seats. 2.For every subsequent election to the Central Council under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine the number of seats allocated in the Central Council of Homoeopathy on the basis laid down in paragraph I above.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section Sch.2--> THE SECOND SCHEDULE (See section 13) RECOGNISED MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS IN HOMOEOPATHY GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES, BOARDS OR MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA Sl Name of the University Board of Medical Institution Recognised Medical Qualification Abbreviation for Registration Remarks Andhra Pradesh   1. Andhra Provincial Homoeopathic Medical College, Gudivada Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine D.H.M. April, 1949 to March, 1969 2. Dr. Gururaju Govt. Homoeopathic Medical College, Gudivada Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From April, 1970 onwards 3. Board of Indian Medicine, Hyderabad Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From October, 1971 1 [3A. Homoeopathic Medical College, Rajahmundry, A.P. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From March, 1973 to Dec., 1986 2 [3B. Andhra University, Waltair Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Direct) MBS(H) From 1983 to 1985  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree Course) MBS(H) From 1983 to 1985  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Special Qualifying Exam) MBS(H) 3 [From 1979 to 1984 3C. Osmania University, Hyderabad 4 [Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery MBS(H) Direct From 1984 to 1990  5 [Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery MBS Special Qualifying Exam [From 1979 to 1983  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery MBS(H) Graded Degree From 1983 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards 3D. Sri Venkateshwara University, Tirupathi Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery in Homoeopathy MBS(H) From 1989 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards 3DA. Nagarjuna University, Guntur Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery M.B.S. From 1985 to 1989  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From October, 1989 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded) From 1985 to 1993 3F. University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1993 onwards 3F(a) NTR University of Health Sciences, Vijayawada Bachelor of Homeoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From 1998 Onwards Assam   6 [3E. Board of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Assam Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. (Old regulations) upto Dec., 1988  Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. (CCH Regulations) 7 [From 1987 onwards Bihar   4. Bihar State Board of Homoeopathic Medicine Diploma in Medicine and Surgery D.M.S. Since 1961-1975  Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1971-1975 8 [4A. University of Bihar, Muzaffarpur Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1973 to 1974  Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1976 onwards 4B. Babasaheb Bhim Rao Ambedkar Bihar University, Muzaffarpur (1) Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1987 onwards  (2) Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S (Graded Degree) From 1986 onwards  (3) Diploma of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From August 1991 onwards Delhi   5. Board of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Delhi Diploma in Homoeopathic Science D.H.S From 1965 to 1970-71  Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. Form 1971 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1984 onwards 5(a) Delhi University 9 [Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1994 onwards Gujarat   10 [5A. Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Gujarat,Ahmedabad Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From June,1974 onwards 11 [5B. Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Gujarat Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. (CCH Regulations) From 1987 onwards 5B Sardar Patel University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1991 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded Degree) From 1987 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Materia Medica M.D(Hom)(Mat.Med) From 2004 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Repertory M.D.(Hom)(Rep) From 2004 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Homoeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom)(Hom Phil) From 2004 onwards 12 [5C. North Gujarat University,Patan Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From August 2001 onwards 5D. Saurashtra University, Rajkot Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From August 2001 onwards Karnataka   6. The Homoeopathic Medical College, Belgaum Licentiate of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy L.C.E.H. From June 1971 to December, 1971 7. Court of Examiners in Homoeopathic Education, Bangalore. Licentiate of the Court of Examiner in Homoeopathy L.C.E.H. From January, 1973  Graduate of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy G.C.E.H From January, 1973 13 [7A. The Karnataka Board of Homoeopathic System of Medicine. Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1985 onwards 14 [7B. Gulbarga University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy - Materia Medica M.D.(Hom) (Mat.Med.) From 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy - Homoeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom) (Hom.Phil.) From 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy - Repertory M.D.(Hom) (Rep.) From 1999 onwards 15 [7C. Mangalore University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1991 onwards 16 [7D. Bangalore University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards 7F. Karnataka University, Dharwad Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1995 onwards 7G. Rajiv Gandhi University of Health Sciences, Karnataka Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From April 2002 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Materia Medica) M.D.(Hom) (Materia Medica) From September 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Homoeopathic Philosophy) M.D.(Hom) (Homoeopathic Philosophy) From September 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Repertory) M.D.(Hom) (Repertory) From September 1999 onwards Kerala   17 [8. Board of Examiners in Homoeopathy, Govt. of Kerala Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine D.H.M. From 1962 onwards  Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and surgery D.H.M.S. From June, 1974 onwards 9. Royal College of Homoeopathic Physicians, Ernakulam Licentiate of Royal College of Homoeopathic Physicians L.R.C.H.P. Upto 1966-67 18 [9A. University of Calicut, Kerala Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1982 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Materia Medica) M.D.(Hom) (Mat. Med.) From 1996 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Homeopathic Philosophy) M.D.(Hom) (Hom.Phil.) From 1996 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Repertory) M.D.(Hom) (Repertory) From September 2001 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded Degree) From 1995 onwards 19 [9B. University of Kerala Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1989 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded) B.H.M.S.(Graded) From 1994 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Materia Medica) M.D.(Hom) (Materia Medica) From October 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Homoeopathic Philosophy) M.D.(Hom) (Homoeopathic Philosophy) From October 1999 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Repertory) M.D.(Hom) (Repertory) From October 1999 onwards 20 [9C. Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1989 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded Degree) B.H.M.S.(Graded) From 1997 onwards Madhya Pradesh   21 [10. The Board of Homoeopathic and Biochemic System of Medicine, Madhya Pradesh Diploma in Homoeopathy and Biochemistry D.H.B. From 1960 to 1975 22 [10A. State Council of Homoeopathy, Madhya Pradesh Diploma in Homoeopathy and Biochemistry D.H.B. From September 1975 to 1986. 10B. State Council of Homoeopathy, Madhya Pradesh Diploma in Homoeopathy Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1987 to 1995 23 10B. State Council of Homoeopathy Madhya Pradesh Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. 24 [From 1987 onwards 10C. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From August 2001 onwards 10C. Barkatulla Vishwavidyalaya, Bhopal Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 2001 onwards 10D Jiwaji University, Gwalior Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From June, 2003 onwards 10E Vikram Vishwavidyalaya ,Ujjain Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From 31.8.2002 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded Degree) B.H.M.S (Graded Degree) From 10.11.2002 onwards Maharashtra   11. The Court of Examiners of Homoeopathic and Biochemic System of Medicine, Bombay Licentiate of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy L.C.E.H. From December, 1961 onwards  Diploma in Homoeopathy and Biochemsitry D.H.B. From October, 1955 onwards 25 [11A. Vidharbha Board of Homoeopathic and Biochemistry Medicine, Nagpur. Diploma in Homoeopathy and Biochemistry D.H.B. From November, 1955 to 1961 26 [11B. The Court of Examiners of Homoeopathic and Biochemistry System of Medicine, Bombay Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1976 onwards 27 [11C. Omitted  28 [11D. University of Bombay Bachelor in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1988 onwards 11DA. University of Mumbai, Mumbai Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1996 onwards 29 [11E. Court of Examiners of Homoeopathic and Biochemic System of Medicine, Bombay. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S.(C.C.H. Regulations) From 1987 onwards 30 [11F. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathawada University, Aurangabad. Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1991 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Materia Medica M.D.(Hom) (Mat.Med.) From 1998 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy - Homeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom) (Hom.Phil.) From 1998 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy (Repertory) M.D.(Hom) (Rep.) From 1998 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathy Medicine and Surgery (Graded) B.H.M.S. (Graded) From 1994 onwards 12. Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy Fellow of the Court of Examiners in Homoeopathy F.C.E.H. In May, 1958 only 31 [12A. Maharashtra Council of Homoeopathy, Mumbai. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1988 onwards 12B. University of Pune Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1988 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded) Upto 2002 only 12ca. Amravati University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1998 onwards 12C. Nagpur University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1991 onwards 12D. Shivaji University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards 12E. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From December 2001 onwards 12F. North Maharashtra University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 2001 onwards 12G. Swami Ramanand Tirath Marathwada University, Nanded Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1998 onwards 12H. Maharashtra University of Health Sciences Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded) From 2002 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 2003 onwards Orissa   13. Orissa Board of Homeopathic Medicine, Bhubaneshwar. Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1972 onwards 32 [13A. Utkal University, Vani Vihar, Bhubaneshwar Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1981 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy Materia Medica M.D.(Hom) (Mat. Med.) From 1997 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy -Homeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom.) (Hom.Phil.) From 1997 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Repertory M.D.(Hom) (Rep.) From 1997 onwards 33 13B. Berhmpur University, Berhampur Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery M.B.S., 34 [B.H.M.S. From 1983 onwards 13BB. Sambalpur University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1986 onwards Rajasthan   35 [13C. Rajasthan Homoeopathic Medical College and Hospital, Jaipur Diploma of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1969 to 1973 36 [13D. Rajasthan Board of Homoeopathic Medicine, Jaipur 37 [Diploma of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1979 onwards  Diploma of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S.(CCH Regulation) From 1988 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S.(Graded) From 1983 to 1990  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1992 onwards 38 [13DD. University of Rajasthan Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards 13.DDA. University of Rajasthan (a) Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Materia Medica M.D.(Nom) (Mat red.) From 1994 onwards  (b) Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Homoeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom) (Hom Phil.) From 1994 onwards  (c) Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Repertory M.D.(Hom) From 1994 onwards 13DDB J.R. Nagar Rajasthan Vidyapeeth (Deemed University), Udaipur Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Materia Medica M.D.(Hom) (Mat.Med) From June 2004 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy- Homoeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom) (Hom. Phil) From June 2004 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy-Repretory M.D.(Hom) (Rep) From June 2004 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery(Graded) B.H.M.S (Graded) From November 2003 onwards Tamil Nadu   13E Tamil Nadu Homoeopathic Council, Madras Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. During 1973-74 39 [13F Director of Govt. Examination, Madras, Tamil Nadu Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1978 onwards 40 [13G. Tamil Nadu Homoeopathic Council, Madras Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1988 onwards (a) White Memorial Homoeopathic Medical College, Attoor Diploma n Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1988 onwards 13H. Madural Kamraj University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From August 1992 onwards (a) Govt. Homoeopathic Medical College Thirumangalam Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From August 1992 onwards 13I. Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University Chennai Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1994 onwards Uttar Pradesh   14. State Board of Homoeopathic Medicine, U.P., Lucknow. Graduate of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery G.H.M.S. From 1960 to 1964  Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery B.M.S. From 1958 to 1985  Certificate of Homoeopathic Practice. C.H.P. From 1956 to 1957 15. Agra University,Agra Graduate of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery G.H.M.S. From 1965 to 1967 41 [15A. Agra University, Agra Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery B.M.S. From 1981 onwards 42 [15B. Agra University Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1986 to Sept. 1995 15C. Dr. B.R.Ambedkar University, Agra Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From 1995 onwards 16. Kanpur University, Kanpur Graduate of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery G.H.M.S. From 1967 onwards 43 [16A. Kanpur University Bachelor of Medicine and Surgery B.M.S. From 1979 onwards 17. National Homoeopathic Medical College and Hospital Lucknow - H.L.M.S. From 1923 to 1936  - H.M.D. From 1925 to 1942  - H.M.B. From 1924 to 1949  - B.M.S. From 1950 to 1957 18. Homoeopathic Medical College, Lucknow - H.M.B. From 1931 to 1936 West Bengal   19. The Council of Homoeopathic Medicine, West Bengal Diploma in Medicine and Surgery D.M.S. From 1965 onwards 20. General Council and State Faculty of Homoeopathic Medicine, West Bengal Diploma in Medicine and Surgery D.M.S. From 1943 to 1964 21. Calcutta Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine H.M.B. upto 1936  Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery B.M.B.S. From 1936 to 1942 22. Bengal Allen Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. upto 1942  Master of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery M.H.M.S. upto 1942  Licentiate in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery L.H.M.S. Upto 1942 23. Dunham Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Member of Dunham College of Homoeopathy M.D.C.H. Upto 1942 24. Ashutosh Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Practitioner of Rational System of Medicine P.R.S.M. Upto 1942  Practitioner of Healing Art P.H.A. upto 1942 25. Herring Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Licentiate of the Rational Homoeopathic Society L.R.H.S. Upto 1942 26. Regular Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Licentiate in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery H.L.M.S. Upto 1942 27. Central Homoeopathic College, Calcutta - H.L.M.S. 1910  - H.M.B. 1910 28. Bengal Homoeopathic Medical College, Calcutta Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine H.M.B. Upto 1942 44 [29. National Institute of Homoeopathy, Calcutta Diploma of National Institute of Homoeopathy Diploma N.I.H. From October, 1979 onwards 45 [29A. The Council of Homoeopathic, West Bengal Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery M.B.S.(Hom.) 1972 to 1975 46 [29B University of Calcutta Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. 47 [From 1984 onwards.  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy- Materia Medica M.D.(Hom) (Mat. Med) From september 2003 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy - Repertory M.D.(Hom) (Rep) From September 2003 onwards  Doctor of Medicine in Homoeopathy- Homoeopathic Philosophy M.D.(Hom) (Hom Phil) From September 2003 onwards 29C. Council of Homoeopathic Medicine, West Bengal Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1990 onwards. 29D University of Burdwan , West Bengal Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From August 2003 onwards Punjab   48 [30. Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Punjab Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery D.H.M.S. From 1978 onwards.  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From January 2001 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded) From 1999 onwards 30A. Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Punjab Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded Degree) B.H.M.S. (Graded) From January 2001 onwards  Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S. From May 2003 onwards 30B Punjab University, Chandigarh Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From 31st August, 2004 onwards Goa   5E University of Goa Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery BHMS From 2004 Onwards Madhya Pradesh   10E Vikram Vishwavidyalaya Ujjain Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and surgery B.H.M.S date month Year 10E Vikram Vishwavidyalaya Ujjain Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and surgery B.H.M.S date month Year 10E Vikram Vishwavidyalaya Ujjain Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery B.H.M.S From31.8.2002 10E Bachelor of Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery (Graded degree) B.H.M.S (Graded degree) 10.11.2002 ONWARDS Inserted by S.O. 3984/85-See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 24th August, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 3185/87-87-See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 14th November, 1987. Substituted by S.O. 702/94-See Gazette of India, Pt II-3(ii), dated 12th March, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 2739/89—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 28th October, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 2330/93-See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 6th November, 1993. Inserted by S.O. 761/87—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 21st March, 1987. Substituted by S.O. 1860/93—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 4th September, 1993. Inserted by S.O. 3496/77—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 12th November, 1977. Added by S.O. 846/87—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 28th March, 1987. Inserted by S.O. 1420/77—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 14th May, 1977. Inserted by S.O. 2275/93—See Gazette of India, Pt. H-3(ii), dated 27th November, 1993. Inserted by S.O. 2363/94—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 19th November, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 2502/90—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 29th September, 1990. Inserted by S.O. 214/92—Sec Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 18th January, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 1210/92—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 9th May, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 417/94—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 5th February, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 1403/77—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 14th May, 1997. Inserted by S.O. 1517/83—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 12th March, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1517/83—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 12th March, 1983. Inserted by S.O. 1325/94—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 11th June, 1994. Substituted by S.O. 2758/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 31st July, 1982. Substituted by S.O. 2048/86—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 24th May, 1986. Subserted by S.O. 2048/86—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 24th May, 1986. Substituted by S.O. 2363/94—Sec Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 9th November, 1994. Substituted by S.O. 2758/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 31st July, 1982. Substituted by S.O. 362/90—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 10th February, 1990. Substiuted by S.O. 2897/89—See Gazette of India, Pt.fl-3(ii), dated 18th November, 1989. Substituted by S.O. Notification No V. 270217/87, dated 14th November, 1990. Substituted by S.O.710/92-See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 7th March, 1992. Substituted by S.O.2363/94-See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 19th November, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 2363/94—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 19th November, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 2243/82—See Gazette of India, Pt II-3(ii), dated 19th June, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 2845/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 7th August, 1982. Substituted by S.O. 739/85—See Gazette of India, Pt. H-3(ii), dated 23rd February, 1985. Item No. 13AA renumbered as item No. 13C by S.O. 2845/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 7th August, 1982. Item No. 13AAB renumbered as item No. 13D by S.O. 2845/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 7th August, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 1859/92—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 4th September, 1993. Inserted by S.O. 1182/91—See Gazette of India, 27-4-1991, Pt. II-3(ii) also (S.O. 1248/91) Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 4th May, 1991. Item Nos. 13B and 13BA renumbered as item Nos. 13E and 13F respectively by S.O. 2845/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. ll-3(ii), dated 7th August, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 2363/94—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 19th November, 1994. Inserted by S.O. 2595/89—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 14th October, 1989. Inserted by S.O. 978/93—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 15th May, 1993. Inserted by S.O. 2758/82—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 31st July, 1982. Inserted by S.O. 3235/78—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 11th November, 1978. Inserted by S.O. 3099/85—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 6th July, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 4278/85—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 14th September, 1985. Inserted by S.O. 891/92—See Gazette of India, Pt. II-3(ii), dated 21st March, 1992. Inserted by S.O. 2243/82—See Gazette of India, Part II-3(ii), dated 19th June, 1982.
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973_Section Sch.3-->  THE THIRD SCHEDULE (See section 14) QUALIFICATIONS GRANTED BY MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS OUTSIDE INDIA Name of University, Board or Medical Institution Recognised medical qualification Abbreviation for registration Remarks 1. Faculty of Homoeopathy, London Diploma of the Faculty of Homoeopathy D.F.Hom. 2. Faculty of Homoeopathy London Member of the Faculty of Homoeopathy. M.F.Hom. 3. Faculty of Homoeopathy London. Fellow of the Faculty of Homoeopathy.. F.F.Hom 
