Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Water(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. BE it enacted by parliament in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Water(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> In the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977.(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, for clause(C), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- '(C) "industry" includes any operation or process, or treatment and disposal system, which consumes water or gives rise to sewage effluent or trade effluent, but does not include any hydel power unit;'.
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> In the principal Act, for the words "specified industry", wherever they occur, the word "industry" shall be substituted.
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 4--> For section 16 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- Power of Central Government to Exempt the Levy of Water Cess "16.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any industry, consuming water below the quantity specified in the notification, from the levy of water cess. (2) In exempting an industry under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall take into consideration - (a) the nature of raw material used; (b) the nature of manufacturing process employed; (c) the nature of effluent generated; (d) the source of water extraction; (e) the nature of effluent receiving bodies; and (f) the production data, including water consumption per unit production, in the industry and the location of the industry."
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 5--> Schedule I to the principal Act shall be omitted.
Water (Prevention And Control Of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 6--> For Schedule II to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted , namely:- "SCHEDULE II (see section 3) Purpose for which water is consumed Maximum rate under sub-section (2)  of section 3 Maximum rate under  Sub-section (2A) of Section 3 1. Industrial cooling, spraying    in mine pits or boiler feeds Five paise per kilolitre Ten  paise Per kilolitre. 2. Domestic purpose Two paise per kilolitre Three paise  per kilolitre 3. Processing whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are _ Ten paise  per kilolitre Twenty paise per kilolitre. a) easily biodegradable ; or  b) non _ toxic; or  c) both non toxic and easily bio degradable.  4. Processing whereby water gets polluted  and the pollutants are _ Fifteen paise per kilolitre Thirty paise per kilolitre." a) not easily biodegradable; or  b) toxic; or  c) both toxic and not easily biodegradable.  
