Nagaland State Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualification) Act, 1964_Section Preamble--> State(s): Nagaland An Act to provide for the removal of certain disqualifications for being chosen as and for being a member of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide in accordance with the provisions of article 191 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India that the holders of the offices hereinafter mentioned shall not be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. It is hereby enacted in the Fifteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Nagaland State Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualification) Act, 1964_Section 1--> State(s): Nagaland (1) This Act may be called the Nagaland State Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualification) Act, 1964. (2) It extends to the whole of Nagaland. (3)It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 11thdayof February, 1964.
Nagaland State Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualification) Act, 1964_Section 2--> State(s): Nagaland A person shall not be deemed never to have been disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a member of the Nagaland Legislative Assembly by reason of the fact that he holds any of the offices specified in the Schedule appended hereto.
Nagaland State Legislature Members (Removal of Disqualification) Act, 1964_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Nagaland 1.Any office held by a Minister of State or Deputy Minister for the Union or for any State specified in the first Schedule to the Constitution of India. 2.The office of the Parliamentary Secretary to the Government of India or to the Government of Nagaland. 3.The office of the Chief Whip, Deputy Chief Whip or Whip in Parliamentary or is the Nagaland Legislative Assembly. 4.Theofficeofthe Chairman, Vice-Chairman or member of any Regional Tribal Area, Range or Village Council constituted in Nagaland under any existing law or Regulation. 5.The office of Government Pleader or Public Prosecutor. 6.The office of part-time Professor, Lecturer, Instructor or Teacher in Government educational institutions. 7.Medical practitioner rendering part-time service to Government. 8.The office of Chairman, Vice-Chairman or member or members of any Committee, Board or Authority appointed by the Government of India or the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution of India. 9.Gaonbura, Chowkidar whether called by this or any other title. 10.Any office under the Government which is not a whole-time office remunerated either by salary or fees. 11.Any office held in the Territorial Army or National Cadet Corps. 12.Any office held in Auxiliary Air Force or Air Defence Reserve. 
