Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 . IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 was enacted to regulate the sale and purchase of the agricultural produce in the State. The said Act provides for the establishment of market areas and market yards. The supervision and control of market areas vest in a committee constituted under section 13 of the said Act. Some of the members of the said committee are elected under Clause (VIII) of sub-section (1) of section 13 of the said Act. Section 14 of the said Act empowers the State Government to appoint the members of the first committee. The term of the first committee is one year. The term of the members of the first committee was being extended from time to time in 1972, the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samitis (Alpakalik Vyawastha) Adhiniyam, 1972 was enacted to make temporary provisions regarding administration of Mandi Samitis. The system provided by the said Act of 1972 is still in operation and no election to constitute the market committees could be held so far. The State Government has now decided to constitute the market committees and hold the elections there for, but before the constitution of the market committees, it has to be ensured that various sections of the society are duly represented in such committees. In order to give due representation to various sections of the society and to curb the corrupt practices in the elections of the members of such committee, it has been decided to amend the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964. The Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Vidheyak, 2001 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001.
Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam 1964, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act,- (a) for the words "Nagar Mahapalika", "Municipal Board", "Gaon Sabha", "Gaon Sabhas" and "Kshettra Samiti," wherever occurring, the words "Municipal Corporation", "Municipal Council", "Gram Panchayat", "Gram Panchayats" and "Kshettra Panchayat", respectively shall be substituted. (b) for the words "Zila Parishad" and "Antarim Zila Parishad", wherever occurring, the words "Zila Panchayat" shall be substituted. (c) for the words "Notified Area Committee", "Town Area Committee", wherever occurring, the words "Nagar Panchayat" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (1) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(1-1) "other backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Schedule I of the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation fop Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Glasses) Act, 1994 ;"
Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (viii),- (a) in sub-clause (a) for the words "out of which one shall be of Scheduled Castes" the following words shall be substituted, namely:- "out of which one shall be- (i) of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (ii) of other backward classes of citizens; and (iii) woman belonging to other than Scheduled-Castes or Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens"; (b) in sub-clause (b) for the words "out of which one shall be of Scheduled Castes" the following words shall be substituted, namely:- "out of which one shall be,- (i) of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (ii) of other backward classes of citizens ; (iii) a woman belonging to other backward classes of citizens; and (iv) a woman belonging to other than Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens"; (c) in sub-clause (c) for the words "out of which two shall be of Scheduled Castes" the following words shall be substituted, namely:- "out of which one shall be,- (i) of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (ii) of other backward classes of citizens; (iii) a woman belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (iv) a woman belonging to other backward classes of citizens; (v) a woman belonging to other than Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens"; (d) in sub-clause (d) for the words "out of which two shall be of Scheduled Castes" the following words shall be substituted, namely:- "out of which,- (i) one shall be of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (ii) two shall be of other backward classes of citizens; (iii) two shall be women belonging to other than Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes of citizens; (iv) one shall be a woman belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (v) one shall be a woman belonging to other backward classes of citizens"; (e) after the existing proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided further that the reservation of the seats for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under this clause shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 of the Constitution".
Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 14 of the principal Act the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "14-A. Corrupt practices:-The provisions of section 123 of Chapter I of part VII of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall mutatis mutandis apply in the election to a Mandi Samiti. 14-B. Electoral offences:_The provisions of sections 125,126,127,127-A, 128,129, 130, 131,132,132-A,134,134-A, 135,135-A and 136 of Chapter III of Part of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 shall have effect as if,- (a) the reference therein to an election were a reference to an election held under this Act; (b) in section 127-A, in sub-section (2), in clause (b), in sub-clause (i) for the words Chief Electoral Officer the words Director of Election had been substituted; (c) in sections 134 and 136, for the words by or under this Act the words by or under the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 had been substituted; (d) in section 135-A,- (i) for the word government the words Government, the Board or a Mandi Samiti had been substituted. (ii) in the explanation for the words this sub-section and section 20-B the words, this section had been substituted." 
