Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for the prohibition of cultivation and sale of Kesari Gram and it is hereby enacted in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India connected therewith. It is hereby enacted in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows :
Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983.1 (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on October 25, 1982. Vide Noti No. 2708 (2)/XVII-V-M(Ka)-25-83, dated 23.9.1983.
Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No person shall- (a) cultivate Kesari Gram (lathyrus sativus)-. (b) sell or offer or expose for sale, or have in his possession for purpose of sale, under any description or for use as an ingredient for the preparation of any goods intended for sale, Kesari Gram (lathyrus sativus) or any product thereof; (c) manufacture Kesari Dal or any other product of Kesari Gram (lathyrus sativus); Explanation-For the purposes of this section, Kesari Gram flour, Kesari Dal flour, mixture of Kesari Gram or Kesari Dal or flour of either with Bengal Gram (cicer arietinum) or Bengal Gram Dal or Bengal Gram Dal flour or with any other Dal or any other flour, shall be deemed to be product of Kesari Gram.
Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Any person who contravenes the provisions of Section 2 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to six years and shall also be punishable with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees.
Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 shall mutatis mutandis apply- (a) in relation to the articles mentioned in Section 2 of this Act as they apply in relation to food as defined in the said Act; (b) in relation to an offence punishable under Section 3 of this Act as they apply in relation to offences punishable under this said Act.
Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Kesari Gram (Prohibition) (Second) Ordinance, 1983 (U.P. Ordinance No. 24 of 1983), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such appeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance, referred to in sub-section (l), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act, as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
