Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit Act, 1984 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Local Funds Audit Act, 1984 (U.P. Act No. 12 of 1984) has been enacted to provide for regulating Audit of Local Funds under the management and control of Local Authorities and Funds of certain corporate and non-corporate bodies in the State. Clause (d) of Section 2 of the said Act defines the words "local authority". In this definition any other authority constituted for the purpose of village administration which includes the Zila Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats, Gram Panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats. Since the accounts of Zila Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats, Gram Panchayats and Nyaya Panchayats are now audited by the Chief Audit Officer, Cooperative Societies and Panchayats, Uttar Pradesh, the existence of the said bodies of village administration are creating confusion. It has, therefore, been decided to amend the said Act to exclude the Zila Panchayats, Kshettra Panchayats, Gram Panchayats, Nyaya Panchayats and any joint committee from the definition of "local authority". The Uttar Pradesh Local Funds Audit (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly. Received the assent of the Governor on September 19, 2011 and published in the U.P. Gazette, Extra., Part 1, Section (Ka), dated 20th September, 2011, pp. 2-3.
Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit (Amendment) Act, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Local Fund Audit Act, 1984 for clause (d) the following clause shall be substituted. Namely:- (d) "local authority" means a Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council, Municipal Corporation or any other authority constituted for the purpose of local self-Government or legally entitled to, or entrusted by, the State Government with the control or management of municipal or local fund and includes any society, body or institution, whether incorporated or not, notified by the State Government by general or special order to be a local authority for the purposes of this Act, but does not include a Zila Panchayat, Kshettra Panchayat, Gram Panchayat, Nyaya Panchayat or a Joint Committee.'. 
