Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Police Act, 1861 in its application to Uttar Pradesh. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Police Act, 1861, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in section 1, for the existing fifth clause defining the words 'District Superintendent', the following clause shall be substituted, namely :- "the words 'District Superintendent' and 'District Superintendent of Police' shall include an Additional District Superintendent or Joint District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent or other person appointed by general or special order of the State Government to perform all or any of the duties of a District Superintendent of Police under this Act in any district."
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 4,- (i) for the words 'Inspector General of Police, and in such," the words "Director General-cum-Inspector-General of Police and in such Inspectors-General", shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "Assistant District Superintendents", the words "Additional District Superintendents, Joint District Superintendents and Assistant District Superintendents" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 5, for the words "Inspector General of Police", the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General of Police" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 7, for the words "Inspector General", the words "Director General-cum-Inspector-General, Inspectors General", shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 8, for the words "Inspector General" wherever occurring, the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 10, for the Words "Inspector General" the; words "Director General-cum-Inspector General" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 12, for the words "Inspector General", wherever occurring, the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 13, for the words "Inspector General", wherever occurring, the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General or Inspector General", shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 14, for the words, "Inspector General", wherever occurring, the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General", shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 15 of the principal Act. in sub-section (2), for the words Inspector General", the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "Assistant District Superintendent", the words "Additional District Superintendent or Joint District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 30-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "Assistant District Superintendent", the words "Additional District Superintendent or Joint District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 32, for the words "Assistant District Superintendent" the words "Additional District Superintendent or Joint District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 42, for the words, "an Assistant District Superintendent", the words "Additional District Superintendent or Joint District Superintendent or Assistant District Superintendent" shall be substituted.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act, in section 45, for the words "Inspector General" the words "Director General-cum-Inspector General" shall be substituted. 
