Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984 (5 of 1985)_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Police Act, 1861, in its application, to Uttar Pradesh. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984 (5 of 1985)_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint in this behalf.
Police (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1984 (5 of 1985)_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Police Act, 1861, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, after section 32, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "32-A.Power to prohibit mass drill or mass training etc.:-(1) The Magistrate of the district may, whenever he consider it necessary so to do for preservation of the public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by public notice or by order directed to individuals in any place prohibit, in any area within his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms or the holding of or taking part in any mass, drill or mass training with arms where it arouses reasonable apprehension that the participant in such drill or training are likely to cause fear or alarm or a felling of insecurity among the public or any section thereof. Explanation-For the purpose of this section "arms" means any type of offensive weapon and includes lathi, danda, stick and belcha. (2) No prohibition under this section 'shall remain in force for more than three months : Provided that if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for the preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, it may, by notification, direct that a public notice or order issued by Magistrate of the district under sub-section (1) shall remain in force for such further period, not exceeding six months from the date on which such notice or order would have, but for such direction, expired as it may specify in the said notification. (3) The Magistrate of the district may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made by him under sub-section (1). (4) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (2) or by the Magistrate of the District under sub-section (1). (5) Where an application under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) is received, the Magistrate of the District or the State Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an opportunity of appearing before him or it either in person or by Pleader and showing cause against the order and if the Magistrate of the District or the State Government, as the case may be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the reasons for so doing. 32-B. Penalty for contravention of prohibition under section 32-A:-(1) Whoever contravenes any prohibition made under section 32-A, shall be liable, on conviction before a Magistrate, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable." 
