Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT To provide for adequate representation of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens in the Post-Graduate Medical Education on the basis of Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Examination, held in the year 1997 and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. WHEREAS admission to courses of study for award of Doctor of Medicine, Master of Surgery. Master of Dental surgery and various Post-Graduate Diploma, in the King Georges Medical College, Lucknow and other State Medical Colleges are made through Post-Graduate- Medical Entrance Examination. AND WHEREAS for adequate representation of person belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward Classes of citizens, provisions for reservation have been made : AND WHEREAS vide government Order no. 5744 Sect- 14/Panch-30/90 dated October 11, 1994 minimum percentage of marks for admission for general candidates was fixed at forty-five per cent and for candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens was fixed at thirty-five per cent; AND WHEREAS after considering the orders of the Honble Supreme Court passed in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh vs.Km. Nivedita jain, the requirement of obtaining minimum marks for admission of the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes. Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens was withdrawn vide Government Order no. 4137 Sect- 14/Panch-95-140/90 dated August 31, 1995 ; AND WHEREAS the Honble Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Sadhna Devi and others vs. State of U.P. and others has quashed the said Government Order dated August 31, 1995 : AND WHEREAS vide Government Order no. 634/Panch- 14-97/140/90 dated April 2, 1997 the minimum percentage of marks for admission to Post-Graduate Medical Education for general candidates has been fixed at forty-five per cent and for candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens at thirty-five cent, AND WHEREAS in making admission to Post Graduate Medical Education in accordance with government Order Dated April 2, 1997 while keeping the minimum percentage of marks at thirty-five cent on the basis of the Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Examination held in the year 1997 the quota for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes couldnot be filled which would not be in consonance with reservation policy. AND WHEREAS the question is of fixation of minimum percentage of marks for admission of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizen was under consideration the process of admission such as counseling in respect of Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Examination, 1997 could not be commenced; AND WHEREAS to ensure adequate representation of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens in admission to Post Graduate Medical Education on the basis of Post Graduate Medical Entrance Examination held in the year 1997 it has been considered expedient to fix the minimum percentage of marks for the said categories of person at twenty per cent: - IT IS HEREBY enacted in the forty- eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997. (2) Section 2, 3. 4, 5, 6 and 7 shall be deemed to have come into force on October 1, 1996, section 8 shall be deemed to come into force on June 15, 1997 and remaining provisions shall come into force at once.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act :- (a) "Post -Graduate Medical Education" means courses of study for the award of Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) , Master of Surgery (M.S.) Master of Dental Surgery (M. D.S.) and various Post-Graduate Diploma of the King George Medical College, Lucknow or any other State Medical College in which admissions are made through Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Examination but shall not include super specialty courses : (b) "other backward classes of citizen" means the Backward classes of citizens specified in Scheduled-I of the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1994.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) In Post Graduate Medical Education there shall be reserved at the stage of admission, the following percentages of seats in favour of the persons belonging to seats in favour the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens : (a) in the case of Scheduled Castes ---twenty -one percent; (b) in the case of Scheduled Tribes ---two per cent; (c) in the case of other backward classes of citizens: --- twenty-seven per cent Provided that the reservation under clause (c) shall not apply to the category of other backward classes of citizens specified in Schedule-II of the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994. (2) If a person belonging to any of the categories mentioned in sub-section (1) gets selected on the basis of the merit In the Post Graduate Medical Entrance Examination with General candidates, he shall not be counted against the vacancies reserved for such category under sub-section (1).
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh A candidate who has secured less than forty five per cent marks in case of general candidates and twenty per cent marks in the case of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes & and Other Backward Classes of citizens in the Post Graduate Medical Entrance Examination 1997 shall not be eligible for admission to Post Graduate Medical Education on the basis of said examination.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The Government orders no. 5744 sect-14/Panch-3O/90 dated October 11, 1994 and no. 634/ Panch-l4/97-140/96 dated April 2, 1997 shall stand amended to the extent that minimum percentage of marks for admission to Post-Graduate Medical Education on the basis of Post -Graduate Medical Entrance Examination, 1997 shall be twenty -per cent for candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other backward Classes of citizens.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order Of any court or in the court of the State Government and the minimum marks specified in section 4 shall be deemed to be and to have been minimum marks for admission to the Post-Graduate Medical Education on the basis of Post-Graduate Medical Entrance Examination, 1997 as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Anything done or any action taken to postpone the admission process in relation to Post Graduate Medical Entrance Examination, 1997 to ensure adequate representation of persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes of citizens shall be deemed to be valid and lawful.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this Act, the State Government may, by a notified order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. (2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made after expiration of the period of two years from the commencement of this Act. (3) Ever order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, before both the Houses of State Legislature and the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23-A of the Uttar Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1904 shall apply as they apply in respect of rules made by the State Government under any Uttar Pradesh Act.
Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes) Act, 1997_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Post Graduate Medical Education (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other backward classes) Ordinance, 1997 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the Provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
