Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947. IT is hereby enacted in the Forty-first year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on April 21, 1990.
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 2 of the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, clause (i) shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely : "9. Electoral roll for Gaon Sabha:- The electoral roll for the Assembly constituency prepared under the Representation of the people Act, 1950 for the time being in force, so far as it relates to the area of a Gaon Sabha shall be the electoral roll for that Gaon Sabha : Provided that any correction, deletion or addition made in the electoral roll, after the last date for making nomination for any election in the Gaon Sabha and before the completion of that election, shall not be taken into consideration for the purposes of that election."
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 12-BB of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely : - "12-BB. Superintendence of election:- Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the superintendence, direction and control of the conduct of all elections of members, of Gaon Panchayat and Pradhans and Up- Prad hans of Gaon Sabhas shall be vested in the Nirvachan Nideshak (Panchayat).'
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been doneor taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
