Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to prohibit bonded labour in any form in Uttar Pradesh. It IS HEREBY enacted in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on July 22, 1975.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act bonded labour means all work or service which is extracted from any person or his dependents under menace of any penalty, or, in repayment of principal or interest or both of any loan or advance or in discharge of any other contract or like obligation.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No person shall compel any person to render any bonded labour, or other similar form of forced labour, whether on the basis of any custom, tradition or agreement rendered void by virtue of section 5 of the Uttar Pradesh Landless Agricultural Labourers Debt Relief Act, 1975, or on the basis of any other debt whatsoever.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Any custom or tradition or any contract or other instrument (whether entered into or executed before or after the commencement of this Act) where under or by virtue of which any debtor or any of his dependents or any member of his family is required to work as labourer or otherwise for the creditor, shall be void.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Any person contravening the provisions of this Act shall the punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend up to Rs. 1,000 or with both.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing a contravention of the provisions of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Prohibition of Bonded Labour Ordinance, 1975 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
