Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees Act, 1976. It IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Sections 5 and 6 of the Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees Act, 1976 provided, inter alia, that the competent authority may, on the application of any person entitled to fell a standing tree or to cut, remove otherwise dispose of a fallen tree, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, grant permission to do so that the competent authority shall give his decision in the case of an application in respect of any tree other than a tree standing in a forest, grove or public premises, within ninety days from the date of the receipt of the application, and, in the case of an application in respect of a fallen tree, within seven days from the date of receipt of the application. The general public was facing difficulty in obtaining such permission and consequently losing interest in plantation. Therefore, with a view to motivate the general public towards plantation it was decided to amend the said Act for simplifying the procedure for obtaining permission to fell or remove trees. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was necessary implement the aforesaid decision, the Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 P. Ordinance no. 5 of 2001) was promulgated by the Governor on February 24, 2001. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on February 24, 2001.
Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For sections 5 and 6 of the Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees Act, 1976, hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted, namely:- "5. Procedure for permission to fell or remove trees:-(1) Any person entitled to fell a standing tree or to cut, remove or otherwise dispose of a fallen tree, may make an application to such officer in such form as may be notified by the State Government, for permission to fell such standing tree or to cut, remove or otherwise dispose of such fallen tree and the officer to whom such application is made, shall, within twenty days after making such enquiry as he thinks fit, forward the application along with his report to the competent authority. (2) the competent authority shall, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the report under sub-section (1), grant or refuse the permission applied for: Provided that the competent authority may, if he is not satisfied with the report made under sub-section (1), make such further enquiry as he thinks fit: Provided further that such permission shall not be refused without affording the opportunity of hearing to the applicant: Provided also that such permission shall not be refused if the tree constitutes danger to person or property: Provided further that except in such areas as may be notified by die State Government in this behalf, such permission shall not be required for felling of any tree with a view to appropriating the wood or leaves thereof for bona fide use for purposes of fuel, fodder, agricultural implements or oilier domestic use: Provided also that such immediate steps as are necessary to remove any obstruction or nuisance or to prevent any danger may be taken without such permission. (3) Where the competent authority fails to take any decision under sub-section (2) within the time specified there for, it shall be deemed that the permission applied for, has been granted. (4) Every permission granted under this Act shall be subject to such conditions, including taking of security for ensuring regeneration of the area and replanting of trees or otherwise, as may be specified from time to time by the State Government by notification. 6. Representation against the decision of the Competent Authority:-Any person aggrieved from the decision of the competent authority under section 5 may make a representation within thirty days from the date of such decision to the Revising Authority and the decision of the Revising Authority on such representation shall be final.
Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Protection of Trees (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub- section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act were in force at all material times. 
