Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for the reservation in public services and posts in favour of the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes of citizens and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It is hereby enacted in the Forty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 19941 . (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on December 11, 1993. Received the assent of the Governor on 22nd March, 1994 and published in the Uttar Pradesh Gazette (Extra), Part I, Section (Ka), dated 23rd March, 1994.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act: (a) "appointing authority" in relation to public services and posts means the authority empowered to make appointment to such services or posts; 1 [(b) "other backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part A of Schedule I;] (b-1) 2 [...] (b-2) 3 [...] (b-3) 4 [...] (c) "public services and posts" means the services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State and includes services and posts in: (i) a local authority; (ii) a Co-operative Society as defined in clause (f) of Section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the share capital of the society is held by the State Government; (iii) a Board or a Corporation or a statutory body established by or under a Central or a Uttar Pradesh Act which is owned and controlled by the State Government, or a Government company as defined in Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 in which not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid-up share capital is held by the State Government; (iv) an educational institution owned and controlled by the State Government or which receives grants in aid from the State Government, including an university established by or under a Uttar Pradesh Act, except an institution established and administered by minorities referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 of the Constitution; (v) in respect of which reservation was applicable by Government orders on the date of the commencement of this Act and which are not covered under sub-clauses (i) to (iv); (d) "year of recruitment" in relation to a vacancy means a period of twelve months commencing on the first of July of a year within which the process of direct recruitment against such vacancy is initiated. Substituted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002 (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 2 (b) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission clause (b-1) to (b-3) was stood as under: "(b-1) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part B of Schedule I; (b-2) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part C of Schedule I; (b-3) "other backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens more backward classes of citizens and most backward classes of citizens;" Omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 2 (b) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission clause (b-1) to (b-3) was stood as under: "(b-1) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part B of Schedule I; (b-2) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part C of Schedule I; (b-3) "other backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens more backward classes of citizens and most backward classes of citizens;" Omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 2 (b) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission clause (b-1) to (b-3) was stood as under: "(b-1) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part B of Schedule I; (b-2) "more backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens specified in Part C of Schedule I; (b-3) "other backward classes of citizens" means the backward classes of citizens more backward classes of citizens and most backward classes of citizens;"
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 [(1) In public services and posts, there shall be reserved at the stage of direct recruitment, the following percentage of vacancies to which recruitments are to be made in accordance with the roster referred to in sub-section (5) in favour of the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes of citizens : (a) in the case of Scheduled Castes - Twenty-one per cent (b) in the case of Scheduled Tribes - Two per cent (c) in the case of backward classes of citizens - Twenty-seven per cent: Provided that the reservation under clause (c) shall not apply to the category of Other Backward Classes of citizens specified in Schedule II : Provided further that reservation of vacancies for all categories of persons shall not exceed in any year of recruitment fifty per cent of the total vacancies of that year as also fifty per cent of the cadre strength of the service to which the recruitment is to be made. (2) If, in respect of any year of recruitment any vacancy reserved for any category of persons under sub-section (1) remains unfilled, such vacancy shall be carried forward and be filled through special recruitment in that very year or in succeeding year or years of recruitment as a separate class of vacancy and such class of vacancy shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year of recruitment in which it is filled and also for the purpose of determining the ceiling of fifty per cent reservation of the total vacancies of that year notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub-section (1). (3) Where a vacancy reserved for the Scheduled Tribes remains unfilled even after three special recruitments made under sub-section (2), such vacancy may be filled from amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes.] (3-A) 2 [...] (3-B) 3 [...] (4) 4 [ * * * ] 5 [(5) The State Government shall, for applying the reservation under sub-section (1), by a notified order, issue a roster comprising the total cadre strength of the public service or post indicating therein the reserve points and the roster so issued shall be implemented in the form of a running account from year to year until the reservation for various categories of persons mentioned in sub-section (1) is achieved and the operation of the roster and the running account shall, thereafter, come to an end, and when a vacancy arises thereafter in public service or post the same shall be filled from amongst the persons belonging to the category to which the post belonging in the roster.] (6) If a person belonging to any of the categories mentioned in sub-section (1) gets selected on the basis of merit in an open competition with general candidates, he shall not be adjusted against the vacancies reserved for such category under sub-section (1). (7) If, on the date of commencement of this Act, reservation was in force under Government Orders for appointment to posts to be filled by promotion, such Government Orders shall continue to be applicable till they are modified or revoked. Substituted by Uttar Pradesh Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 3 (w.e.f. 31-8-2002) Sub-sections (3-A) and (3-B) omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 3 (b) (i) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission sub-sections (3-A) and (3-B) was stood as under : "(3-A) If in any year of recruitment, suitable candidates belonging to : (a) the most backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to backward classes of citizens; (b) the more backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to most backward classes are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to backward classes of citizens; (c) the backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens." "(3-B) If, in respect of any year of recruitment any vacancy reserved for any category of persons under sub-section (1) remains unfilled even after recruitment made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (3-A) special recruitment may be made for such number of times as may be considered necessary to fill such vacancy from amongst the persons belonging to that category." Sub-sections (3-A) and (3-B) omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 3 (b) (i) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission sub-sections (3-A) and (3-B) was stood as under : "(3-A) If in any year of recruitment, suitable candidates belonging to : (a) the most backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to backward classes of citizens; (b) the more backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to most backward classes are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to backward classes of citizens; (c) the backward classes of citizens are not available to fill the vacancies reserved for them, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens and if the persons belonging to most backward classes of citizens are also not available, such vacancies shall be filled by persons belonging to more backward classes of citizens." "(3-B) If, in respect of any year of recruitment any vacancy reserved for any category of persons under sub-section (1) remains unfilled even after recruitment made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (3-A) special recruitment may be made for such number of times as may be considered necessary to fill such vacancy from amongst the persons belonging to that category." Omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 3 (b) (ii) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission sub-section (4) was stood as under : "(4) Where, in respect of any year of recruitment, any vacancy reserved for any category of persons under sub-section (1) remains unfilled even after recruitment made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (3-A) or even after special recruitment under sub-section (3-B) such unfilled vacancy may be filled up in any succeeding year or years of recruitment as a separating class of vacancy and such class of vacancy shall not be considered together with the vacancies of the year of recruitment in which it is being filled up, for the purpose of determining the ceiling of fifty per cent reservation of the total vacancies of that year." Substituted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 3 (c) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002)
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may, by notified order, entrust the appointing authority or any officer or employee with the responsibility of ensuring the compliance of the provisions of this Act. (2) The State Government may, in the like manner, invest the appointing authority or officer or employee referred to in sub-section (1) with such powers or authority as may be necessary for effectively discharging the responsibility entrusted to him under sub-section (1).
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Any appointing authority or officer or employee entrusted with the responsibility under sub-section (1) of Section 4 who wilfully acts in a manner intended to contravene or defeat the purposes of this Act shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. (2) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under this section except with the previous sanction of the State Government or an officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government by an order. (3) An offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall be tried summarily by a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class and the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 262, Section 263, Section 264 and Section 265 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1973 shall mutatis mutandis apply.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh If it comes to the notice of the State Government, that any person belonging to any of the categories mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 3 has been adversely affected on account of noncompliance of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the Government orders in this behalf by the appointing authority, it may call for such records and take such action as it may consider necessary.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may, by order, provide for nomination of officers for giving representation to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes of citizens in the Selection Committee to such extent and in such manner as it may consider necessary where such committee is constituted either under the service rules or otherwise.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may, in favour of the categories of persons mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 3, by order, grant such concession in respect of fees for any competitive examination or interview and relaxation in upper age limit, as it may consider necessary. (2) The Government orders in force on the date of the commencement of this Act, in respect of concessions and relaxations, including concession in fees for any competitive examination or interview and relaxation in upper age limit and those relating to reservation in direct recruitment and promotion, in favour of categories of persons referred to in sub-section (1), which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, shall continue to be applicable till they are modified or revoked, as the case may be.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For the purpose of reservation provided under this Act, caste certificate shall be issued by such authority or officer in such manner and form as the State Government may, by order, provide.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by a notified order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the State Government or any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may, by notification, amend the Schedules and upon the publication of such notification in the official Gazette, the Schedules shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every order made under sub-section (5) of Section 3, sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 4 and Section 10 and every notification issued under Section 13 shall be laid, as soon as may be, before the Houses of State Legislature and the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 23-A of the Uttar Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1904 shall apply as they apply in respect of rules made by the State Government under any Uttar Pradesh Act.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to cases in which selection process has been initiated before the commencement of this Act and such cases shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of law and Government orders as they stood before such commencement. Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section the selection process shall be deemed to have been initiated, where, under the relevant service rules, recruitment is to be made on the basis of: (i) written test or interview only, the written test or the interview, as the case may be, has started, or (ii) both written test and interview, the written test has started. (2) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the appointment to be made under the Uttar Pradesh Recruitment of Dependent of Government Servant Dying in Harness Rules, 1974.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Public Services Reservation for (Backward Classes) Act, 1989 ( Uttar Pradesh Act No. 21 of 1989), the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Act, 1993 ( Uttar Pradesh Act No. 3 of 1993) and the Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Ordinance, 1994 (Uttar Pradesh Ordinance No. 5 of 1994) are hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Acts and the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section Sch.--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (Substituted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 4 (w.e.f. 31-8-2002).) Schedule [See Section 2(b)] Part I(Re-numbered as Part-I by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October 2005 and published in the Uttar Pradesh Gazette (Extra), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005.) 1. Ahir, Yadav, Gwala, Yaduvanshiya 2. Sonar, Sunar, Swarnkar 3. Jat 4. Kurmi, Chanau, Patel, Patanwar, Kurmi-Mall, Kurmi-Seinthwar 5. Giri 6. Gujar 7. Gosain 8. Lodh, Lodha, Lodhi, Lot, Lodhi-Rajput 9. Kamboj 10. Arakh, Arakvanshiya 11. Kachchi, Kachchi-Kushwaha, Shaky 1 [12. Kahar, Kashyap] 2 [13. Kewat, Mallaha, Nishad] 14. Kisan 15. Koeri 3 [16. Kumhar, Prajapati] 17. Kasgar 18. Kunjra or Raeen 19. Gareria, Pal, Vaghel 20. Gaddi, Ghoshi 21. Chikwa, Qassab Qureshi, Chak 22. Chhippi, Chipa 23. Jogi 24. Jhoja 25. Dhafali 26. Tamoli, Barai, Chaurasia 27. Teli, Samani, Rogangar, Sahu, Rauniar, Gundhi, Arrak 28. Darji, Idrisi, Kakutstha 4 [29. Dhiver] 30. Naqqal 31. Nat (Those not included in Scheduled Castes Category) 32. Naik 33. Faqir 34. Banjara, Ranki, Mukeri, Mukerani 35. Barhai, Saifi, Vishwakarma, Panchal, Ramgadhiya, Jangir, Dhiman 36. Bari 37. Beragi 5 [38. Bind] 39. Biyar 6 [40. Bhar, Raj-Bhar] 41. Bhurji, Bharbhunja, Bhooj, Kandu, Kashaudhan 42. Bhathiara 43. Mali, Saini 44. Sweeper (Those not included in Scheduled Caste Category), Halalkhor 45. Lohar, Lohar-Saifi 46. Lonia, Nonia, Gole-thakur, Lonia-Chauhan 47. Rangrez, Rangwa 48. Marchcha 49. Halwai, Modanwal 50. Hajjam, Nai, Salmani, Savita, Sriwas 51. Rai Sikh 52. Sakka-Bhisti, Bhisti-Abbasi 53. Dhobi (Those not included in the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes Category) 54. Kasera, Thathera, Tamrakar 55. Nanbai 56. Mirshikar 57. Shekh Sarwari (Pirai), Peerahi 58. Mev, Mewati 59. Koshta/Koshti 60. Ror 61. Khumra, Sangatarash, Hansiri 62. Mochi 63. Khagi 64. Tanwar Singharia 65. Katuwa 66. Maheegeer 67. Dangi 68. Dhakar 69. Gada 70. Tantawa 71. Joria 72. Patwa, Patahara, Patehara, Deovanshi 73. Kalal, Kalwar, Kalar 74. Manihar, Kacher, Lakhara 75. Murao, Murai, Maurya 76. Momin (Ansar) 77. Muslim Kayastha 78. Mirasi 79. Naddaf (Dhuniya), Mansoori, Kandere, Kadera, Karan (Karn).] Part II (Part-II and Part-III have been inserted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005.) Backward Classes of citizen who shall be deemed to be, and entitled to get benefit of Scheduled Castes instead of Backward Class under the Act: (1) Kahar, Kashyap (2) Kewat, Mallah, Nishad (3) Kumhar, Prajapati (4) Dhiver (5) Bind (6) Bhar, Rajbhar Part III Following classes of citizens shall be deemed to be and entitled to get benefit of Scheduled Castes under the Act: (1) Dheemar (2) Batham (3) Turha (4) Gaud (5) Manjhi (6) Machhua.] Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005. Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005. Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005. Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005. Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005. Omitted by Notification No. 4/1/2002-Ka-2/2005, dated 10th October, 2005 and published in the U. P. Gazette (Extra.), Part 4, Section (Kha), dated 10th October, 2005.
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section Sch.--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [See Section 3(1)] I. Constitutional Posts : Son or daughter of a person who is 1 [ * * * ]: (a) the President of India; (b) the Vice-President of India; (c) the Judges of the Supreme Court or High Courts; (d) the Chairman or Member of the Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission, the Chief Election Commissioner or the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India; (e) On any other constitutional post of like nature. II. Service Category : (A) Group A or Class I officers of the All India, Central and State Services (Direct Recruit) : Son or daughter of: (a) parents, both of whom are Group A or Class I officers; (b) parents, either of whom is a Group A or Class I officers; (c) parents, both of whom are Group A or Class I officers, but one of them dies or suffers permanent incapacitation; (d) parents, either of whom is a Group A or Class I officer and such parent dies or suffers permanent incapacitation and before such death or such incapacitation has had the benefit of employment in any International Organisation, such as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund. World Bank, etc. for a period of not less than five years; and (e) parents, both of whom are Group A or Class I officers and such parents die or suffer permanent incapacitation and before such death or such incapacitation of both, either of them has had the benefit of employment in any International Organization such as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, etc., for a period of not less than five years. (B) Group B or Class II officers of the Central and State Services (Direct Recruits) : Son or daughter of: (a) parents, both of whom are Group B or Class II officers; (b) parents of whom only the father is a Group B or Class II officer and he gets into Group A or Class I at the age of forty years or earlier; (c) parents, both of whom are Group B or Class II officers, and one of them dies or suffers permanent incapacitation and either one of them has had the benefit of employment in any International Organisation, such as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, etc., for a period of not less than five years before such death or permanent incapacitation; (d) parents of whom the father is a Group A or Class I officer (direct recruit or pre-forty promoted) and the mother is a Group B or Class II officer and the mother dies or suffers permanent incapacitation; and (e) parents of whom the mother is a Group A or Class I officer (direct recruit or pre-forty promoted) and the father is Group B or Class II officer and the father dies or suffers permanent incapacitation. Explanation - For the purposes of the category it is clarified that the expression "permanent incapacitation" means incapacitation which results in putting an officer out of service. (C) Employees in Public Sector Undertakings : The criteria specified in sub-categories (A) and (B) above shall apply mutatis mutandis to officers holding equivalent or comparable posts in Public Sector Undertakings, Banks, Insurance Organisations, Universities etc. and also to equivalent or comparable posts and positions under private employment pending the evaluation of the posts on equivalent or comparable basis in these institutions, the criteria specified in Category IV below shall apply to the officers in these institutions. III. Armed Force including Para Military Forces (Persons holding civil posts are not included): Son or daughter of parents, either or both of whom are in the rank of Colonel and above in the Army or to equivalent posts in the Navy, the Air Force and Para Military Forces. Explanation - For the purposes of this category the service ranks below Colonel of father and mother shall not be clubbed together. IV. Professional class and those engaged in Trade and industry : The criteria specified in Category VI below shall apply to : (A) the persons engaged in profession as a doctor, lawyer, chartered accountant, Income-tax consultant, dental surgeon engineer, architect, film artist and other film professional, author, playwright, sports persons, sport professional, media professional or any other vocations of like status; and (B) the persons engaged in trade, business and industry. Explanation - (i) Where the father is in any profession and the mother is in a Group B or Class II or lower grade employment, the criteria specified in Category VI below shall apply only on the basis of the father's income and the mother's income shall not be clubbed with it. (ii) Where the mother is in any profession and the father is in a Group B or Class II or lower grade employment, the criteria specified in Category VI below shall apply only on the basis of the mother's income and the father's income shall not be clubbed with it. V. Property owners : (A) Agricultural holdings - Son or daughter of parents, either of whom together with his family, which includes self, his spouse and minor children, holds : (a) only irrigated land which is equal to or more than either five per cent of the statutory ceiling limit, or (b) both irrigated and unirrigated land, where the irrigated land (having been bought to a single type under a common denominator) is not less than forty per cent of the statutory ceiling limit for the irrigated land, the unirrigated land shall be converted into the irrigated land on the basis of the existing conversion formula and the irrigated area so computed shall be added to the actual area of the irrigated land and the total area so arrived at in terms of irrigated land is equal to or more than eighty per cent of the statutory ceiling limit for irrigated land. Explanation - The terms "statutory ceiling limit" and "conversion formula" shall be construed in accordance with the law relating to ceiling on the land holdings2 of that area in which the land in question is situated. (B) Plantations : (1) Coffee, tea, rubber, etc. The criteria specified in the Category VI below shall apply. (2) Mango, citrus, apple, etc. The land of such plantations shall be deemed to be agricultural holding and the criteria specified under sub-category (A) above shall apply. (C) Vacant land or buildings in urban area or urban agglomerations - The criteria specified in Category VI below shall apply. Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-category, it is clarified that building may be used for residential, commercial or industrial purpose and the like two or more such purposes. VI. Income or Wealth Criteria : Son or daughter of- (a) the persons having gross annual income of Rupees Three lacs or above or possessing wealth above the exemption limit as prescribed in the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 for a period of three consecutive years; (b) the persons specified in Categories I, II, III or V (A) who are not disentitled to the benefit of reservation but have income from other sources which will bring them within the criteria specified in sub-category (a) above. Explanation - For the purposes of this category, it is clarified that- (i) Income from salaries or agricultural land shall not be clubbed; (ii) The income criteria in terms of rupee shall be modified taking into account the change in its value every three years. If the situation, however so demands, the interregnum may be less.] The words "or has been" omitted by U. P. Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 5 (a) (w.e.f. 31-8-2002) Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960
Uttar Pradesh Public Services (Reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes) Act, 1994_Section Sch.--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [See Section 3(3)] [...] (Schedule III inserted by U. P. Act No. 21 of 2001 and omitted by Uttar Pradesh Act No. 1 of 2002, Section 6 (w.e.f. 31-8-2002). Before omission Schedule III was stood as under : [See Section 3(3)] Part A 1. Chamar, Dhusia, Jhusia, Jatava Part B 1. Agariya 2. Badhik 3. Badi 4. Baheliya 5. Baiga 6. Baiswar 7. Bajaniya 8. Bajgi 9. Balahar 10. Balai 11. Balmiki 12. Bangali 13. Banmanus 14. Bansphor 15. Barwar 16. Basor 17. Bawariya 18. Beldar 19. Beriya 20. Bhantu 21. Bhuiya 22. Bhuyiar 23. Boria 24. Chero 25. Davgar 26. Dhangar 27. Dhanuk 28. Dharkar 29. Dhobi 30. Dom 31. Domar 32. Dusadh 33. Gharami 34. Ghasiya 35. Gond 36. Gual 37. Habura 38. Hari 39. Hela 40. Kalabaz 41. Kanjar 42. Kapariya 43. Karwal 44. Khairaha 45. Khawar (excluding Benbansi) 46. Khatik 47. Khorot 48. Kol 49. Kori 50. Korwa 51. Lalbegi 52. Majhwar 53. Mazhabi 54. Musahar 55. Nat 56. Pankha 57. Parahia 58. Pasi, Tarmali 59. Patari 60. Rawat 61. Saharya 62. Sanaurhiya 63. Sansiya 64. Shilpkar 65. Turaaiha." 
