Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the United Provinces Panchayat Raj Act, 1947. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The power to make alteration, addition or modification in an electoral roll has been vested in the State Election Commission under section 9 of the United Provinces Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 but practically the work of alteration, addition or modification in an electoral roll is being done by the Electoral Registration Officer. In the Acts relating to urban local bodies provides for making alteration, addition and modification in an electoral roll by the Electoral Registration Officer. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act to provide for defining the Electoral Registration Officer and the Assistant Electoral Registration Officer and for empowering the Electoral Registration Officer and the Assistant Electoral Registration Officer to correct, delete or add any entry of an electoral roll. Since the State Legislature was not in Session and immediate legislative action was necessary to implement the aforesaid decision, the Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 (U.P. Ordinance no. 11 of 2004) was promulgated by the Governor on July 2, 2004. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on July 5, 2004.
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 2 of the United Provinces Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(ee) 'Electoral Registration Officer' means an officer designated or nominated as such by the State Election Commission in consultation with the State Government for preparing and revising the electoral rolls in a district; (eee) 'Assistant Electoral Registration Officer' means a person appointed as such by the Electoral Registration Officer for one or more Panchayat areas."
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 9 of die principal Act, in sub-section (8) for the words "State Election Commission", the words "Electoral Registration Officer or Assistant Electoral Registration Officer" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
