Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to amend the Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) Act, 1958, for certain purposes IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963.
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In clause (b) of section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) Act, 1958 (hereinafter called the principal Act), for the colon (:), a semi-colon (;) shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 7 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (2), for the word and figure "section 5" the words "this Act" shall be substituted ; and (2) for the existing sub-section (3), the following shall be substituted : "(3) Where permission is refused, the grounds of such refusal shall be communicated to the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed, within 90 days of the receipt of such application."
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 7 of the principal Act the following shall be added as a new. section 7-A : "7-A. Cancellation of permission obtained under fraud:- If at any time, after a permission has been granted under sub-section (2) of section 7, the prescribed authority is satisfied that such permission was granted in consequence of any material misrepresentation made or any fraudulent statement or information furnished, the prescribed authority may cancel such permission, for reasons to be recorded in writing, and any work done there under shall be deemed to have been done without such permission."
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In clause (c) of section 8 of the principal Act, tor the word and figure "section 5", the words "this Act" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For the existing section 8-B of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted : "8-B. (1) The prescribed authority may institute or defend any legal proceeding under this Act. (2) The prescribed authority shall not, except with the prior approval of the controlling authority, and shall, when so required by the controlling authority- (a) withdraw any legal proceeding under this Act ; (b) compound any offence under this Act or under a regulation made or direction issued there under ; and (c) admit, compromise or withdraw any claim made under this Act."
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In sub-section (1) of section 9 of the principal Act- (1) between the word "erects" and the words "any building" a comma and thereafter the words "re-erects or makes any material change in" shall be substituted ; and (2) for the word and figure "section 5", the words "this Act" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 10 of the principal Act, for the word "alteration" wherever it occurs, the word "change" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 15 of the principal Act- (1) in sub-section (2) between the words "granting permission" and the words "or by an order", the words "or by an order under section 7-A cancelling a permission" shall be inserted. (2) after sub-section (2) the following new sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be added: "(3) The Controlling Authority may, pending the decision of an appeal filed under sub-section (2), stay the operation of the order appealed against. (4) An order under sub-section (3) may be passed on behalf of the Controlling Authority by its chairman and such order shall be deemed to have been passed by the Controlling Authority, anything to the contrary contained in section 4 notwithstanding."
Uttar Pradesh (Regulation of Building Operations) (Amendment) Act, 1963_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After clause (gg) of sub-section (2) of section 19 of the principal Act, a semi-colon (;) and thereafter the word "and" shall be added. 
