Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An ACT further to amend the Registration Act, 1908 in its application to Uttar Pradesh. It is hereby enacted in the Fifty second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may be notification in the official Gazette appoint in this behalf.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 2 of the Registration Act, 1908, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in clause (2),- (a) for the words "or portion of a book", the words, "or portion of a book and also includes a book in electronoc form" shall be substituted. (b) after clause (10), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(10-A) 'true copy' includes a true photostat copy; (10-B) the words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000, shall have the respective meaning assigned to them in that Act."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words, "Additional Inspector-General of Registration and Deputy Inspector General of Registration", the words, "Additional Inspector-General of Registration, Deputy Inspector-General of Registration and Assistant Inspector-General of Registration" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Section 9 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 12 of the principal Act, for the words, "Registrar of the district", the words, "Inspector-General of Registration" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 21 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1-A) No non-testamentary document relating to immovable property shall be accepted for registration unless,- (a) it contains a description of such property sufficient to identify the same; and (b) It is accompanied also, where the property is agricultural land, by a map or plan, not necessarily on scale, showing all properties with full description in the radius of two hundred meters of that agricultural land."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 32-A of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1)- (i) the words, "in such areas as may be notified by the State Government," shall be omitted; (ii) the word "photostat wherever occurring including heading" shall be omitted; (b) in sub-section (2)- (i) for the words "photostat copy" the words "true copy" shall be substituted; (ii) for clauses (c) and (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(c) be compared and verified by such official as may be directed by the Registering officer." (c) sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh section 32-B of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 51 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) In Book I, shall be filed true copies of all documents or memoranda registered under sections 17, 18 and 89 which relate to immovable property, and are not wills: Provided that where Book is in electronic form, all documents, other than wills, registered under aforesaid sections or true copies thereof, as the case may be, or memoranda shall be scanned in it and a printout, thereof shall be kept permanently in Book I, (3) In Book 4, shall be filed true copies of all documents registered under clauses (d) and (f) of section 18 which do not relate to immovble property: Provided that where Book is in electronic form, all documents registered under the aforesaid clauses or their true copies, as the case may be, shall be scanned in it and a printout thereof shall be kept permanently in Book 4."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 52 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1)- (i) in clause (a), for the words, "every such documents at the time of presenting it", the words, "every such documents and true copy thereof at the time of presenting it; and" shall be substituted; (ii) for clauses (b) and (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) a receipt for such document shall be given by the registering officer to the person presenting the same." (b) sub-section (b) shall be omitted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 53 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that where Book is in electronic form, all entries and numbers in that Book and the Book maintained manually shall be identical."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words, "copied, or filed a memorandum of," the words, "scanned, or filed a true copy or a memorandum of" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 55 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(7) Where Book is in electronic form, the indexes made under this section shall also be stored in electronic form in the manner prescribed by rules under section 69."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 57 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, "to Book No. 1," the words, "to Book No. 1, other than those in electronic form," shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 58 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, "admitted to registration", the words, "admitted to registration and true copy thereof" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 60 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words, "thereon a certificate containing the word" registered, "together with the number and page of the book in which the document has been copied,: the words, "thereon and on the true copies thereof, a certificate containing the word" registered, "together with a reference to the number and page of the appropriate Book in which the document or its true copy is to be scanned or kept" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 17--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 61 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "61. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 62, after the provisions of sections 52, 58, 59 and 60 are compiled with, every document admitted to registration alongwith the map or plan, if any, mentioned in section 21, shall without unnecessary delay be scanned and a printout thereof shall be kept permanently in the Book appropriate for the document admitted to registration, according to the order of its admission : Provided that where, Book is not in electronic form or scanning of the document is not possible on the same day, the true copy of the document admitted to registration alongwith the copy of the map or plan, if any, mentioned in section 21 shall be kipt in the Book appropriate for the document in the manner aforesaid for being scanned at the earliest opportunity and replaced permanently by a printout thereof : Provided further that a true copy filed before the commencement of the Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001 and not copied in the Book appropriate therefor, shall be deemed to be a true copy presented under section 32-A and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this section: Provided also that if the true copy filed before the commencement of the Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001 is dim or has otherwise become illegible and has not been copied in the Book appropriate therefor, the registering officer shall, with the prior approval of the Registrar, require the party concerned to deliver the document to him for getting its true copy prepared for the purposes of this section and if the party concerned informs him that the document has been lost or destroyed, the true copy available in the registering office shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) The registration of the document shall, thereupon, be deemed complete and the document shall then be returned to the person who presented the same for registration, or to such other person, if any, as he has nominated in writing in that behalf on the receipt mentioned in section 52. (3) All such Books shall be authenticated at such intervals and in such manner as is from time to time prescribed by the Inspector-General."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 18--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 62 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "62. When a document is presented for registration under section 19, the original document shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of sections 52, 58, 59, 60 and 61 and the translation shall also be scanned alongwith the original document and its printout kept alongwith the printout of the original document, and if Book is not in electronic form or the scanning is not possoble on the same day, the ture copy of the translation shall be kipt alongwith the true copy of the document in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 61, and for the purposes of making the copies and memoranda requered by sections 57, 64, 65 and 66, it shall be treated as if it were the original."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 19--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words, "Sub-Registrar shall file the memorandum in his Book No. 1", the words, "Sub-Registrar shall take similar action on this memorandum, as taken on a document admitted to registration under sub-section (1) of section 61" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 20--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (a) for the words, "file in his Book No. 1, the copy of the document and the copy of the map or plan, if any", the words, "take a similar action on such copy of the document and the copy of the map or plan, if any, as taken on a document admitted to registration under sub-section (1) of section 61" shall be substituted. (b) for the words, "file it in his Book No. 1", the words, "take a similar action on it as taken by the Registrar under this sub-section" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 21--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 66 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (3), for the words, "file it in his Book No. 1", the words, "take a similar action on it as taken on a document admitted to registration under sub-section (1) of section 61", shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (4), for the words, "file it in his Book No. 1", the words, "take a similar action on it as taken on a copy received under sub- section (3)" shall be substituted.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 22--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 69 of the principal Act, after clause (hh), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(hh-1) regulating the number and manner in which printouts or true copies of documents and of translation shall be prepared and the Books in which they shall be kept for record; (hh-2) regulating the form of declaration and the manner of comparison and verification of the true copies; (hh-3) regulating the manner in which and safeguards subject to which the Books may be kept in electronic form.
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 23--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 69 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "69-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the Inspector-General of Registration shall with the prior approval of the State Government, prepare and circulate standard formats of various kinds of documents for the guidance of the general public, which may be used with or without modifications. Explanation:-Use of a standard format prepared and circulated under this section shall not be a prelude to omit the descriptions of the property required under sections 21 and 22."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 24--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 78-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted namely:- "78-B. (1) The fee for the registration of a document may be charged in the form of adhesive labels for which the Inspector-General of Registration may, with the prior approval of the State Government, make rules to regulate supply and sale thereof, the persons by whom alone such sale is to be conducted and the duties and remuneration of and the fees chargeable from such persons. (2) The District Registrar may, on an application of a person, make allowance for the spoiled, misused or unused adhesive labels purchased for the registration of a document is accordance with the rules made by the Inspector-General of Registration with the prior approval of the State Government."
Registration (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 25--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 89 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1), (2) and (4) for the words, "file the copy in his Book No. 1," Wherever occurring the words and figures "take a similar action on it as taken on a document admitted to registration under sub- section (1) of section 61" shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (3) for the words "file the copy or copies, as the case may be, in his Book No. 1," the words and figures "take a similar action on it as taken on a document admitted to registration under sub-section (1) of section 61" shall be substituted. By order, Y. R. Tripathi Pramukh Sachiv. 
