Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act. 1982. IT IS Hereby exacted in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act, 1982 (U. P. Act no. 5 of 1982) has been enacted to provide for the establishment of the Secondary Education Services Selection Board for the selection of teachers in institutions recognised under the Intermediate Education Act, 1921. Section 4 of the said Act provides for the composition of the Secondary Education Services Selection Board. The availability of adequate number of candidates for the appointment of the Chairman and members of the said Board was not possible due to the qualifications provided in the said section for the appointment to offices of the Chairman and members of the said Board and hence the section of teachers was being delayed. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act to make necessary changes in the qualifications of candidates for the appointment to the offices of the Chairman and members of the said Board. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was to implement the aforesaid decision, the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 (U. P. Ordinance no. 5 of 2004) was promulgated by the Governor on May 28, 2004. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 2004. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on May 28, 2004.
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act, 1982, hereinafter referred to as the said Act,- (a) in sub-section (2) after clause (b) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(c) is in the opinion of the State Government an eminent person having made valuable contribution in the field of education." (b) in sub-section (3) in clause (c) after sub-clause (iii) the following sub-clause (iv) shall be inserted, namely:- "(iv) is in the opinion of the State Government, an eminent person having made valuable contribution in the field of education."
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred, to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act in force at all material times. 
