Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh THE Suits Valuation Act, 1887 (As amended in its application to the Uttar Pradesh) An Act to prescribe the mode of valuing certain suits for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of Court with respect thereto. Whereas it is expedient to prescribe the mode of valuing suits for the purpose of determining the jurisdiction of the Courts with respect thereto ; It is hereby enacted as follows:
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887 Commencement.-This Act came into force on 11th February, 1887.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This part shall extend to such local area, and come into force therein on such dates as the State Government by notification in the official Gazette, directs. Note.-This Act has been extended to the areas mentioned in the table as below : TABLE Area Act of order under which extended Notification, if any, under which enforced Date from which enforced 1. Rampur district Rampur (Application of Laws) Act, 1950 3652/XVII, dated Jan, 1, 1950 Jan. 1, 1950 2. Banaras district Banaras (Application of Laws) Order, 1949 3333/XVII, dated Dec. 1, 1949. Dec. 1, 1949 3. Tehri-Garhwal Tehri-Garhwal (Application of Laws) Order, 1949 3334/XII, dated Dec. 1, 1949 Dec. 1, 1949
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may make rules for determining the value of land for purposes of jurisdiction in the suits mentioned in the Court Fees Act, 1870, as in force for the time being in the Uttar Pradesh, Section 7, Paragraphs (v), (v-A) and (v-B): Provided that such rules shall provide that the value of land for the purposes of jurisdiction shall in no case be less than the value as determinable for the computation of court-fees. (2) The rules may determine the value of any class of land, or of any interest in land in the whole or any part of a local area, and may prescribe different values for different places within the same local area.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Suits mentioned in paragraphs IV (a), IV-A, IV-B, V, V-A, V-B, VI, VI-A, VIII and X (d) of section 7 and Articles 17, 18 and 19 of Schedule II of the Court Fees Act, 1870, as in force for the time being in the Uttar Pradesh, shall be valued for the purposes of jurisdiction at the market value of the property involved in or affected by, or the title to which is affected by the relief sought, or of the amount involved in or affected by, or the title to which is affected by the relief sought and such value shall in the case of land be deemed to be the value as determinable in accordance with the rules framed under section 3.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government shall before making rules under Section 3, consult the High Court with respect thereto. (2) A rule under the section shall not take effect till expiration of one month after the rule has been published in the local official Gazette.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Repealed 1 This section applies to the territories under the administration of the Governor of Fort St. George-in-Council and hence not to the Uttar Pradesh.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This part extends to the whole of India, and shall come into force on the first day of July, 1887.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Where in suits other than those referred to in Section 4, court-fees are payable ad valorem under the Court- Fees Act, 1870, as in force for the time being in the Uttar Pradesh, the value as determinable for the computation of Court-fees and the value for purposes of jurisdiction shall be the same.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh When the subject-matter of suits of any class other than suits mentioned in Section 4 or 8 is such that in the opinion of the High Court it does not admit of being satisfactorily valued, the High Court may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, direct that suits of that class shall, for the purposes of the Court Fees Act, 1870, and of this Act and any other enactment for the time being in force, be treated as if their subject-matter were of such value as the High Court thinks fit to specify in this behalf.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [Repeated by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (Act XII of 1891)].
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything in Section 578 of the Code of Civil Procedure, an objection that by reason of the over-valuation or under-valuation of a suit or appeal a court of first instance or lower appellate court which had no jurisdiction with respect to the suit or appeal, exercised jurisdiction with respect thereto shall not be entertained by an appellate court unless- (a) the objection was taken in the court of first instance at or before the hearing at which issues were first framed and recorded or in the lower appellate court in the memorandum or appeal to that court, or (b) the appellate court is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing that the suit or appeal was over-valued, or under-valued and that the overvaluation or under-valuation thereof has prejudicially affected the disposal of the suit or appeal on its merits. (2) If the objection was taken in the manner mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) but the appellate court is not satisfied as to both the matters mentioned in clause (b) of that sub-section and has before it the materials necessary for the determination of the other grounds of the appeal to itself, it shall dispose of the appeal as if there had been no defect of jurisdiction in the court of first instance or lower appellate court. (3) If the objection was taken in that manner and the appellate court is satisfied as to both those matters and has not those materials before it, it shall proceed to deal with the appeal under the rules applicable to the court with respect to the hearing of appeals, but if it remands the suit or appeal, or frames and refers issues, for trial; or requires additional evidence to be taken, it shall direct its order to a court competent to entertain the suit or appeal. (4) The provisions of this section with respect to an appellate court shall, so far as they can be made applicable, apply to a court exercising revisional jurisdiction under section 622 of the Code of Civil Procedure or other enactment for the time being in force. (5) This section extends to the whole of India, and shall come into force on the first day of July, 1887.
Suits Valuation Act (U.P.Amendment) Act, 1887_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Nothing in Part I or Part II shall be construed to affect the jurisdiction of any court- (a) with respect to any suit instituted before rules under Part I applicable to the valuation of the suit take effect, or Part II, has come into force, as the case may be, or (b) with respect to any appeal arising out of any such suit. 
