Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act, 1982. It IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act, 1982 has been enacted to establish a Secondary Education Services Selection Board for the selection of teachers in institution recognised under the intermediate Education Act, 1921. The said Act of 1982 provided for the composition of the Board consisting of a chairman and seven members. In view of large number of vacancies of teachers, the number of members of the said Board was insufficient. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act of 1982 to increase the number of members of the said Selection Board from seven to ten. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was necessary to implement the aforesaid decision the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 (U. P. ordinance no. 7 of 2001 was promulgated by the Governor on March 3, 2001.
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on March 3, 2001.
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board Act, 1982, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "4.Composition of the Board:-(1) The Board shall consist of a chairman and ten members who shall be appointed by the State Government. (2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as chairman unless he,- (a) is or has been a Vice-Chancellor of any University established by law; or (b) is or has been in the opinion of the State Government an outstanding officer of the Administrative service not below the rank of secretary to the State Government or Director of Education Uttar Pradesh. (3) Of the Members,- (a) two shall be persons who are educationist having made significant contribution in the field of education; (b) two shall be persons who are or have been, in the opinion of the State Government, an outstanding officer of the State Educations Service not below the rank of Additional Director; (c) other shall be persons who,- (i) have worked as a professor in any university established by law in Uttar Pradesh or as a Reader of any Degree College recognised by or affiliated to such university for a period of not less than ten years; or (ii) have worked as a Principal of any institution recognised under the Intermediate Education Act, 1921 for a period of not less than ten years; or (iii)are, in the opinion of the State Government, an eminent educationist having made valuable contribution in the field of education. (4) Every appointment under this section shall take effect from the date on which it is notified by the State Government."
Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Secondary Education Services Selection Board (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act were in force at all material times. 
