Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple Act, 1983. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on November 21, 2002.
Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 6 of the Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple Act, 1983 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in. sub-section (2) for clause (a) the following clause shall be substituted namely:- "(a) The President of the Board shall be a non-official Hindu well versed in Hindu theology and having good knowledge and experience in the management and administration of the affairs of Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple and any worship, service, ritual or religious observance made therein to be nominated by the State Government."
Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 7 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1):- (i) for the words "every member" the words "The President or any member" shall be substituted; (ii) in the first proviso the words "clause (a) or" shall be omitted (b) in sub-section (2) "a member" the words "The President or a member" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 8 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (1) and (2) the following sub-sections shall be substituted namely:- "(1) The State Government may remove the President or any member of the Board other dun an ex-officio member on the ground of unfitness or misconduct. (2) The President or any member of the Board shall not be removed under this section unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against his removal."
Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Sri Kashi Vishwanath Temple (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if this Act were in force at all material times. 
