Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to provide for registration, recognition and regulation of Sports Associations and to facilitate and regulate the activities and affairs of the Sports Associations in the State of Uttar Pradesh. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called The Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on October 11, 2004.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Ad-hoc Executive Committee" means an Executive Body, which is temporarily entrusted with the management of the affairs of Sports Association by the Registrar under sections 24 and 26; (b) "affiliation" means establishment of relationship for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Act; (c) "Annual General Meeting" means the annual meeting of the General Body of a Sports Associations; (d) Certificate of Affiliation" Means the document issued by the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate, a State Level Sports Association or a District Level Sports Association while granting affiliation under the provisions of this Act and shall include a letter of affiliation issued by the Uttar Pradesh Olympic Associations; (e) "District" means a revenue district in the State; (f) "District level Sports Association" means a sports unit, which represents a district, in a particular game or sports and is duly affiliated to the concerned District Sports Office, the State Level Sports Association and District Olympic Association, and is registered with the Registrar; (g) "District Sports Council" means the Council operating in a district under the control of the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate; (h) "election" means the election of the executive body of a Sports Association; (i) "Executive body" means a group of duly elected persons who manage and control the affairs of a Sports Association by whatever name called; (j) "Extraordinary General Meeting" means a special meeting of the General Body of a sports Association other than an Annual General Meeting; (k) "General Body" means the body of all voting and non-voting members of a Sports Association; (l) "Government" means the State Government of Uttar Pradesh; (m) "Observer" means a person appointed by the Registrar, the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate, a District Sport office or a Sports Association for monitoring of elections or any other proceedings of a Sports Association; (n) "Office Bearer" means any person who holds the post of the President, Secretary or treasurer in the Executive Body of a Sports Association; (o) "Primary Sports Body" means a sports unit operating in a District which is neither a State Level Sports Association nor a District Level Sports Association and is working at sub-division or tehsil or city or village level and is constituted by individuals and is affiliated to a District Level Sports Association; (p) "Registrar" means the Registrar referred to in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 to perform the functions of the Registrar under this Act and includes any person appointed to assist the Registrar when exercising all or any of the power of the Registrar; (q) "Regulations" means regulation framed by the Executive Body of an Association in the matter of conducting tournament, coaching, training Umpires clinic or any other matter not covered under the bye-laws; (r) "Special Resolution" means resolution passed by two third majority or members present and voting in General Body meeting, the minutes of which meeting are recorded and signed by the Office bearers and attested by the Observer, if any Presence of at least half of the total number of voters shall constitute a quorum for this purpose; . (s) "Sports Association" means a State Level Sports Association, District Level Sports Association or a Primary Sports Body constituted to promote sports and games in the State; (t) "State Level Sports Association" means an elected representative body of District Level Sports Associations, for particular game or sports in the State which is duly affiliated to Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate and affiliated to Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association, and is registered with the Registrar; (u) "Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association" means the Association constituted for the purposes of representation of the State of Uttar Pradesh in the National games and which is recognised as such by the Indian Olympic Association and is duly affiliated to the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate; (v) Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate" means the Directorate of Sports Uttar Pradesh.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every Sports Association defined under this Act, other than a Primary Sports body, shall be registered under the provisions of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Registrar of Co-operative Societies for the State shall be the Registrar for the purposes of this Act, and he may obtain the assistance Of the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate for discharge of his functions under the provisions of this Act. (2) The Government may, by general or special order and subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose, confer on any Officer the power to perform the duties of Registrar under this Act. (3) The Registrar may, by general or special order and subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, delegate all or any of his powers or functions under this Act to an Officer Subordinate to him. (4) The officer to be appointed under sub-section (2) and (3) shall not be below the Rank of an Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Services.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) A State Level Sports Association enlisted in Schedule B and any other future State Level Sports Association for a game or Sports not Presently covered by Scheduled B and its affiliated District Level Sports Association shall apply for registration of the Association, stating therein, the name, address area represented, game or Sports represented by the Sports Association and with, complete details of the Executive Body and accompanied with the documents Specified in Schedule A. (2) Registration fee of rupees two hundred fifty or such other fee as may from to time to time be determined by the Government, shall be chargeable for registration.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) After the Registrar is satisfied that the proposed Sports Association Complies With the Provisions of this Act, he shall, within thirty days from the date of receipt Of application, register the Sports Association together with its bye-laws and issue a certificate thereof under his hand and seal. (2) If the Registrar finds that the requirement of sub-section (1) is not fulfilled, he shall, after giving a fifteen days notice to the applicant and opportunity of being heard, pass appropriate order.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Sports Association shall frame its Constitution which shall consist of the following:- (a) Part A memorandum containing its aims and objectives and area of operation. (b) Part B Bye-Laws
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Subject to the provisions of this act, every Sports Association which seeks registration under this Act shall make, amongst other things, the following provisions in its bye-laws :- (a) Executive body of the Sports Association shall be elected in a democratic manner in periodical elections. (b) election of the Executive Body shall be held at least once in every four years. (c) Sports to abide by the decisions or directions of the respective State Level Sports Association, applicable to District Level Sports Association only. (d) to encourage the Sports and Sports persons of every section of society without any discrimination. (2) Every Sports Association shall incorporate a procedure for elections in its bye-laws, which shall among other provisions comprise the following:- (a) provision of an independent election officer. (b) publication of a voters list before issue of notice of elections. (c) minimum 21 days notice for election, issued under the name and seal of the Secretary of the Association accompanied by the audited accounts for the previous year and valid voters list. (d) provisions for receiving nominations at least 3 days in advance. (e) provisions for holding elections by secret ballot. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), every amendment in the bye-laws be passed a special resolution and shall be approved and registered by the Registrar under the provision of this Act. (4) If the Registrar is of the opinion that the proposed amendment is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he may return the proposed amendment along with the reasons to the Sports Association for reconsidering the same. The Sports Association shall, thereafter, reconsider the proposed amendment and may resubmit fresh proposed amendment to the Registrar after bringing it in accordance with the provisions of this Act and after meeting the objections made. Thereafter the Registrar shall either approve or disapprove the proposed amendment and communicate his order with reasons to the concerned Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Every District Level Sports Association, registered under this Act, shall be a member of the concerned State Level Sports Association. (2) Every Primary Sports body shall be a member of the concerned District Level Sports Association. (3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any addition, omission or change in membership shall be made only at a General Body meeting of a Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) A State Level Sports Association shall be constituted by a minimum of six district level sports associations. (2) A District Level Sports Association shall be constituted by a minimum of three Primary Sports Bodies. (3) A Primary Sports Body shall be constituted by a minimum of seven individuals.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh There shall be a minimum of five and a maximum of twenty-one members including the office bearers in the Executive Body of a Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association shall be given affiliation by the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate, and shall be considered as a State Level Sports Association registered under this Act for the games or sports recognised for participation in the Olympic Games or Commonwealth Games conducted by the Indian Olympic Association. (2) District Olympic Associations shall affiliate the District Level Sports Associations registered under this Act. (3) The Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association or any of its affiliated bodies may perform any other task relating to sports which the Government or the Uttar Pradesh Sports Directorate may entrust to it. (4) The Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association or any constituent District Olympic Association thereof shall issue letters of Affiliation to the registered Sports Associations referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) within thirty days of the application made by such an Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Election of the Executive Body of a State Level Sports Association shall be held in the presence of an Observer of the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate Election of the Executive Body of a District Level Sports Association shall be held in the presence of an Observer of its State Level Sports Association and an Observer of the District Sports Office. (2) On conclusion of the election of the Executive Body of a Sports Association, the Election Officer shall issue a certificate, duly countersigned by the Observer(s) giving the names and addresses of the elected members. On issuance of such certificate the elected Executive Body shall take charge of the Sports Association. The Election Officer shall send copies of such certificate to the Registrar and the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Every member of a Primary Sports Body shall have the right to cast one vote in the election of its Executive Body. (2) Each affiliated Primary Sports Body shall have the right to cast one vote on behalf of that Primary Sports Body for the election of the Executive Body of a District Level Sports Association. (3) President and Secretary of each affiliated District Level Sports Association shall have the right to cast one vote on behalf of that District Level Sports Association for the election of the Executive Body of a State Level Sports Association. (4) No individual member shall have a right to cast vote for the election of the Executive Body of a District Level Sports Association or a State Level Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) All individual members shall be eligible to contest the election of a Primary Sports Body. (2) Office bearers of all affiliated Primary Sports Bodies shall be eligible to contest the elections of a District Level Sports Association. (3) Office Bearers of all affiliated District Level Sports Associations shall be eligible to contest the elections of a State Level Sports Association. (4) Anyone contesting election must possess the qualifications prescribed in Schedule C of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If any dispute arises touching the constitution, management activity, election or claim to affiliation of any sports Association, the same shall be resolved through conciliation and arbitration. (2) The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (Central Act no.26 of 1996) as amended from time to time, shall apply to the conciliation and arbitration proceedings referred to under sub-section (1).
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 17--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every Sports Association shall keep its accounts up to date.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 18--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every State Level Sports Association shall get its accounts audited by a Chartered Accountant and shall make appropriate arrangement for auditing of accounts of its affiliated District Level Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 19--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The statement of the audited accounts shall be sent within six months of the closing of the financial year by the Primary Sports Body to its District Level Sports Association by the District Level Sports Association to its State Level Sports Association; and by the State Level Sports Association to the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 20--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Registrar or the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate may call for any record of a Sports Association required for an enquiry under this Act. (2) The State Level Sports Association may call for any record of an affiliated District Level Sports Association required for an enquiry under this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 21--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) A State Level Sports Association may after giving due hearing, Disaffiliate any District Level Sports Association which has not fulfilled any of the obligations laid down in Chapter VIII of this Act for two years in succession and inform the Registrar, who may then take appropriate action under section 24. (2) The Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate may after giving due hearing, disaffiliate any State Level Sports Association which has not fulfilled any of the obligations laid down in the Chapter VIII far two years in succession and inform the Registrar, who may then take appropriate action under section 24.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 22--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) A Sports Association shall be liable to action on any of the following Grounds:- (a) If the Sport Association fails to maintain accounts and submit the same under section 19 or thus to produce the same when called for inspection. (b) If the Sports Association fails to hold elections in accordance with its bye-laws or as the case may be, when enjoined by the provisions of Chapter VII. (c) If the Sports Association fails to carry out its obligations under Chapter VIII. (d) If the Sports Association or any Of its office bearers or any member misappropriates the funds for his personal gains or mismanages the affairs of the Sports Association to give undue benefit to any other person. (e) If the Sports Association is disaffiliated under section 21. (2) A State Level Sports Association may after giving opportunity of being heard, recommend to the Registrar that a District Level Sports Association affiliated to it may be disqualified if it- (a) does not follow the directions of the State Level Sports Association in the matter of conducting tournaments and flouts its Regulations. (b) does not pay the affiliation fee. (c) otherwise violates the provisions of its own registered bye-laws.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 23--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Registrar may- (a) on the request of a State Level Sports Association, or (b) on the request of not less than one tenth of the total members of a Sports Association, or (c) on his own motion, hold an enquiry either himself or by a person duly authorised by him. (2) The Registrar or the person authorised by him shall, for the purpose of any inquiry, have all the powers to inspect records, direct production and take copy of any document of the concerned Sports Association for the purpose of the enquiry.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 24--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) After holding an inquiry the Registrar, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the affected Sports Association, may,- (a) appoint an Ad-hoc Executive Committee and cause to hold fresh elections of the Executive Body within three months; (b) in the case of misappropriation of funds, take action in accordance with law. (2) No existing Office Bearer of a Sports Association which is disqualified under sub-section (1) shall be permitted to contest elections of any Sports Association for a period of six years from the date of such disqualification.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 25--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) No person or group of persons, either individually or collectively shall represent or be allowed to represent the State of Uttar Pradesh in any games or sports without being authorized by a State Level Sports Association. (2) No Sports Association shall be entitled to use the description Uttar Pradesh or use the name of a District as part of its name or undertake any Sports activity which results in representing the State of Uttar Pradesh or a District, as an affiliated unit of any National Federation, Board or Association purporting to represent India, or in any other manner whatsover, unless such Sports Association is register as a State Level Sports Association or a district Level Sports Association is under this Act (3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or (2) shall, on conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which extend to six months or with fine or with both. (4) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except upon complaint made in writing by the Registrar or any officer authorised by him. (5) The Registrar may, for the reasons recorded in writing, compound any offence punishable under this section. On composition of any offence under this section, no proceedings shall be taken or continued in respect of such offence.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 26--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, an Association undertaking games or Sports activities at State or District Level and is already registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 shall be entitled to opt to be registered and recognised under this Act and to receive a certificate thereof on application to the Registrar and within thirty days from the date of commencement of this Act shall amend its bye-laws to bring it in conformity with the provisions of this Act to the satisfaction of the Registrar, and submit all the documents specified in Schedule A of this Act. (2) If no such application is made within thirty days of the commencement of this Act or if the bye-laws of the Sports Association covered under sub-section (1) are not brought in conformity with the provisions of this Act at the expiry of thirty days from the commencement of this Act, the Executive Body of the Sports Association shall be superseded by the Registrar and an Ad-hoc Executive Committee shall be appointed to manage the affairs of the Sports Association. Such an Ad-hoc Executive Committee shall call an Extraordinary General Meeting and get the bye-laws amended and approved within thirty days of taking charge, apply for registration under the provisions of this Act and then proceed to conduct fresh elections. (3) After the amendment in bye-laws, fresh elections shall be held within thirty days of such amendment in the cases where,- (a) such an amendment has been made after Superseding the earlier elected Executive Body, (b) earlier elected Executive Body has been elected by a voting collegiums which comprised members other than those provided under this Act: Provided that the voting collegiums and eligibility of persons for contesting elections shall be determined on the basis mentioned in sub- section (4). (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, at the commencement of this Act, the Office Bearers of the Executive Bodies of various State Level Sports Associations and District Level Sports Associations shall be determined in the following manner for the purpose of conducting fresh elections under sub-section (3) :- (a) for the State Level Sports Associations listed in Schedule B, of this Act on the basis of the returns filed by the affiliated State Level Sports Associations with the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate and the record available with the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate based on such returns on the date of commencement of this Act. (b) for the District Level Sports Associations, primarily on the basis of returns filed by the affiliated State Level Sports Associations with the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate and, if such return are not available, on the basis of record of Affiliation available with the District Sports Office on the date of Commencement of this Act
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 27--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the registration of all the Sports Associations which are registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and, have opted for registration and recognition under section 26 shall cease to exist from the date of such option. (2) Notwithstanding the cessation of registration of a Sports Association under sub-section (1), all the claims accrued or liabilities incurred or proceedings initiated prior to the commencement of this Act shall be claimed, suffered or as the case may be, continued as if the registration has not ceased to exist. (3) On cessation of registration of a Sports Association under sub-section (1), the property of such Sports Association, continue to vest in such persons or body of persons in whom the property vested immediately before the commencement of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 28--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every Sports Association shall have right to participate in the sports activities conducted by the Sports Associations to which it is affiliated, subject to the provisions of the bye-laws and Regulations of the affiliating Sports Association.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 29--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every State level Sports Association other than Uttar Pradesh Olympic Association shall- (a) conduct at least one Inter-District State Championship, for the seniors and juniors every year; (b) send its players and teams to participate at the National Level; (c) arrange to provide round the year training and coaching facilities for the players either by itself or in association with Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate; (d) Arrange to give such prizes, scholarships, medals and other such facilities as would encourage the sports persons.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 30--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every District Level Sports Association other than a District Level Olympic Association shall- (a) conduct at least one District Level Championship each for the Seniors, and Juniors every year, (b) send its players and teams to participate the State Level, (c) arrange to provide training and coaching facilities for the player either by itself or in association with Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate, (d) arrange to give such prizes, scholarships, medals and other such facilities as would encourage the sports person.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 31--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 32--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by general or special order publish in the Gazette, give such directions as are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and may appear to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing such difficulty: Provided that the powers conferred under this section shall not be exercised after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 33--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the State Government or any authority or officer or servant of the State Government for any act done or purporting to be done, or for any action taken in carrying out the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 34--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The following procedure shall govern for any addition, or alteration or the Omission from the list provided under Schedule A Schedule B and Schedule D- (a) the Uttar Pradesh State Sports Directorate may send a written advice to the Registrar after due consideration. (b) upon receiving the written advice, the Registrar shall publish a notice of the proposed addition, alteration or omission. (c) upon expiry of thirty days from the publication of such notice, the proposed amendment shall be considered by the State Government, and if the State Government thinks it fit, it may, by notification in the Gazette, amend the concerned schedule: Provided that all notifications issued under this sub-section shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are so issued, before the Houses of State Legislature.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 35--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) All Sports Association or person aggrieved by an order made by the Registrar under the provisions of this Act may appeal against the order to the Secretary to the Government, Department of Sports & Youth Affairs within thirty days of such an order being made. (2) The decision of the Secretary to the Government, Department of Sports & Youth Affairs made in such an appeal shall be final and a revision against his order shall lie with the High Court within thirty days of such an order.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 36--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh All lawful actions taken or purported to have been taken by a Sports Association under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 prior to the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been taken by virtue of its being registered as a Sports Association under this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 37--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After the exiting section 18 of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 the following new section shall be inserted namely:- "18-A. Power of Registrar to refuse or to cancel the registration of certain Societies:- (1) the Registrar shall refuse to register- (a) a Society under section 3, or (b) the change of name made under section 12-A If the main activities of the Society include Sports and the expression Uttar Pradesh or the name of any district as a part of the proposed name of the Society. (2) If the name of a Society registered before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Sports Associations (Registration, Recognition and Regulation) Act, 2004 contains as part of its name the expression Uttar Pradesh or the name of any District of the State or its parts, such Society shall amend its name to remove Uttar Pradesh or, as the case may be, the name of the district from the registered name of the Society within thirty days from such commencement. (3) If any Society fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (2), the Registrar shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to such Society, cancel the registration of such Society. (4) Cancellation of Registration under sub-section (3) shall operate as if the members of such Society have resolved to dissolve the Society and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly."
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section 38--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Ordinance, 2004 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if this Act were in force at all material times. 0---------------------------------------
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (See sec. 5, 26 and 34) List of Documents necessary for Registration 1. List of members attested by a Magistrate. 2. List of elected members of the Executive Body. 3. Certificate of Affiliation. 4. Memorandum and Bye-Laws made in accordance with the provisions of this Act (in two copies) 5. Minutes of the last general meeting. 6. In the case of an existing Association, an undertaking to bring the bye-laws in conformity with the provisions of this Act. 7. Up to date audited accounts. ----------------------------------------
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section Sch.2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (See sec. 5, 26 and 34) State Level Sports Associations eligible for Registration at commencement of this Act 1. U. P. Archery Association 2. U. P. Athletics Association 3. U. P. Badminton Association 4. U. P. Basketball Association 5. U. P. Boxing Association 6. U. P. Chess Association 7. U. P. Cricket Association 8. U. P. Cycling Association 9. U. P. Football Association 10. U. P. Golf Association 11. U. P. Gymnastic Association 12. U. P. Handball Association 13. U. P. Hockey Association 14. U. P. Kabaddi Association 15. U. P. Kho-Kho Association 16. U. P. Net Ball Association 17. U. P. Power Lifting Association 18. U. P. Rifle Shooting Association 19. U. P. Swimming Association 20. U. P. Table Tennis Association 21. U. P. Taekwondo Association 22. U. P Tennis Association 23. U. P. Volleyball Association 24. U. P. Weight Lifting Association 25. U. P. Wrestling (Free Style) Association 26. U. P. Wrestling (Indian Style) Association 27. U. P. Womens Cricket Association 28. U. P. Womens Hockey Association 29. U. P. Shooting Ball Association 30. U.P. Judo Association 31. U. P. Fencing Association 32. U. P. Wushu Association 33. U. P. Taikwando Association 34. U. P. Atia Patia Association 35. U. P. Kayaking & Konoing Association --------------------------------------------
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section Sch.3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (See sec. 15) Qualification for contesting elections and holding the post of an Office Bearer 1. He/She shall be a citizen of India. 2. He/She should possess any one of the qualifications listed below within the area of operation of the concerned Sports Association. (a) Has been born there, (b) Is ordinarily resident there, (c) Is working there, (d) Possesses property there. 3. He/ She has not been convicted in any criminal case. 4 He/She has not been declared insolvent. --------------------------
Uttar Pradesh Sports (Registration, Recognition and Regulation of Associations) Act, 2005_Section Sch.4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh See sec.34) Mandatory Record to be maintained by a Sport Association 1. Register of Members. 2. Minute Book of the meetings of the Executive Body. 3. Minute Book of the meetings of the General Body. 4. Register of Accounts. 5. Record of activities, events and achievements. 
