Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to amend the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women Act, 2004. It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women Act, 2004 (U.P. .Act no. 7 of 2004) provides for the constitution of the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women. Clause (b) of subsection (2) of the said section provides that the said Commission shall inter alia consist of seven members nominated by the State Government from amongst the Women possessing a Degree of a University established by law in India or a qualification recognized as equivalent thereto and who have worked for the upliftment and welfare of women. The proviso to the said clause (b) provided that of the said seven members one member each shall be from amongst- (1) Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes; (2) Other backward classes of citizen; (3) Minorities; (4) Advocates(with minimum ten years experience ). It was decided to amend the said Act to omit the provisions of Advocate member mentioned at serial no. 4 above. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was necessary to implement the aforesaid decision, the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Ordinance, 2005 (U.P. Ordinance no. 6 of 2005) was promulgated by the Governor on May 4,2005. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. By order, D.V.SHARMA
Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Act, 2005 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on May 4, 2005
Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women Act, 2004 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act in sub-section (2), in the proviso to clause (b) item (iv) shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Women (Amendment) Ordinance, 2005 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act in force at all material times. 
