Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948 and to validate certain Acts. It is hereby enacted in the thirty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows : Statement of Object WITH a view to meeting the situation created by the Allahabad High Court's judgment in M/s. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of U.P. holding sections 28-A, 28-C and 28-D of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, as ultra vires, a new section 28-A was enacted through the U.P. Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979. The new section 28-A did not contain any provision empowering the State Government to prescribe a form of certificate to be furnished by a person importing or bringing goods from outside the State otherwise than in connection with business. Such a provision was considered necessary to ensure uniformity in the matter of submission of certificate by the importers. It was also considered necessary to provide for the continuance in effect of the rules and notifications issued under the old section 28-A even after the enactment of the new section by the aforesaid amendment Act. As difficulties were being experienced in many cases and action taken under the new section in accordance with rules and notifications framed/issued earlier had been challenged, it had become necessary to make these provisions immediately. Since the State Legislature was not in session and the above provisions were required to be made immediately, the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1982 (U.P. Ordinance No. 35 of 1982) (See (1982) 51 STC Statutes 109.) was promulgated by the Governor on October 6, 1982, after obtaining previous instructions from the President. Since the aforesaid Ordinance was going to expire shortly and in the meantime certain further amendments in the aforesaid section 28-A and section 28-B were also considered necessary, the Governor promulgated the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1983 (U.P. Ordinance No. 14 of 1983) on March 16, 1983, after obtaining previous instructions from the President which was subsequently replaced by U.P. Ordinance No. 19 of 1983. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance No. 19 of 1983.
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983. (2) It shall come into force at once except sections 3, 4 and 5 which shall be deemed to have come into force on March 16, 1983.
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 28-A of the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted and be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the twenty-seventh day of September, 1979, namely :- "(1) Any person (hereinafter in this section referred to as the importer) who intends to bring, import or other wise receive, into the State from any place without the State, any goods liable to tax under this Act in such quantity or measure or of such value as exceeds, - (a)(i) twenty kilograms in the case of foodgrains, cereals, pulses, soyabean, and all products thereof, and all raw materials including resin, rosin and oil seeds used for extracting oils of any kind; and (ii) rupees fifty, in the case of other goods; or (b) the quantity, measure or value notified by the State Government in that behalf, in connection with business, shall obtain the prescribed form of declaration on payment of the prescribed fee from the assessing authority having jurisdiction over the area where his principal place of business is situated or, in case there is no such place, where he ordinarily resides : Provided that where the importer intends to bring, import or otherwise receive such goods otherwise than in connection with business, he may, at his option, in the like manner obtain the prescribed form of certificate." (b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted and be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the twenty seventh day of September, 1979, namely :- "(4-A) Where any person intends to bring, import or otherwise receive into the State from any place without the State any goods referred to in sub-section (1) otherwise than in connection with business and obtains the prescribed form of certificate, the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply as if the word 'certificate' were substituted for the word 'declaration' used therein."
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 28-B of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "28-B. Transit of goods by road through the State and issue of transit pass - When a vehicle coming from any place outside the State and bound for any other place outside the State, and carrying goods referred to in sub-section (1) of section 28-A, passes through the State, the driver or other person incharge of such vehicle shall obtain in the prescribed manner a transit pass from the officer-in-charge of the first check post or barrier after his entry into the State and deliver it to the officer-in-charge of the last check post or barrier before his exit from the State, failing which it shall be presumed that the goods carried thereby have been sold within the State by the owner or person in-charge of the vehicle : Provided that where the goods carried by such vehicle are, after their entry into the State, transported outside the State by any other vehicle or conveyance, the onus of proving that goods have actually moved out of the State shall be on the owner or person in-charge of the vehicle. Explanation. - In a case where a vehicle owned by a person is hired for transportation of goods by some other person, the hirer of the vehicle shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle."
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Chapter XIV of the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Rules, 1948, as substituted by the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (First Amendment) Rules, 1974, the references to section 28-A shall be deemed to be references to section 28-A of the principal Act as substituted by the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979, and amended by this Act, with the modification that after the words "notified under" occurring in sub-rule (4)(a) of rule 83, sub-rule (1) of rule 85, sub-rule (1) of rule 86 and sub-rule (1) of rule 87-A, the words "or referred to in" shall be deemed to have been inserted, and for the words "in the notification" occurring in sub-rule (4)(a) of rule 83, the word "therein" shall be deemed to have been substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of purported exercise of the powers under section 28-A of the principal Act before the commencement of this Act which is in conformity with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, shall be deemed to be and always to have been valid and lawful as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times.
Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax (Second Amendment and Validation)(Second) Ordinance, 1983, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act or the rules as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
