Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Under the Proclamation issued by the President on the 6th December, 1992 the powers of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh are now exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. There are a number of amendments to various State enactments which are required to be taken up urgently. It may not be possible for Parliament to find sufficient time to undertake the consideration of these enactments. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament may, in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of aritcle 357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the powers of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws for the State. 2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature(Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the 6th day of December.1992, under article 356 of the Constitution , by the President, and published with the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry at home Affairs No.G.S.R.912(E) of the said date.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exercisable by Ordinance under the authority of parliament, is hereby conferred on the President. (2) In exercise of the said power, the President may, from time to time, whether Parliament is Ordinance is not in session, enact, as President's Act , Bill containing such provisions as he considers necessary: Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee constituted for the purpose, consisting of twenty members of the House of the People nominated by speaker and Ten members of the Council of states nominated by the Chairman. (3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parliament. (4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under sub-section (3).which period may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Act and if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament during the session in which the Act has been laid before it Ordinance the session succeeding, such modification shall be given effect to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2): Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of the Act Ordinance of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 
