Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An act to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixty Year of the Republic of India as follows:--- Statement of Object Under the Proclamation issued by the President on the 17th October, 1996 the powers of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh are now exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. It may not be possible for Parliament to find sufficient time to deal with legislative measures which may have to be enacted. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament may, in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the powers of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws for the State.   2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1995.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the 18th day of October, 1995, under article 356 of the Constitution, by the President, and published with the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs No.G.S.R.685(E) of the said date.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh to make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to the exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby conferred on the President.. (2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact, as a President's Act, a Bill containing such provisions as he considers necessary: Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee constituted for the purpose, consisting of twenty members of the House of the People nominated by the Speaker and ten members of the Council of States nominated by the Chairman. (3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parliament. (4) Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under sub-section (3), which period may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, direct and modifications to be made in the Act and if the modifications are agreed to by the House of Parliament during the session in which the Act has been so laid before it or the session succeeding, such modifications shall be given effect to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2): Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. K.L.MOHANPURIA, Secy.to the Govt.of India. 
