Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for giving proper accommodation at Lucknow to the Officers and Leaders of Opposition of the State Legislature. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object IT is duty of State Government to provide proper residences to the Officers of the State Legislature and the Leaders of Opposition of either House of the State Legislature throughout the term of their offices. It has therefore been decided to make a law to provide for designating certain residences under the control and management of the Estate Department as the official residences thereof to use throughout the term of their offices. 2. The Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of opposition) Bill, 2005 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act,- (a) "Officer" means a person who holds the office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council; (b) "the Leader of Opposition" means the Leader of the Opposition of either House of the State Legislature.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The residence number 9 situated at Mall Avenue Colony, residence number 12 situated at Kalidas Marg, residence numbers 5 and 18 situated at Gautam Palli Colony, Lucknow under the control and management of Estate Department of the State Government, shall be designated as official residences of the Speaker Legislative Assembly, the Chairman Legislative Council, the Deputy Speaker Legislative Assembly and the Deputy Chairman Legislative Council respectively. (2) The residence number 12 situated at Mall Avenue and 6 Type VI situated at Gomti Nagar Phase-II under the control and management of Estate Department of the State Government, shall be designated as official residences of the Leader of Opposition of Legislative Assembly and the Leader of Opposition of Legislative Council. (3) The above occupants of the designated residences referred in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall deliver the vacant possession to the Estate department within fifteen days on being ceased to hold the office.
Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Residences of the Officers and Leaders of Opposition) Act, 2005_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions Of this Act the State Government may by a notified order, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. (2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiration of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act. (3) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, before both Houses of the State Legislature and the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 23-A of the Uttar Pradesh General Clauses Act, 1904 shall apply as they apply in respect of rules made by the State Government under any Uttar Pradesh Act. 
