Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows-
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 20131 . Received the assent of the Governor on March 26, 2013 and published in the Uttar Pradesh Gazette, Extraordinary, Part 1, Section (Ka), dated 28th March, 2013
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub-section (1-A), after clause (e), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely- "(f) a University to be known as Siddharth University, Kapilvastu, Siddharth Nagar; (g) a University to be known as Allahabad State University, Allahabad;".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 50 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1- B), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely- "(1-C) Until the First Statutes of the Siddharth University are made under this section, the Statutes of the University of Gorakhpur, as in force immediately before the establishment of the said University shall apply to it subject to such adaptations and modifications as the State Government may, by notification, provide. (1-D) Until the First Statutes of the Allahabad State University, Allahabad are made under this section, the Statutes of the Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Kanpur as in force immediately before the establishment of the said University shall apply to it subject to such adaptations and modifications as the State Government may, by notification, provide.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 52 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2- A) the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely- "(2-B) Until the First Ordinances of the Siddharth University are made under sub-section (2), the Ordinances of the University of Gorakhpur, as in force immediately before the establishment of the said University, shall apply to it subject to such adaptations and modifications as the State Government may, by notification provide.". "(2-C) Until the First Ordinances of the Allahabad State University, Allahabad are made under sub-section (2), the Ordinances of the Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, as in force immediately before the establishment of the said University, shall apply to it subject to such adaptations and modifications as the State Government may, by notification provide.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Schedule to the principal Act,- (a) for the entries appearing at Serial Nos. 3, 4 and 6 of the following entries shall be substituted, namely- "3. The University of Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Kanpur- (i) Until the establishment of the Allahabad State University, Allahabad District of Allahabad, Amethi, Auraiya, Etawah, Farrukhabad, Fatehpur, Hardoi, Kannauj, Kanpur Dehat, Kanpur Nagar, Kaushambhi, Lakhimpur-Kheiri, Sitapur, Rae Bareli and Unnao. (ii) Upon the establishment of the Allahabad State University, Allahabad Districts of Auraiya, Amethi, Etwah, Farrukhabad, Hardoi, Kannauj, Kanpur Dehat, Kanpur Nagar, Lakhimpur-Kheiri, Sitapur, Rae Bareli and Unnao. 4. The Deen Dayal Upadhyay Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur- (i) Until the establishment of the Siddharth University Districts of Basti, Deoria, Gorakhpur, Kushi Nagar, Maharajganj, Santkabir Nagar and Siddharth Nagar (ii) Upon the establishment of the Siddharth University Districts of Deoria, Kushi Nagar and Gorakhpur.". 6. Doctor Ram Manohar Lohia Avadh University, Faizabad (i) Until the establishment of Allahabad State University, Allahabad Districts of Ambedkar Nagar, Bahraich, Balrampur, Bara Banki, Faizabad, Gonda, Pratapgarh, Shrawasti and Sultanpur (ii) Upon the establishment of the Siddharth University Kapilvastu, Siddharth Nagar and Allahabad State University, Allahabad Districts of Ambedkar Nagar, Bahraich, Bara Banki, Faizabad, Gonda and Sultanpur (b) After the Serial No. 11, the following serials shall be inserted, namely- "12. The Allahabad State University, Allahabad District of Allahabad, Fatehpur, Kaushambi, and Pratapgarh 13. The Siddharth University, Kapilvastu, Siddharth Nagar District of Balrampur, Basti, Maharajganj Shrawasti, Siddharth Nagar and Sant Kabir Nagar.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may, for the purpose of removing any difficulty in relation to the establishment of the Siddharth University, Kapilvastu, Siddharth Nagar and Allahabad State University, Allahabad by order published in the Gazette, direct that the provisions of the principal Act shall during such period, as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission as it may deem to be necessary or expedient: Provided that no such order shall be made after two years from the date of commencement of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2013. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before both the Houses of the State Legislature. (3) No order under sub-section (1) shall be called in question in any court on the ground that no difficulty, as is referred to in sub-section (1) existed or required to be removed. 
