Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973. In is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Urdu language is spoken as mother tongue by a section of the society in Uttar Pradesh. The Urdu language is required to be developed in such a manner that any person of the society may continue his study to the higher stage of learning in Urdu literature including Arabi and Pharsi language. The Uttar Pradesh Arabi Pharsi Universities Act, 2009 (U.P. Act No. 12 of 2009) was enacted for the purpose. After due study of the said Act it has been found that certain provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State University Act, 1973 are not present therein. With a view to making good of the shortcomings appeared in the said Act of 2009, it is has been decided to amend the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 to include the Uttar Pradesh Urdu, Arabi Pharsi University in the list of the Universities administered thereby and to repeal the said Act of 2009. The Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on October 1, 2009.
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub-section (1-A) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) a University to be known as the Urdu, Uttar Pradesh Arabi Pharsi University at Lucknow.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 5 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) the powers conferred on the Uttar Pradesh Urdu, Arabi Pharsi University at Lucknow in respect of education and research in Urdu, Arabic and Persian and advancement and dissemination of knowledge thereof shall be exercisable throughout Uttar Pradesh.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After Section 7-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "7-B. Additional power and duties of certain Universities:-Upon being authorized by the State Government by notification the Uttar Pradesh Urdu, Arabi Pharsi University shall help, affiliate and facilitate the minority educational institutions providing higher education.".
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Schedule to the principal Act after Serial No. 10 the following serial shall columnwise be inserted, namely:- 1 2 3 11 The Uttar Pradesh Urdu, Arabi Pharsi University at Lucknow Whole of Uttar Pradesh in respect of education and research in Urdu, Arabic and Persian
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may, for the purpose of removing any difficulty in relation to the Urdu, Arabi Pharsi University, by order published in the Gazette, direct that the provisions of principal Act shall during such period, as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission as it may deem to be necessary or expedient: Provided that no such order shall be made after two years from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before both Houses of the State Legislature. (3) No order under sub-section (1) shall be called in question in any court on the ground that no difficulty, as is referred to in sub-section (1) existed or was required to be removed.
Uttar Pradesh State Universities (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Arabi Pharsi University Act, 2009 (U.P. Act No. 12 of 2009) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the Act referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act, 1973 as amended by this Act as if this Act were in force at all material times. 
