Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission Act, 1988. In exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1993, the president is pleased to enact as follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of January, 1993.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 6 of the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission Act, 1988, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub- section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairman and such other members not exceeding five as the State Government may from time to time appoint from amongst its officers and the officers of a corporation wholly owned or controlled by the State Government who have, for at least ten years, held a post or posts under the Central or State Government or such corporations not below the rank of Group A posts of the State Government ".
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Sections 8 and 9 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "10. Application of F. R. 56 to members:- (1) The provisions of rule 56 of the Uttar Pradesh Fundamental Rules shall apply and continue to apply to every member of the Commission as they apply to any other Government servant of the same grade, rank or cadre. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained to sub-section (1), a person who has retired on attaining the age of superannuation, from Government Service or the service of a corporation wholly owned or controlled by the State Government, may be re-employed and appointed as a member, if he is otherwise eligible for such appointment under sub-section (1) of section 6 for such period as may be specified in the appointment order, so however, that he shall not hold the office beyond the date of his attaining the age of sixty-two years. (3) Any person holding the office of a member on August 30, 1991 who had passed the date of retirement provided in rule 56 of the Uttar Pradesh Fundamental Rules, before August 30, 1991 shall be deemed to have been re-employed and appointed under sub-section (2)".
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Act, 1993_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Commission (Amendment) Ordinance, 1993 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
