Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board Act, 1988
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on May 31, 1990.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the long title of the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board Act, 1988, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, for the Word "Board" the word "Commission" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1)of section 1, section 2, section 4, sub-section(2) of section 6, sections 11, 12,14, 15,16,17,18,20, 23 and 27 ; (b) in the heading of chapters II, III and V; (c) in the marginal headings of sections 6,12,14, 16 and 18 ; for the word "Board" wherever it occurs, the word "Commission" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the principal Act, after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(c-1) Group A post or Group C post means the post specified as such by the State Government from time to time".
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "5. Establishment of Commission:- (1) There shall be a Commission to be known as the Uttar Pradesh subordinate Services Selection Commission. (2) The Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board constituted as a body corporate under section 5 of this Act as it stood immediately before May31, 1990, shall stand dissolved on May 31, 1990 and upon such dissolution- (a) the Chairman and other members of that Board shall become respectively the first Chairman and other members of the Commission ; (b) all the properties and assets of that Board shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the State Government ; (c) all debts, liabilities and obligations of that Board, whether contractual or otherwise, shall stand transferred to the State Government; (d) the services of every whole time employee of the Board shall provisionally stand transferred to the State Government, and- (i) if he gives notice in writing to the State Government within ninety days from May 31, 1990 of his intention not to become an employee of the State Government, his services shall stand terminated on the expiration of that period ; (ii) in any other case he shall become an employee of the State Government as on May 31, 1990.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 6 of the principal Act,- (a) for section(1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely.- "(1) the commission shall consist of a Chairman and such other members not exceeding five, as the State Government may, from time to time appoint : Provided that not less than one hall of the member shall, as far as possible, be persons who on the date of their respective appointments have, for at least ten years, held post or posts under the Central or t he State Government, not below t he rank of Group A posts of the State Government." ; (b) in sub-section (2), for the word and figure "section 7" the word and figure "sub-section (1)" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Far section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "7. Powers and duties of Chairman and other members:- (1) The Chairman shall be in-charge of the administration of the Commission and shall have the powers to - (a) constitute committees or sub-committees from amongst the members with or without one or more non-members ; (b) allocate to members, Committees and sub-committees such work as is not specifically allocated by this Act, or rules or regulations made there under ; (c) co-ordinate the working of t he Commission and its members; (d) grant casual leave to and approve the tour programme of, other members and officers of the Commission. (2) The other members shall assist the Chairman in conducting the examinations and interviews of candidates and do such other work as may be allocated to them by or under this Act, the rules or regulations made there under, or by the Chairman under clause (b) of sub-section (1)."
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely: - "13. Secretary of the Commission:- (1) There shall be a Secretary of the Commission appointed by the State Government, who shall be the Head of the Office of the Commission. (2) The Secretary shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be Specified in the rules or regulations made under this Act."
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), clauses (d) and (e) shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 19 of t he principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely : - "19. Decision in meeting:- All questions at any meeting of the Commission shall be determined by a majority of the members; present and voting and in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman or in his absence, the member prescribing shall have a second or casting vote."
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For the heading of Chapter VI of the principal Act, the following heading shall be substituted, namely:- "Annual Reports"
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Sections 21,22,24 and 25 of the principal Act, shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Act, 1990_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection Board (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have teen done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
