Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act, 1961, with a view to providing for the creation of two special funds, one earmarked for sugarcane research and development and the other for rehabilitation, modernisation and establishment of sugar factories in Uttar Pradesh. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Twenty-fifth Year o the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 1974. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, specify.
Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 3 of the U. P. Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act, 1961, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act :- (a) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words "sixty-seven paise", the words "one rupee" shall be substituted ; (b) after sub-section (9) the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :- "(10) At the beginning of each financial year, after due appropriation has been made by law, the State Government shall withdraw from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State an amount equivalent to the proceeds of the tax levied under clause (a) of sub-section (1), to the extent that the rate of tax exceeds sixty paise per quintal of sugarcane, recovered by it during the preceding financial year, and place it to the credit of the two separate funds named below in the following proportions, namely:- (a) one-third share to the credit of the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane Research and Development Fund, and (b) two-third share to the credit of the Uttar Pradesh Sugar Factories Rehabilitation, Modernisation and Establishment Fund. (11) The Credit of the proceeds referred to in sub-section (10) to the two separate funds referred to in that sub-section shall be an expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State. (12) The maintenance and the operation of the said two funds shall be vested in a Committee to be called the Uttar Pradesh Sugar Special Funds Committee; consisting of the following persons, namely :- (a) the-Secretary to the State Government in the Sugar Industry Department, who shall be the Convener, of the Committee ; (b) the Chairman of the U. P. State Sugar Corporation Limited ; (c) the Cane Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh. (13) The Committee referred to in sub-section (12) shall Be a body corporate with perpetual succession, and may sue and be sued by the said name, and shall have power to invest moneys belonging to the funds in such manner as it deems fit and to spend them on the objects indicated in the respective names of the funds." 
