Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act. 1961. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty -seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The manufacture or production of Gur or Rab by crushing sugarcane is being done by small fanners and small cottage industries by the help of vertical crusher (Urdhwa Kolhu) or vertical power crusher (Urdhwa Shakti Chalit Kolhu). Such small faremrs and small cottage industry owners have to face difficulties in obtaining licence under the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act, 1961. It has. therefore, been decided to amend the said Act to exempt the said units from obtaining licences. The Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Bill, 2006 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 2006.
Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane (Purchase Tax) Act, 1961 for sub-section (1) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "No unit other than a unit comprising vertical crusher (Urdhwa Kolhu) or vertical power crusher (Urdhwa Shakti Chalit Kolhu) for manfacture or production of gur or rab by crushing sugarcane or a unit which has obtained a licence under the Uttar Pradesh Khandsari Sugar Manufactures Licensing Order, 1967, shall without obtaining a licence from the Sugar Commissioner, carry on or undertake any process connected with the manufacture or production of gur or rab : Provided that a licence granted or renewed under the U.P. Sugarcane Cess Act, 1956, or purported to have been granted or renewed thereunder, shall be deemed to be a licence granted, or . renewed, as the case may be, under this Act, for the period for which it was granted or renewed as if this Act had been in force during the aforesaid period and on all material dates." 
