Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for the imposition of a tax on Luxuries in Hotels and for amendment to certain taxation and Land Revenue Laws. It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 19751 . (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. Received the assent of the Governor on 19th March, 1975 and published in the Uttar Pradesh Gazette (Extra.), dated 24th March, 1975.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Chapter shall come into force1 on such date as the State Government may by notification in the Gazette appoint in that behalf. Came into force on 1-8-1975, vide Notification No. 4771/Paryatan-36 TS-74, dated 25th July, 1975.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this chapter unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "American Plan" means the tariff plan in which the rent of the room includes the charges for the breakfast, the lunch and the dinner and may include the charges for the evening tea; (b) "Continental Plan" means the tariff plan in which the rent for the room includes the charges for the breakfast; (c) "hotel" includes an accommodational unit wherein rooms are provided to the customers on rent, but does not include the units approved under the 'Paying Guest Scheme' of Department of Tourism of the Government of Uttar Pradesh; (d) "Luxuries" means such amenities as are provided in a hotel to the occupants of such rooms or suites therein as carry a rent of rupees one thousand or more per day; (e) "luxury tax" or "the tax" means the tax levied under Section 4; (f) "Modified American Plan" means the tariff plan in which the rent of the room includes the charges for the breakfast, and one meal, either lunch or dinner; (g) "proprietor" means the owner of the hotel and includes the person, who, for the time being, is in charge of the management of the hotel; (h) "rent" means the aggregate of all charges by whatever name called, actually received from the occupant of a room or suite in a hotel and includes charges for air-conditioning, cooler, heater, geyser, television, radio, music, entertainment, extra bed, or linen articles but does not include the charges for food or drinks or such other items, on the sale of which trade tax is payable under the Uttar Pradesh Tax Act, 19482. Explanation 1 - Irrespective of the number of persons staying in a room or suite the tax shall be levied, considering the room or the suite as a unit. Wherever a composite rate of charges has been fixed by the proprietor including charges of accommodation, food and drinks and the like under the various tariff plans such as, Continental, American or Modified American Plan, the tax under this Act shall not be levied on that part of such charges on which Trade Tax is leviable under the Uttar Pradesh Trade Tax Act, 19482 . Explanation 2 - Wherever the charges are realised by the proprietor on the basis of a rate, other than the daily rate, the assessment of the tax, shall be made on the average daily charges calculated on the basis of the total period of use of the room or suite. Explanation 3 - Wherever the proprietor gives any kind of discount and realise charges at a different rate than the published or declared rate of tariff for the rooms or suites, the tax shall be levied on the charges actually realised and not on the charges published or declared by the proprietor.] Substituted by U. P. Act No. 34 of 1999, Section 2 (w.e.f. 29-7-1999). Now U. P. Value Added Tax Act, 2008.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 [(1) A luxury tax shall be payable at the rate of five per cent of the rent by every person who occupies on rent a room or suite of rooms provided with luxuries in a hotel.] 2 [ * * * ] 3 [(2) In computing the luxury tax a fraction of a rupee which is fifty paise or more shall be taken as rupee one and which is less than fifty paise shall be ignored.] Substituted by U. P. Act No. 26 of 1994, Section 3 (w.e.f. 12-10-1994). Proviso omitted by U. P. Act No. 34 of 1999, Section 3 (a) (w.e.f. 29-7-1999). Old proviso is reproduced below: "Provided that any person who makes payment of rent in foreign currency shall be granted a rebate of twenty-five per cent in the tax payable by him." Substituted by U. P. Act No. 34 of 1999, Section 3 (b) (w.e.f. 29-7-1999).
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 4-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Subject to such conditions as it may impose, the State Government may, if it is necessary so to do in the public interest, by notification, exempt any class of hotels or any specific class of luxuries provided in a hotel from payment of the whole or any part of the tax payable under this Act or allow for deferment of the payment of the whole or any part of such tax, for a period not exceeding five years. (2) Where a proprietor has availed of any exemption or deferment under sub-section (1) and any of the conditions for such exemption or deferment has not been complied with by him for any reason whatsoever, then, such proprietor shall, be liable to pay the tax for the period of exemption or deferment as if such exemption or deferment had not been allowed to him.] Inserted by U. P. Act No. 34 of 1999, Section 4 (w.e.f. 29-7-1999).
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The tax shall be collected along with rent by the proprietor of the hotel from the persons liable to pay it and shall be paid by the proprietor to the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) If any proprietor fails to pay the tax within the prescribed period he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum on the amount remaining unpaid, and such interest shall be added to the amount of tax and deemed for all purposes to be part of the tax : Provided that where as a result of an order passed on appeal the amount of tax is varied the interest shall be re-calculated.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The tax shall be assessed by such authority as may be prescribed. (2) The procedure of assessment and of any appeal from any order of assessment, and the powers of the assessing and appellate authorities shall be such as may be prescribed.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Chapter, the assessing authority may permit the proprietor of a hotel to pay in lieu of the tax payable by him under this Chapter, a lump sum by way of composition subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The assessing authority or any other officer authorised by him in that behalf may, with a view to satisfying itself or himself that the provisions of this Chapter or rules made thereunder are being complied with- (a) enter any hotel at any reasonable time; (b) require any proprietor of a hotel to produce before him any books, accounts or other documents; (c) inspect any books, accounts or other documents; and (d) inspect the rooms to ascertain their occupancy.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 7, any sum payable under Section 5, shall on the certificate of the assessing authority be recoverable from the proprietor as an arrear of land revenue.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 5 if any person fails to pay any sum payable under Section 5 or Section 7 within the prescribed period he shall, on conviction be liable to pay a fine not exceeding rupees five thousand and when the offence is a continuing one, with a further fine not exceeding rupees one hundred per day during which the offence continues. (2) Whoever fails to supply any information which he is required to supply under any rules made under this Chapter or knowingly supplies false information shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If the person committing an offence under this Chapter is a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 'provided in this Chapter if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence'. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Chapter is committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation - For the purpose of this section- (a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the State Government or any officer of the State Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder.
Uttar Pradesh Taxation and Land Revenue Laws Act, 1975_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may by notification in the Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of the provisions of this Chapter and such rules may, among other things, provide for the levy of fees in respect of proceeding referred to in Section 6. (2) All rules made under this Chapter shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session for a total period of not less than thirty days, extending in its one session or more than one successive sessions, and shall, unless some later date is appointed, take effect from the date of their publication in the Gazette subject to such modifications or amendments as the two Houses of the Legislature may during the said period, agree to make, so, however, that any such modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder. 
