Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for establishment and operation of a fund for the promotion of Welfare of Advocates in Uttar Pradesh. It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-fifth year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh .
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- (a) 'Advocate' means an Advocate enrolled on the roll of the State Bar Council and shall include the pleaders and other Legal practitioners enrolled as such under the provisions of the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 . (aa) 'Bar Association' means a Bar Association affiliated to the State Bar Council (b) "State Bar Council" means the State Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh constituted under Section 3 of the Advocates Act, 1961, (c) "Fund" means fund as referred to in section 3, (cc) 'Member ' means a member of the Scheme. (d) "Trustees Committee" means the Committee constituted under Section 3, (e) "Welfare stamp" means the stamp referred to in Section 9: (f) "Vakalatnama" includes a memorandum of appearance or any other document by which an Advocate is empowered to appear, act or plead before any court,tribunal, authority or person but does not include any Vakalatnama or memorandum of appearance filled on behalf of the Government or an officer repesenting the Government.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) For the following objects of general public utility a charitable trust shall be created in respect of a fund, to be constituted as hereinafter provided and to be called the Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund, namely- (a) obtaining from the life Insurance Corporation of India a policy of group Life Insurance of Advocates up to the age of 60 years. (b) the provision of buildings halls and libraries, canteens, sheds and other facilities for District Bar Associations, or the making of contributions to Bar Associations for the purposes of making such provision; (c) the organisation of other schemes for the welfare of needy Advocates : and (d) such other objects as would, in the opinion of the Trustees committee, improve the working conditions and facilities of Advocates. (2) The Fund shall consist of - (a) All monies transferred to it under Section 4; (b) All contributions made to it by the State Bar Council. (c) Any voluntary donation or contribution made to the Fund by any Advocate, including recived from the Life Insurance Corporation of India on the death of an Advocate insured under the group life Insurance policy where such Advocate had nominated the Trustees Committee as the person to whom the money secured by the policy shall be paid in the event of his death; (d) Any grants made to the Fund by the State Government; (e) Any sum borrowed under Section 5; (f) Any interest or dividend or other return or any investment made in respect of any part of the Fund. (g) The sale proceeds of stamps transferred by the State Government in accordance with Section 10. (h) all admission fees and annual subscription for membership of the Scheme received in accordance with Section 11 and interest, if any thereon. (3) The Fund shall vest and be held and administered by a Trustees Committee to be named the Utter Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Trustees Committee, of which the following shall be the members, namely- (a) The Advocate General of Uttar Pradesh ex-officio, who shall be Chairman. (b) Chairman, State Bar Council, ex-officio, or where that office is for the time being held by the Advocate General, an Advocate nominated. (bb) Two members of the State Bar Council, elected by it. (c) The Secretary to the State Government in the Judicial Department ex-officio, who shall be member-Secretary. (4) A member nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (3) shall hold office till the office of the Chairman State Bar Council is held by the Advocate General but he may at any time by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman, resign his membership. (5) The Trustee committee shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire and hold property, and amy sue and be sued by the name. (6) No act or proceeding of the Trustee Committee shall be questioned or deemed to be invalid by reason merely of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution thereof.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this act, an amount equivalent to the sums received by the State Bar Council on account of the deposits of Stamps duty on certificates of enrolment paid by Advocates, together with interest actually earned thereon, shall be paid by it to the credit of the Fund, and such credit to Fund shall discharge the State Bar Council of the liability in respect thereof to the State Government. (2) An amount equivalent to the stamp duty deposited by Advocates for certificates of enrollment with the State Bar Council in a financial year shall be transferred by the State Government to the Fund as soon as may be after the end of that financial year and such transfer shall discharge the State Government of its liability in respect thereof, for that financial year.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Trustees Committee may, from time to time, borrow any sum required for the purpose of this act. (2) The monies in the Fund may be deposited in any scheduled bank or invested by the Trustees Committee in loan and advances to any Corporation owned for controlled by the State Government,or in such other manner as the State Government may, from time to time direct. (3) The fund shall be deemed to be a local fund and be audited by the Examiner, Local Fund accounts, Uttar Praesh.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh All decisions and other instruments made and executed by the Trustees Committee may be authenticated by the signature of the Member-Secretary,who also have the power to operate any bank account on behalf of the said Committee.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may, from time to time, issue to the Trustees Committee to comply with such directions.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Bar Council shall contribute to the Fund rupees one Lakh on the date of commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Advocates Welfare fund (Amendment) Ordinance, 1986. Provided that any amount contributed by the state Bar Council under this section as it stood prior to the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) (Second) Ordinance, 1998, shall not be refundable. In Section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Every advocate shall affix on the Vakalatnama accepted by him a Welfare Stamp of the value of five rupees and no court, tribunal, authority or person shall receive any Vakalatnama in favour of such advocate unless it is so stamped in addition to any stamp required under any other law for the time being in force. (2) The value of the Welfare Stamp shall neither be taxable cost in suit or proceeding nor be collected in any event from a party to such suit or proceeding. (3) Any contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2)by any member shall disentitle him to the benifits of the scheme and shall be deemed to be a misconduct and the Trustee Committee shall report the matter to the State Bar Council for appropriate action. (4) Every Welfare Stamp affined on a Vakalatnama under sub-section (1) shall be cancelled in the manner provided in section 30 of the Court Fees Act, 1870.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Bar Council shall cause to be printed Welfare Stamps for the purpose of this Act, in such design and such denomination as it thinks fit with the works "Welfare Stamp" printed thereon. (2) The State Government shall control the distribution and sale of Welfare Stamps through stamp vendors appointed by it for the sale of court-fee stamps or through such other agency as it may deem fit. (3) The State Government shall at the close of every financial year transfer the sale proceeds of the Welfare Stamps after deducting the costs incurred in printing (which shall be paid to the Bar Council) sale and distribution of the Stamps to the account of the Fund. (4) The State Government shall furnish to the Trustee Committee a Statement containing the number of Welfare Stamps recieved from the Bar Council and sold, the details of costs deducted, the cost of printing paid to the Bar Council and the amount transferred under this section to the account of the Fund within three months of such transfer. (5) The State Government may provide the services of Government Press for printing of welfare stamps on realizing the printing charges.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 10A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, in case of temporary shortage of Welfare Stamps, the value of Welfare Stamps may be paid in cash to such subordinate officer or clerk of the court, tribunal, authority or person as may be specified by such court, tribunal authority or person and such subordinate officer or clerk shall give a receipt* have the same effect as if the Welfare Stamp of that amount has been duly affixed in accordance with this act. (2) The subordinate officer or the clerk receiving the cash under sub-section (1) shall deposit it in the Treasury under such head as the State Government may be notified order specify in this behalf.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) An advocate may apply to the Secretary Trustees Committee in such form as may be prescribed for admission as member of the Scheme. (2) Every applicant shall pay in the prescribed manner an admission fee of one hundred ruppees in lump sum with the application. (3) The Trustee Committee may on receipt of the application and the admission fee, make such inquiry as it deems fit and shall neither admit the applicant to the membership of the scheme or for reasons to be recorded in writing reject the application and refund the amount paid towards admission fee: Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of being heard. (4) The membership of an applicant so admitted shall be deemed to have commenced on the first day of January of the year in which the application was made or the date of enrollment of the applicant as an Advocate whichever is later. (5) Every member of the Scheme shall pay in the prescribed manner an annual subscription for every calendar year on or before the thirty-first day of December of that year at the rate of - (a) Fifty rupees, where he has practised as an Advocate for not more than five years. (b) One hundred rupees, where he has practised as an advocate for more than five years but not more than 10 years. (c) Two hundred and fifty rupees where he has practised as an Advocate for more than ten years. Provided that the Government Advocates shall pay an additional amount of rupees fifty. Per annum with their annual subscription for every calender year or part thereof during their tenure as Government Advocate. Provided further that a member at his option may make one time payment of life subscription of ruppees three thousand and in the case of his being Government Advocate rupees three thousand five hundred. Provided also that the State Government may, after consultation with the Trustees Committee, by a notified order, vary the rates of annual and life subscription. Explanation.- (i) For the purposes of this sub-section (1) practice as an Advocate includes practice as a pleader or other legal practitioner enrolled under the Legal Practitioners Act,1879 or as an Advocate on the roll of any Bar Council constituted under the Advocates Act,1961- (ii) The period of practice shall be reckoned as on the calendar year for which the subscription is payable or the date of enrollment as a legal practitioner or the Advocate, whichever is later. (iii) "Government Advocate" means Advocate engaged by the Goverenment or a body, authority or corporation owned or controlled by the Government to represent it before a court, tribunal, authority or a person who received any amount by way of retainership or monthly allowance from the Government or such body, authority or corporation, as the case may be.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) A member of the Scheme shall cease to be such member, if:- (a) he dies. (b) his name is removed from the State Roll maintained by the State Bar Council, (c) he resigns the membership, (d) he is in arrears of annual subscription for a period of two years or more and the Trustee committee after giving him an opportunity to show cause, terminates his membership. (2) An Advocate who has ceased to be a member of the Schemes, may, on his written application and on payment of the arrears of annual subscription which would have paid, if his membership had continued together with interest thereon at the rate of eighteen per centum per annum, be re-admitted to the membership of the Scheme provided his name is restored or, as the case may be, continues on the State Roll maintained by the State Bar Council.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) In the event of a death of member, his nominee or where there is no nominee, his legal heirs shall be paid from the Fund an amount calculated at the rate of rupees five thousand per annum for every completed year of his membership which shall not be less than rupees twenty-five thousand and more than rupees one lakh fifty thousand. (2) A member shall on ceasing to be a member under clauses (b), (c) or (d) of sub-section (1) of section 12, shall be paid from the Fund,- (i) If he resigns after twelve years and before twenty five completed years of his membership, an amount calculated at the rate of two thousand rupees per annum for every completed year of membership ; (ii) If he resigns after twenty five completed years of his membership, an amount calculated at the rate of five thousand rupees per annum for every completed year of membership subject to a maximum of rupees one lakh fifty thousand. (iii) If he ceases to be such member due to any other cause not covered by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), an amount equal to the aggregate of his subscription paid by him and simple interest thereon at such rate as the Trustees Committee may, from time to time, fix. (3) For calculating the completed years of membership for the purposes of this section, every five years of practice at bar, if any, before admission of a member to the scheme shall be completed as one year of membership of the Scheme.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the right or interest ofany member of the Scheme or his nominee or legal heirs to receive any amount from the fund under Section 13 shall not be alienated or charged and shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or order of any Court.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 14A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Where all Advocate who is a member of the Scheme under this Act as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Advocates Welfare Fund (Amendment) (Second) Ordinance. 1998, within two months of such commencement. opts not to continue as a member of the Scheme he shall be paid an amount to which he is entitled under Section 13 as it stood before such commencement and such Advocate shall not be admitted again to the membership of the Scheme. If no such option is given such Advocate shall continue as a member of the Scheme.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the trustees Committee, or any member or officer thereof in respect of anything which is in goodfaith done or intended to be done pursuance of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may, by notification; make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the fore going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely,- (a) the form and the manner in which application for membership of the scheme may be made ; (b) the manner of payment of admission fee and annual subscription for the membership of the Scheme ; (c) the form and the manner in which the list of members of the Scheme shall be maintained and its copies or extracts shall be communicated to Courts to enable them to ensure compliance of the provisions of Section 9. (d) the form and the manner in which application for payment under Section 3 shall be made and the procedure of inquiry, if any to be made by the Trustees Committee for such payment ; (e) the form" and the manner in which nomination to receive payment under Section 13 may be made. (f) any other matter which has to bc or may be prescribed.
Uttar Pradesh Advocate Welfare Fund Act, 1974_Section 17--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Where an Advocate has filed a Vakalatnama in a case before the commencement of this Ordinance and continues to apper, act or plead in that case in pursuance of such Vakalatnama, after such commencement he shall file a Welfare Stamp through an application on or before the first date of hearing of that case after such commencement. 
