U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for the preservation of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains in Uttar Pradesh other than those declared by Parliament by law to be of national importance. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the preservation and protection of ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains in U.P. other than those declared to be of national importance by the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951, and for certain other matters concerned therewith; It is hereby enacted in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:
U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force at once.
U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, any reference to ancient or historical monument or archaeological site or remains, shall mean ancient or historical monument or archaeological site or remains other than those declared by the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration National Importance) Act, 1951, to be of national importance.
U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The provisions of the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904, as set out in Schedule I with the modifications mentioned in Schedule II are hereby re-enacted and shall apply and be always deemed to have applied to ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains in U. P.
U.P. Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Preservation Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Any action taken or purported to be taken including any declaration, appointment, notification, order, instruction, direction, scheme, rule, regulation, form or certificate, made or issued or purported to be made or issued under the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904, shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as re-enacted and modified by this Act, continue in force and shall be deemed to have been taken, made or issued under the provisions so re-enacted, unless and until directed otherwise or superseded by anything done or any action taken under the provisions so re-enacted. 
