Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916 and the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 It is hereby enacted in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object The 'Sarvajan Hitaya Gareeb Awas (Slum Area) Malikana Haq Yojana' has been introduced with a view to giving right of ownership to the persons belonging to the weaker section of the society residing in urban area. It has been felt that the said Yojana in the said areas is not being implemented properly. It has, therefore, been decided to amend the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916 (U.P. Act No. 2 of 1916) and the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 (U.P. Act No. 2 of 1959) to provide for empowering the State Government to issue directions as it thinks fit with respect to the acquired or vested land in a Municipality or a Municipal Corporation, so that proper implementation of the said scheme is ensured and the interest of the weaker section of the society may be secured. The Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2009 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2009.
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 124 of the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916, after sub-section (3) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(4) For safeguarding the interest of weaker section of the society in an urban area, the State Government may issue directions as it may think fit with respect to the acquired or vested land in a municipality.".
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Section 128 of the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(2) For safeguarding the interest of weaker section of the society in an urban area, the State Government may issue directions as it may think fit with respect to the acquired or vested land in a Municipal Corporation.". 
