Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916 and the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object On the recommendations of the Government of India it has been decided to amend the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916 (U.P. Act No. 2 of 1916) and the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 (U.P. Act No. 2 of 1959) mainly to provide for,- (a) constitution of Development Fund by every Municipal Council; (b) earmarking and utilising 25 % of the Development Fund to provide and promote services of urban poor and inhabitants of slum areas; (c) providing by ever)' Municipal Corporation the budget for urban poor. The Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For Section 114 of the Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "114. (1) There shall be established, for each municipality a Municipal Fund and to the credit whereof shall be placed all sums received including the grants-in-aid from the consolidated fund of the State and all loans raised, by or on behalf of the municipality. (2) Every municipality shall constitute a Development Fund for the purpose of this Act. The constitution and disposal of the Development Fund shall be effected in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) Twenty-five per cent of the Development Fund constituted under sub-section (2) shall be non-lapsable and shall be earmarked and utilized to provide and promote services for the urban poor and the inhabitants of the slum areas. Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-section (3) "services" shall include basic environmental services, roads, primary education and health, housing, water supply, sanitation, social security and such like services. However it shall not include establishment expenses (including salary and wages) not directly and specifically incurred for delivery of services.".
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 139 of the Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959, hereinafter in this chapter referred to as the principal Act, the following sub-section shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "(4) Twenty-five per cent of the Development Fund constituted under sub-section (3) shall be non-lapsable and shall be earmarked and utilized to provide and promote services for the urban poor and the inhabitants of the slum areas. Explanation.-For the purpose of sub-section (4) "services" shall include basic environmental services, roads, primary education and health, housing, water supply, sanitation, social security and such like services. However, it shall not include establishment expenses (including salary and wages) not directly and specifically incurred for delivery of services.".
Uttar Pradesh Urban Local Self-Government Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 146 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (f) the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- (g) "provide the budget for the urban poor.". 
