Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Forty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on January 14, 1995.
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act after section 131-A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- '131-B. Bhumidhar with non-transferable right to become bhumidhar with transferable right after ten years:- (1) Every person who was a bhumidhar with non transferable rights immediately before the commencement or the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995 and had been such bhumidhar for a period of ten years or more, shall become a bhumidhar with transferable rights on such commencement. (2) Every person who is a bhumidhar with non-transferable rights on the commencement referred to in sub-section (1), or becomes a bhumidhar with non-transferable, rights after such commencement, shall become bhumidhar with transferable rights on the expiry of period of ten years from his becoming a bhumidhar with non-transferable rights. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, if a person, after becoming a bhumidhar with transferable rights under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), transfers the land by way of sale, he shall become ineligible for a lease of any land vested in Gaon Sabha or the State Government or of surplus land as defined in the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960."
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1995_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) (Second) Ordinance, 1995 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), or the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Laid Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1995 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Corresponding provisions Of the principal Act as amended by this Act, as if the provisions of this Act were in. force at all material times. 
