Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend, the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This is Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005.
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 154 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, hereinafter referred to as principal Act, after sub-section (2) the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) For every transfer of land in excess of the limit prescribed under sub-section (1) prior approval of the State Government shall be necessary: Provided that where the prior approval of the State Government is not obtained under this sub-section, the State Government may on an application give its approval afterward in such manner and on payment in such manner of an amount, as fine, equal to twenty-five per cent of the cost of the land as may be prescribed. The cost of the land shall be such as determined by the Collector for stamp duty."
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 171 of the principal Act, in the Hindi version, in sub-section (2), in clause [VERNACULAR PORTION DELETED] for the words [VERNACULAR PORTION DELETED] the words [VERNACULAR PORTION DELETED] shall be substituted and be deemed to have been substituted on August 23,2004.
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) It is hereby declared that any transfer of such fragment as had become void under section 168-A.as it stood before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2004 (U.P. Act no. 27 of 2004) and had not been entered in revenue records in favour of State Government shall be deemed to have been voidable and any person may get such transfer validated by depositing such fee and within such time and in such manner as may be notified by the State Government: Provided that the provision s of this sub-section shall cease to be in force after expiry of one year from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Section 11 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2004 (U.P. Act no. 27 of 2004) shall be omitted. 
