Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Special Provision) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to make special provision in relation to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object With a view to providing opportunity of validation, in any transfer of such fragment as had become void under Section 168-A of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 as it stood before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2004 (U.P. Act No. 27 of 2004) and had not been entered in revenue records in favour of the State Government, it has been decided to make a law to provide for making special provision in relation to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (U.P. Act No. 1 of 1951). The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Special Provision) Bill, 2010 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Special Provision) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Special Provision) Act, 2010.
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Special Provision) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh It is hereby declared that any transfer of such fragment as had become void under Section 168-A of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 as it stood before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 2004 (U.P. Act No. 27 of 2004) and had not been entered in revenue records in favour of the State Government shall be deemed to have been divested and any person may get such transfer validated by depositing such fee and within such time and in such manner as may be notified by the State Government: Provided that, this special provision shall cease to be in force after expiry of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
