Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to make better provision for the realization of certain contributions for the maintenance and support of the Canning College and the British Indian Association. Whereas certain contributions for the maintenance as support of the Canning College situate at Lucknow and of the British Indian Association, a registered body in Lucknow, have hitherto been realized by the Government along with the land revenue from the taluqdars and grantees of Oudh and their heirs, legatees, and transferees, and whereas it is expedient to remove certain doubts which have arisen as to the liability of the aforesaid persons or their representatives or legatees or assigns; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Canning College 1 [...] Contribution Act, 1920 The words "and British Indian Association" omitted by section 2 of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948.
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) [...]1 (2) "Canning College" means the Canning College situate at Lucknow; (3) the expression "estate," "Grantee", "Legatee" and "taluqdar" bear the same meaning as in the Oudh Estate Act, 1869, as amended by the Oudh Estates (Amendment) Act, 1910; (4) "heir" bears the same meaning as in the Oudh Estates Act, 1869, as amended by the Oudh Estates (Amendment) Act, 1910, but includes also a "widow" or a "mother" who has inherited or inherits property as such; (5) "transfer" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means an alienations inter vivos, and includes a transfer in execution of a decree or by means of a compromise of settlement and a sale held for the recovery of land revenue or for the enforcement of any other claim of the (State Government), whether before or after the commencement of this Act; (6) "Transferee from a taluqdar or grantee" includes a transferee from the heir or legatee of a taluqdar or grantee and the legal representative, successor, and assign of such transferee. Omitted by U. P. Act 37 of 1948.
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Every taluqdar or grantee and every heir, legatee or transferee of a taluqdar or grantee shall pay along with the land revenue which he is liable to pay such, a contribution for the maintenance and support of the Canning College 1 [ * * * ]at the rate of 2 [three-quarters of one per cent] of the total amount of such revenue. 3 [...] Provided 4 [ * * * ] that when any estate or portion of an estate has been transferred prior to the first day of April, 1909, to any person, who is not a taluqdar or grantee or a heir or legatee of a taluqdar or grantee the transferee shall pay such contribution at the rate of 5 [three-fifths of one per cent] of the total amount of land revenue which he is liable to pay to the 6 [State Government] The words "and the British Indian Association" omitted by section 4 (i) of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948. Subs for "1-1/2 per cent" by section 4 (ii) of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948. The first proviso to section 3 and the word "further" in the second proviso omitted by section 4 of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948. The first proviso to section 3 and the word "further" in the second proviso omitted by section 4 of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948. Sub. for "one per cent" by sub-section (4) of U.P. Act XXXVII of 1948. Subs by the AO 1950 for "Provincial Government" which had been subs by the AO 1939 for "Government".
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The contribution referred to in section 3 shall be realized by the revenue authorities along with the land revenue and every provision of the United Provinces Land Revenue, Act, 1901, relating the recovery of such contributions.
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 [The whole of the contribution realized under section 4 shall be paid into the account of Canning College.] Subs. by section 5 of U. P. Act XXXVII of 1948.
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Out of its receipts aforementioned the Committee of the Canning College shall pay to the Committee of the Colvin Taluqdar's School at Lucknow for its support a sum which shall not exceed one-third of those receipts and shall not be less than- (i) twenty-five thousand rupees if the said receipts are not less than seventy-five thousand rupees, (ii) one-third of the said receipts if they are less than seventy-five thousand rupees.
Canning College Contribution Act, 1920_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The 1 [State Government] may, from time to time]2 frame rules in accordance with the provisions of this Act, for the guidance of the revenue authorities in regard to the collection of the aforesaid contributions. Subs. by the A.O. 1950 for "Provincial Government" which had been subs by the A.O. 1939 for "Government." Subs. for "the Board of Revenue may from time to time, subject to the sanction of the L. G." by section 2 and Sch. of the U. P. Act XII of 1922 as amended by the U. P. Act I of 1924 read with the AO 1937. 
