Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2007 (U.P. Act No. 46 of 2007) was enacted to amend the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 (U.P. Act No. 11 of 1966) to provide inter alia for reducing the term of Committees of Management and the members thereof from five years to two years, empowering the registrar to postpone any election whenever he is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it difficult for him to hold the elections on the fixed date and to appoint an Administrator or Committee of Administrators after the expiry of the term of such Committee of Management and arranging for re-constitution of the Committee of Management by the Administrator or Committee of Administrators in accordance with the provisions of the said Act of 1965 within a period of six months from the date of their appointment. Thereafter, the said period was extended from six months to one year and six months by U.P. Act No. 3 of 2008. The elections of most of the primary Co-operative societies were completed but the elections of the most of the central and apex societies could not be completed. Completion of the elections of all the Co-operative Societies was to take time. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act of 1965 to extend the said period from one year and six months to two years and six months. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was necessary to implement the aforesaid decision. The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 (U.P. Ordinance No. 8 of 2009) was promulgated by the Governor on September 20, 2009. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on September 20, 2009.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 29 of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub-section (7) for the words "one year and six months" wherever occurring the words "two years and six months" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 (U.P. Ordinance No. 8 of 2009) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
