Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object On the recommendations of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and the State Deregulation Committee it has been decided to amend the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 (U.P. Act No. 11 of 1966) to provide for,- (a) empowering the Committee of Management of a Primary Agricultural Co-operative Credit Society, a Central Co-operative Bank or an Apex Bank to decide its internal control system, appoint auditors and to give compensation for the audit; (b) authorising the Committee of Management to enter into negotiations and sanction contracts up to the value of ten lakh each during the construction phase and rupees five lakh thereafter instead of five lakh rupees and two and a half lakh rupees respectively; (c) conducting of the audit of accounts of a Co-operative Bank by Chartered Accountants appointed by the concerned Bank from the panel approved by the National Bank and the determination and payment of fees of such Chartered Accountants by the concerned Bank; (d) increasing the amount of penalty for contravention of the provisions of Section 8 and Section 106. The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 29-A of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in clause (a) after sub-clause (xvi) the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(xvi-3) decided its Internal Control Systems, appointment of auditors and compensation for the audit;".
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 31-A of the principal Act for clause (xi) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(xi) Subject to the regulations, if any, which may be framed by the Committee of Management to enter into negotiations and sanction contracts up to the value of Rs 10 lakh each during the construction phase and up to Rs 5 lakh each thereafter and to do all such acts, deeds and things in the name of and on behalf of the society in relation to any of the matters aforesaid for the purposes of the society.".
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) for the existing proviso the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that the audit of a Co-operative Bank shall be conducted by the Chartered Accountants from the panel approved by the National Bank. Chartered Accountant shall be appointed by the concerned bank from the approval panel. The fees of Chartered Accountants shall be determined and paid by the concerned bank. Explanation.-For the appointment of Chartered Accountants the panel approved by the National Bank shall be accepted by the Committee of Management of the concerned bank and thereafter the Chartered Accountants shall be appointed by the Chief Executive Officer/Secretary of the bank.".
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 104 of the principal Act- (a) for the words "five hundred rupees" the words "two thousand five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; (b) for the words "ten rupees" the words "fifty rupees" shall be substituted. 
