Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Sub-section (2) of Section 29 of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 (U.P. Act No. 11 of 1966) provided that the term of the Committee of Management of Co-operative Societies shall be two years, which was going to expire on July 9, 2011. Since there is possibility of holding of elections of urban local bodies due to which adequate security forces are required for holding the election thereof impartially, there would be difficulty to hold the elections of the members of urban local bodies and Committee of Management of Co-operative Societies simultaneously. Besides, it was felt that the term of two years is too short for the elected members of the Committee of Management of Co-operative Societies to make new policies in the interest of Co-operative Societies and to ensure implementation thereof. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act to increase the term of the Committee of Management of Co-operative Societies from two years to three years. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action was necessary, the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (U.P. Ordinance No. 2 of 2011) was promulgated by the Governor on June 2, 2011. The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. Received the assent of the Governor on September 22, 2011 and published in the U.P. Gazette, Extra., Part 1, Section (Ka), dated 23rd September, 2011, pp. 3-4.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on June 2, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 29 of the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1965 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (i) in clause (a) for the words "two years" the words "three years" shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (b) for the words and figures "the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2007" the words and figures "the Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011" shall be substituted; (iii) for clause (c) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) The term of the Committee of Management, which has completed on or before the date of commencement of the Act referred to in clause (b), the period of three years from the date of its constitution and the term of its elected members, shall expire on such commencement."
Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Second Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (U.P. Ordinance No. 2 of 2011) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
