Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 An Act to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to Uttar Pradesh It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows :- Received the assent of the President on April 30, 1976, published in U. P. Gazette, Extra., dated 1st May, 1976.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976. (2) It shall extend to the whole of Uttar Pradesh.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the said Code, in sub-section (6), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely : "Provided that the Court of Session may hold, or the High Court may direct the Court of Session to hold, its sitting in any particular case at any place in the sessions division, where it appears expedient to do so for considerations of internal security or public order, and in such cases, the consent of the prosecution and the accused shall not be necessary."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 11 of the said Code, after sub-section (1) the following sub-section shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted, namely :- "(1-A) The State Government may like wise establish as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class in respect to particular cases, or to a particular class or particular classes of cases, or in regard to cases generally, in any local area."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 13 of the said Code, for the words "second class", the words "first or second class" shall be substituted and for the words "in any district", the words "in any local area" shall be substituted.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 25 of the said Code, in sub-section (2) the following proviso shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted, namely : "Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed to prohibit the State Government from exercising its control over Assistant Public Prosecutor through police officers."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 209 of the said Code, for clauses (a) and (b), the following clauses shall be substituted and be deemed always to have been substituted namely : "(a) as soon as may be after complying with the provisions of Section 207, commit the case to the court of session; (b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody until commitment of the case under clause (a) and thereafter during, and until the conclusion of the trial."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 299 of the said Code, in sub-section (1), for the words "competent to try such person", the words "competent to try such person or to commit him for trial" shall be substituted.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 326 of the said Code,- (a) in sub-section (1), for the words, "Magistrate", wherever occurring the words "Judge or Magistrate" shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (2), before the words "from one Magistrate to another Magistrate", the words "from one Judge to another Judge or" shall be inserted.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Section 438 of the said Code shall be omitted.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 484 of the said Code, in sub-section (2), after clause (d) the following clause shall be inserted and be deemed always to have been inserted namely : "(e) the provisions of the United Provinces Borstal Act, 1938 (U. P. Act VII of 1938) the United Provinces First Offenders, Probation Act, 1938 (U. P. Act VI of 1938), and the Uttar Pradesh Children Act, 1951 (U. P. Act I of 1952) shall continue in force in the State of Uttar Pradesh until altered or repealed or amended by the competent Legislature or other competent authority, and accordingly, the provisions of Section 360 of this Code shall not apply to that State, and the provision of Section 361 shall apply with the substitution of references to the Central Acts named therein by references to the corresponding Acts in force in that State."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court- (a) any notification of the State Government issued before November 28, 1975 purporting to establish any Court of Judicial Magistrates having jurisdiction over more than one district shall be deemed to have been, issued under Section 11 read with Section 13 of the said Code as amended by this Act and be deemed to be and always to have been valid; (b) any order of the State Government issued before November 28, 1975 directing the control over Assistant Public Prosecutors to be exercised through officers of the Police Department shall be deemed to be and always to have been valid as if the amendment made in Section 25 of the said Code by this Act were in force at all material times.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Ordinance, 1976 (U. P. Ordinance No. 13 of 1976) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the aforesaid Ordinance or under the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 (U. P. Ordinance No. 38 of 1975) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act as if this Act had come into force on November 28, 1975. 
