Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to Uttar Pradesh It is hereby enacted in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Received the assent of the President on January 19, 1984 and published in U. P. Gazette, Extra., dated 21st January, 1984, pp. 3-5.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983. (2) It shall extend to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force1 on such date as the State Government may by notifications specify in that behalf and different dates may be specified for different provisions. Enforced on 1st May, 1984., Vide Notification No. 1074/VIII-9-3- (3)-78, dated 19-4-1984, published in U. P. Gazette, Part I, dated 9th June, 1984.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, hereinafter referred to as the said Code, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely : "(5-A) In the event of the death, resignation, removal or transfer of the Sessions Judge, or of his being incapacitated by illness or otherwise for the performance of his duties, or of his absence from the place at which his court is held, the senior-most among the Additional Sessions Judges, and the Assistant Sessions Judges present at the place, and in their absence the Chef Judicial Magistrate shall without relinquishing his ordinary duties, assume charge of the office of the Sessions Judge and continue in charge thereof until the office is resumed by the Sessions Judge or assumed by an officer appointed thereto, and shall subject to the provision of this Code and any rules made by the High Court in this behalf, exercise any of the powers of the Sessions Judge."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 12 of the said Code, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely : "(4) Where the Office of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, absence or otherwise for the performance of his duties, the senior-most among the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate and other Judicial Magistrates present at the place, and in their absence the District Magistrate and in his absence die senior-most Executive Magistrate shall dispose of the urgent work of the Chief Judicial Magistrate."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 16 of the said Code, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely : "(4) Where the Office of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate is vacant or he is incapacitated by illness, absence or otherwise for the performance of his duties, the senior-most among the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates and other Metropolitan Magistrates present at the place, shall dispose of the urgent work of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 20 of the said Code, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely,- "(6) the State Government may delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the District Magistrate."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 26 of the said Code, for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(b) any offence under any other law may be tried- (i) when any court is mentioned in this behalf in such law, by such court, or by any court superior in rank to such court, and (ii) when no court is so mentioned, by any court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable, or by any court superior in rank to such court."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 54 of the said Code, the following sentence shall be inserted at the end, namely : "The registered medical practitioner shall forthwith furnish to the arrested person a copy of the report of such examination free of cost."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After Section 54 of the said Code, the following section shall be inserted, namely : "54-A. Test identification of the accused:- When a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence and his test identification by any witness is considered necessary by any court having jurisdiction, it shall be lawful for an Executive Magistrate acting at the instance of such court, to hold test identification of the person arrested."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 81 of the said Code, in sub-section (1), the following third proviso shall be inserted, namely : "Provided also that where such person is not released on bail or where he fails to give such security as aforesaid, the Chief Judicial Magistrate in the case of a non- bailable offence or any Judicial Magistrate in the case of a bailable offence may pass such orders as he thinks fit for his custody till such time as may be necessary for his removal to the court which issued the warrant."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 436 of the said Code, in sub-section (1), in the first proviso for the word "discharge" the word "release" shall be substituted.
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 484 of the said Code, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the proviso, the following further proviso shall be inserted, namely : "Provided further that the provisions of Section 326 of this Code as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1976 shall apply also to every trial pending in a court of Session at the commencement of this Code and also pending at the commencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983."
Code of Criminal Procedure (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entries relating to Section 363 of the Indian Penal Code, in column 5 for the existing words the words "Non-bailable" shall be substituted. 
