Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In pursuance of the provisions of clause (3) of Article 348 of the Constitution, of India, the Governor is pleased to order the publication of the following English translation of the Uttar Pradesh Alpsankhyak Ayog (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2001 (Uttar Pradesh Adhiniyam Sankhya 30 of 2001) as passed by the Uttar Pradesh Legislature and assented to by the Governor on October 5, 2001:- AN act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities, Act, 1994. IT is hereby enacted in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh State Commission for Minorities Act, 1994 (U.P. Act no. 22 of 1994) has been enacted to constitute a Commission for Minorities in Uttar Pradesh and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The said Act though provided for the constitution of the Commission and the term of office of its Chairman and the members but it did not provide their maximum age limit till when, they could hold their respective offices. It was, therefore, decided to amend the said Act to fix the maximum age of the Chairman and the members of the said Commission as sixty five years and to provide that the Chairman, and other members of the Commission, who have already attained the age of 65 years 2001 shall cease to hold their office as such. Since the Stale Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative measure was necessary to implement the aforesaid decision, the Uttar Pradesh Commission for the Minorities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 (U. P. Ordinance no. 13 of 2001) was promulgated by the Governor on June 8, 2001. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on June 8, 2001.
Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities Act, 1994, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act in sub-section (1),- (a) for clause (a) die following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) the Chairman or every other Member shall hold office for a term of one year from the date he assumes, office: Provided that no Chairman or other Member shall hold office as such alter he has attained the age of sixty-live years: Provided further that the Chairman shall not be eligible for reappointment as Member. (b) after clause (c) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- (d) The provisions of clause (a) as amended by the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001 shall apply also to the Chairman and every other Member folding office immediately before the commencement of the said Act. (e) The Chairman or other Member, who has attained the age of sixty-five years, on or before the commencement of the Act referred to in clause (d) shall cease to hold office as such oil such commencement."
Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Hilar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, as if this Act were in force at all material times. 
