Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In pursuance of the provisions of clause (3) of Article 348 of the Constitution of India, the Governor is pleased to order die publication of the following English translation of the Uttar Pradesh Alp Sankhyak Ayog (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 2004 (Uttar Pradesh Adhiniyam Sankhya 20 of 2004) as passed by the Uttar Pradesh Legislature and assented to by the Governor on August 12,2004. AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities Act, 1994. IT is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object Section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities Act, 1994. Provides that the Chairman and every Member of Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities shall hold office for a term of one year from the date he assumes office. The said term of the Chairman and every Member is not adequate to benefit the Commission with the services, of more and more persons of eminence, ability and integrity. It has, therefore been decided to amend the said Act to increase the term of the Chairman and every Member of the Commission from one year to three years so as to make the said Commission more effective. The Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Bill, 2004 is introduced accordingly. By order, D. V. SHARMA, Pramukh Sachiv. THE UTTAR PRADESH COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2004
Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2004.
Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities Act, 1994 in sub-section (1),- (a) In clause (a) for the words 'one year" the words "three years" shall be substituted; (b) In clause (d) for the words and figures "Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2001" the words and figures "Uttar Pradesh Commission for Minorities (Amendment) Act, 2004" shall be substituted. (c) Clause (e) shall be omitted. 
