Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 AN ACT to provide the consolidation of agricultural holdings in Uttar Pradesh for the development of agriculture. Whereas it is expedient to provide for consolidation of agricultural holdings in Uttar Pradesh for the development of agriculture, It is hereby enacted as follows:- [U. P. Act No. V of 1954] Amended by the U. P. Act No 26 of 1954, U.P. Act No. 13 of 1955, U. P. Act No. 20 of 1955, U. P. Act No. 24 of 1956, U. P. Act No. 16 of 1957, U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958, U. P. Act No. 33 of 1961, U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963, U. P. Act No. 12 of 1965, U. P. Act No. 21 of 1966, President's Act No. 18 of 1968, U. P. Act No. 4 of 1969, U. P Act No 31 of 1970, U. P. Act No. 34 of 1974, U. P. Act No. 30 of 1975, U. P. Act No. 35 of 1976, U. P. Act No. 6 of 1978, U. P. Act No. 20 of 1982.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) This section shall come into force at once and the remainder of the Act shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, appoint in this behalf and different dates may be appointed for different parts of Uttar Pradesh.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The U P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1939 is hereby repealed.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (1) "Assistant Consolidation Officer" means a person appointed as such by the Slate Government to exercise the powers and perform the duties of an Assistant Consolidation Officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder [and shall include an Assistant Rectangulation Officer.]1 [(1-A) "Chak" means the parcel of land allotted to a tenure- holder on consolidation.]2 [(2) "Consolidation" means re-arrangement of holdings in a unit amongst several tenure-holders in such a way as to make their respective holdings more compact. Explanation-For the purposes of this clause, holding shall not include the following : (i) land which was grove in the agricultural year immediately preceding the year in which the notification under section 4 was issued ; (ii) land subject to fluvial action and intensive soil erosion; (iii) land mentioned in section 132 of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 ; (iv) such compact: areas as are normally subject to prolonged water-logging ; (v) usar, kallar, and rihala plots forming a compact area including cultivated land within such area ; (vi) land in use for growing pan, rose, bela,jasmine and kewra ; and (vii) such other areas as the Director of Consolidation may declare to be unsuitable for the purpose of consolidation]3 4 (2-A) "Consolidation area" means tin- area, in respect of which a notification under section 4 has been issued, except such portion threreof to which the provisions of the U. P. Zamirdari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 do not apply ;] 5 (2-AA) "Consolidation Committee" means a committer to be constituted in the manner prescribed for the purposes of the Act;] 6 [(2-B) "Consolidation Lekhpal" means a person appointed as such by the State Government to perform the duties of a Consolidation Lekhpal under this Act or the rules made thereunder and shall, in areas under consolidation operations, include a Lekhpal appointed under the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 ;] 7 [(3) "Consolidation Officer" means a person appointed as such by the State Government to exercise the powers and perform the duties of a Consolidation Officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder 8 (and shall include a Rectangulation Officer;)] 9 (3-A) "Consolidator" means a person appointed as such by the State Government to exercise the powers and perform the duties of a consolidator under the Act or the rules made thereunder]10 (and shall include a Reclangulator and also, in areas under consolidation operations, the Supervisor Kanungo appointed under the U. P. Land Revenue Act,1901 for that area ;] 11 [(3-B) " Consolidation Scheme" means the scheme of consolidation in a unit ;] 12 [(4) "Director of Consolidation" means the person appointed as such by the State Government to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the Director of Consolidation under this Act or the rules made thereunder and shall include an Additional Director of Consolidation and a Joint Director of Consolidation ;] 13 [(4-A) "Deputy Director of Consolidation", means a person appointed as such by the State Government to exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Director of Consolidation as may be delegated to him by the State Government and shall include a District Deputy Director of Consolidation and Assistant Director of Consolidation ; (4-B) "District (Deputy Director of Consolidation" means a person who is for the time being the Collector, of the District ; (4-C) "Holding" means parcel or parcels of land held under one tenure by a tenure-holder singly or jointly with other tenure- holders] 14 ["(5) "land" means land held or occupied for purposes connected with agriculture, horticulture and animal husbandry (including pisciculture and poultry farming) and includes : (i) the site, being a part of holding, of a house or other similar structure ; and (ii) trees, wells and other improvements existing on the plots forming the holding ;] (6) "Legal representative" has the meaning assigned to it in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 ; (7) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act ; 15 [(8) "Publication in the unit" or "publish in the unit" with reference to any document means reading out the document in the unit on a date of which prior notice shall be given by beat of drum, and proclamation by beat of drum, or, in any other customary mode, in the unit of the fact that the document is open to public inspection. at any appointed place and time Provided that where a Consolidation Committee has been constituted for the unit each member of the said Committee shall also be individually informed of the fact of publication- 16 [(8-A) "Rectangulation" means the process of divinding the area of a unit, into rectangles and parts of rectangles of convenient size with a view to regulating the allotment of chaks during consolidation ; ] 17 ["(9) "Settlement Officer Consolidation" means a person appointed as such by State Government to exercise the powers and perform the duties of a Settlement Officer, Consolidation under this Act and the rules made thereunder and shall include an Additional Settlement Officer, Consolidation and Assistant Settlement. Officer, Consolidation ;] (10) "State Government" means the Government of Uttar Pradesh ; 18 [(11) "Tenure-holder" means a bhumidhar or sirdar find includes : (a) an asami, (b) a Government lessee or Government grantee," or (c) a co-operative farming society satisfying such conditions as may be prescribed ;] 19 [(11-A) "Unit" means village or part thereof, and where the Director of Consolidation so notifies by publication in the official Gazette, two or more villages or parts thereof, or which a single scheme of consolidation is to be framed ;] (12) Words and expressions- (a) not defined in this Act but 20 [used or] defined in the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901, or (b) not defined in this Act or in the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 but 21 [used or] defined in the U. P. Zamindari Aboliation and Land Reforms Act, 1950] shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Act in which they are so [used or]22 defined ; [and (13) The references to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and the U P. Land Revenue Act. 1901, shall be construed as references to the said Acts as amended from time to time. ]23 Added by section 2 (1) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Added by section 2 (2) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s 2 (2) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Added by s. 2 (3) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 2 (4) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Added by s. 2 (5) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 2 (6) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Inserted by s. 2 (3) of U P. Act 8 of 1963. Substituted by s 2 (7) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958 Inserted by s. 2 of U P. Act 38 of 1963. Added by s. 2 (5) of U P. Act 38 of 1963. Substituted by s. 2. (8) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Added by s. 2 (9) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 2 (6) of U. P. Act. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 2 (11) of U. P. Act. 38 of 1958. Added by s. 2 (7) of U. P. Act. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 2 (12) of U. P. Act. 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 44 (1) of U. P. Act. 12 of 1965. Added by s. 2 (14) of U. P. Act 28 of 1958. Inserted by s. 2 (15) of U. P. Act 28 of 1958. Inserted by s. 2 (15) of U. P. Act 28 of 1958. Inserted by s. 2 (15) of U. P. Act 28 of 1958. Inserted by s. 44 (2) of U. P. Act 12 of 1965.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) (a) The State Government, may where it is of opinion that a district or part thereof may be brought under consolidation opera- lions, make a declaration to that effect in the Gazette, whereupon it shall became lawful for any officer or authority who may be empowered in this behalf by the District Deputy Director of Consolidation- (i) to enter upon and survey, in connection with rectangulation or otherwise and to take levels of any land in such area (ii) to fix pillars in connection with rectangulation ; and (iii) to do all acts necessary to ascertain the suitability of the area for consolidation operations. (b) The District Deputy Director of Consolidation shall cause public notice of the declaration issued under clause (a) to be given at convenient places in the said district or part thereof. (2) (a) When the State Government desides to start consolidation operations, either in an area covered by a declaration issued under sub-section (2) or in any other area, it may issue a notification to this effect (b) Every such notification shall be published in the Official Gazette and in each unit in the said area.] Substituted by s. 3 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 4-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Where the State Government is of opinion that in the case, of a district or part thereof in respect of which a notification has already been issued under section 52, it is expedient in public interest so to do, it may make a declaration by notification in the Gazette that the such district or part thereof may again be brought under consolidation operation : Provided that no such declaration shall be issued within ten years from the date of the notification referred to in the said section. (2) The provisions of this Act shall mutatis mutandis apply to every notification issued under sub-section (1) as they apply to a notification under section 4.] Added by s. 30 of U. P. Act 35 of 1976.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 2 (1) Upon the publication of the notification 3 [under sub-section (2) of section 4] in the official Gazette, the consequences, as hereinafter set forth, shall subject to the provisions of this Act, from the date specified thereunder till the publication of notification under section 52 or sub-section (1) of section 8, as the case may be, ensue in the area to which the 3 [notification under sub-section (2) of section 4] relates, namely:- (a) the district or part thereof, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be under consolidation operations and the duty of maintaing the record-of-rights and preparing the village map the field book and the annual register of each village shall be performed by the District Deputy Director of Consolidation, who shall maintain or prepare them, as the case may be, in the manner prescribed (b) 3 [...] (c) notwithstanding anything, contained in the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, no tenure-holder except with the permission in writing of the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, previouslly obtained shall- (i) use his holding or any part thereof for purposes not connected with agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry including pisciculture and poultry, farming. ; or 4 [(ii) transfer by way of sale, gift or exchange his holding or any part thereof in the consolidation area Provided that a tenureholder may continue to use his holding,' or any' part thereof, for any purpose for which it was in used prior to the date specified in the notification issued 3 [under sub-section (2) of section 4.] 5 [(2) Upon the said publication of the notification under sub-section (2) of section 4 the following further consequences shall ensue in the area to which the notification relates, namely:- (a) every proceeding for the correction of records and every suit and proceeding in respect of declaration of rights or interest in any land lying in the urea, or for declaration or adjudication of any other right in regard to which proceedings can or ought to be taken under this Act, pending before any court or authority whether of the first instance or of appeal, reference or revision shall on an order being passed in that behalf by the court or authority before whom such suit or proceeding is pending, stand abated : Provided that no such order shall be passed without giving to the parties notice by post or in any other manner and after giving them an opportunity of being heard : Provided further that on the issue of the notification, under sub-section (1) of section 6, in respect of the said area or part thereof every such order in relation to the land lying in such area or part, as the case may be, shall stand vacated ; (b) such abatement shall be without prejudice to the rights of the persons affected to agitate the right or interest in depute in the said suits or proceedings before the appropriate consolidation authorities under and in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. ] 6 [Explanation:-For the puposes of sub-section (2), a proceeding under the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Celling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 or an uncontested proceeding under sections 134 to 137 of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, shall not be deemed to be a proceeding in respect of declaration of rights or interest in any land.] Substituted by s. 45 of U. P. 12 of 1965. Substituted by s. 4 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Omitted by s. 2 (i) of U. P. Act 21 of 1966. Substituted by S. 21 (1) of U. P. Act 34 of 1974. Added by S. 2 (ii) of U. P Act 21 of 1966. Substituted by section 31 of U. P. Act 35 of 1976 and shall be deemed always to have been substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) It shall be lawful for the State Government at any time to cancel the 1 [notification] made under section 4 in respect of the whole or part of the area specified therein. 2 [(2) Where a [notification]3 has been cancelled in respect of any unit under sub section (1), such area shall subject to the final orders relating to the correction of land records, if any, passed on or before the date of such cancellation, cease to be under consolidation operation with effect from the date of the cancellation.] Substituted by section 4 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by sec. 5 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1858. Substituted by section 4 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh With a view to facilities the revision of records of each village or part thereof in the unit and subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, "he District Deputy Director of Consolidation shall, before 1 [the provisional consolidation scheme] for a unit is prepared, cause to revise the village maps of such unit. Substituted by section 5 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Upon the revision of maps under section 7, the District Deputy Director of Consolidation shall, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, and in such manner as may be prescribed, cause to be- (i) revised, the field-book of the unit after field to field partal and the current annual register after its test and verification ; (ii) determined, an consultation with the Consolidation Committee, the valuation of- (a) each plots after taking into consideration its productivity- location and availability of irrigation facilities, if any ; and (b) all trees, wells and other improvements existing in the plots for the purpose of calculating compensation therefor ; (iii) ascertained the share of each owner, if there be more owners than one, out of the valuation determined under sub-clause (b) of clause (ii) ;and (iv) determined the shares of individual tenure-holders in joint holdings for the purpose of effecting partition to ensure proper consolidation. (2) The District Deputy Director of Consolidation shall cause to be prepared a "khasra chakbandi" in the form prescribed, in respect of all the plots falling in the unit as also a statement showing the mistakes and disputes discovered during the test and verification of the annual register in the course of the field-to field partal.] Substituted by section 6 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 8-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer shall, in consultation with Consolidation Committee, prepare, in respect of each unit under consolidation operations, a statement in the prescribed from (hereinafter called the Statement of Principles) setting forth the principles to be followed in carrying out the consolidation operations in the unit. (2) The Statement of Principles shall also contain- (a) details of areas, as far as they can be determined at this stage, to be earmarked for extension of abadi including . areas for abadi site for Harijans and landless persons in the unit and for such other public purposes as may be prescribed ; (b) the basis on which the tenure-holders will contribute land for extension of abadi and for other public purposes ; and (c) details of land to be earmarked for public purposes out of land vested in a Gaon Sabha or a Local Authority under section 117 or section 117-A of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950. 2 [(d) the standard plots for ach unit.] 3 [(3) The standard plots referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (2)shall be determined by the Assistant Consolidation Officer after ascertaining from the members of the Consolidation Committee and the tenure-holders of the units the best plot or plats of the unit, regard being had to productivity, location and the existing soil class of the plot or plots.] Added by section 7 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Added by section 9 (i) of U. P. Act No. 6 of 1978. Added by s. 9 (ii) of U. P. Act No. 6 of 1978.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Upon the preparation of the records and the statements mentioned in section 8 and 8-A, the Assistant Consolidation Officer, shall- (a) correct the clerical mistakes, if any, and send or cause to be sent to the tenure-holder concerned and other persons interested, notices containing relevant extracts from the current annual register and such other record as may be prescribed showing- (i) their rights in and liabilities in relation to the land; (ii) mistakes and disputes discovered under section 8 in respect thereof ; (iii) specific shares of individual tenure-holder in joint holdings for the purpose of effecting partitions, where necessary, to ensure proper consolidation ; (iv) valuations of the plots ; and (v) valuation of trees, wells and other improvements for calculating compensation there or and its Apportionmenty amongst owners, if there be more owners than one ; (b) publish in the unit the current Khasra and the current annual register, the Khasra Chakbandi, the Statement of Principles prepared under section 8-A and any other records that may be prescribed to show, inter alia, the particulars referred to in clause (a). (2) Any person to whom a notice under sub-section (1) has been sent, or any other person intersted, may, within twenty-one days of the receipt of notice, or of the publication under sub-section (1), as the case may be, file before the Assistant Consolidation Officer objections in respect thereof disputing the correctness or nature of the entries in the records or in the extracts furnished therefrom, or in the Statement of Principles, or the need for partition.] Substituted by section 8 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 9-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer shall- (i) where objections in respect, of claims to land or partition of joint holdings are filed, after hearing the parties concerned; and (ii) where no objections are filed, after making such enquiry as he may deem necessary, settle the disputes, correct the mistakes and effect partition as far as may be by conciliation between the parties appearing before him and pass orders on the basis of such conciliation. (2) All cases which are not disposed of by the Assistant Consolidation Officer lender sub-section (1), all cases relating to valuation of plots and all cases relating to valuation of trees, wells or other improvements for calculating compensation therefor, and its appointment amongst, co-owners, if there be more owners than one, shall be forwarded by the Assistant Consolidation Officer to the Consolidation Officer,, who shall dispose of the same in the manner prescribed. (3) The Assistant Consolidation Officer, while acting under sub-section (1) and the Consolidation Officer, while acting under sub-section (2), shall be deemed to be a court of competent jurisdiction anything to the contrary contained any other law for the time being in force notwithstanding. Substituted by section 9 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 9-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Where objections have been filed against the Statement of Principles under section 9, the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall after affording opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned and after taking into consideration the views of the Consolidation Committee, submit his report to the Consolidation Officer who shall dispose of the objections in the manner prescribed. (2) Where no objections have been filed against the Statement of Principles within the time provided therefor under section 9, the Consolidation Officer shall, with a view to examining the correctness, make local inspection of the unit, after giving due notice to the Consolidation Committee., and may thereafter make such modification or alterations in the Statement of Principles as he may consider necessary. (3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Consolidation Officer under sub-section (1), or sub-section (2), may, within 21 days of the date of the order, file an appeal before the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, whose decision, except as otherwise provided by or under this Act shall be final. (4) The Consolidation Officer and the Settlement Officer, Consolidation shall before deciding an objection or an appeal, make local inspection of the unit after giving due notice to "the parties concerned and the Consolidation Committee.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 9-C--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer, or the Consolidation Officer, may partition joint, holdings under section 9-A. notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in 178 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, or any other law, and may also partition the same suo moto. (2) The partition of joint holdings shall be effected on the basis of shares, provided that where the tenure-holders concerned agree, it may be effected on the basis of specific plots.]
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Annual Register shall be revised on the basis of the orders passed under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of section 9-A. It shall thereafter be prepared in the form prescribed and published in the unit. (2) Where any entry in the annual register, published under sub-section (1), is modified in pursuance of an order passed under this Act or under any other law, a reference to the order along with an extract of its operative portion shall be noted against the said entry. Substituted by s. 10 of U. P. Act No.8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 10-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 6 of U. P. Act No. 38, of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 10-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX ]1 Deleted by section 6 of U. P. Act No. 38, of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Any party to 1he proceedings under section 9-A, aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the Consolidation Officer under that section, may, within 21 days of the date of the order, file an appeal before the Settelement Officer, Consolidation, who shall, after affording opportunity of being heard to the parties concerned, give his decision thereon which, except as otherwise provided by or order under this Act, shall be final and not be questioned in any court of law. (2) The Settelement Officer, Consolidation, hearing an appeal under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a court of competent jurisdiction, anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force notwithstanding.] Substituted by section 11 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 11-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 No question in respect of- (i) claims to land, (ii) partition of joint-holdings, and (iii) valuation of plots, trees, wells and other improve ments, where the question is sought to be raised by a tenura- holder of the plot or the owner of the tree, well or other improvements recorded in the annual register under section 10, relating to the consolidation area 2 [which has been raised under section 9 or which might or ought to have been raised under that section,] but has not been so raised shall be raised or heard at any subseauent stage of the consolidation proceedings.] Substituted by section 12. of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 24 of U. P. Act No. 4 of 1969.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 11-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 13 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 11-C--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 In course of hearing of an objection under section 9-A or an appeal under section 11 or in proceedings under section 48, the Consolidation Officer, the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) or the Director of Consolidation, as the case may be. may direct that any land which vests in the State Government or the Gaon Sabha or any other local body or authority may be recorded in its name, even though no objection, appeal or revision has been filed by such Government, Gaon Sabha, body or authority.] Added by s. 22 of U. P. Act No. 34 of 1974.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) All matters relating to changes and transfers affecting any of the rights or intrest recorded in the revised records published under sub-section (1) of section 10 for which a cause of action had not arisen when proceedings under sections 7 to 9 were started or were in progress, may be raised before the Assistant Consolidation Officer as and when they arise, but not later than the date of notification under section 52, or under sub-section (1) of section 6. (2) The provisions of sections 7 to 11 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the hearing and decision of any matter raised under sub-section (1) as if it were a matter raised under the aforesaid section. Substituted by s. 14 of U. P. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 12-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Notwithstanding any- thing contained in U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, may subject to the rules made in this behalf- (a) determine the amount of land revenue payable by a tenure-holder on land on which he acquires rights as a result or orders under 2 [XXX] this Act. and (b) where necessary, also determine the amount of land revenue payable in respect of a protion of the tenure-holder's holding. (2) In assessing the amount of land revenue payable under sub-section (1), the provisions of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and the rules made thereunder shall mutatis mutandis apply,] Added by s. 7 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Omitted by s. 15 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 12-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [ XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 16 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 12-C--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [ XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 16 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 12-D--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 Two or more tenure-holders may, at any time, before the publication of the revised annual register under sub-section (1) of section 10, apply to the Consolidation Officer to amalgamate their holdings of like tenure on such terms as may he agreed upon between them. The Consolidation Officer may, if the proposed amalgamation is in the interest of consolidation, give effect to the sime.] Substituted by s. 17 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 13-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 13-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 13-C--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 13-D--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 15--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 11 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 16--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 16-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 13 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 16-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 13 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 17--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 18--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by s. 18 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 19--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) A consolidation scheme shall fulfil the following conditions, namely:- (a) the rights and liabilities of a tenure-holder, as recorded in the annual register prepared under section 10, are subject to the deductions, if any, made on account of contributions to public purposes under this Act, secured in the lands allotted to him ; (b) the valuation of plots allotted to a tenure-holder subject to deductions, if any, made on account of contributions to public purposes under this Act, is equal to the valuation of plots originally held by him : Provided that, except with the permission of the Director of Consolidation, the area of the holding or holdings allotted to a tenure-holder shall not differ from the area of his original holding or holdings by more than twenty five per cent of the latter ; (c) the compensation determined under the provisions of this Act, or the rules framed thereunder, is awarded- (1) to the tenure-holder- (i) for trees, wells other imnrovrmenls, originaly held by him and allotted to another tenure-holder, and (ii) for land contributed by him for public purposes; (2) to the Gaon Sabha, or any other local authority, as the case may be, for development, if any, effected by it in or over land belonging to it and allotted to a tenure-holder ; (d) the principles laid down in the Statement of Principles are followed ; (e) every tenure-holder is, as far as possible allotted a compact area at the place where he holds the largest part of his holding : Provided that no tenure-holder may be allotted more chaks than three except with the approval in writing of the Deputy Director of Consolidation. Provided further that no consolidation made shall be invalid for the reason merely that the number of chaks allotted to a tenure- holder exceeds three ; (f) every tenure-holder is, as far as possible, allotted the plot on which exists his private source of irrigation or any other improvement, together with an area in the vicinity equal to the valuation of the plots originally held by him there ; and (g) every tenure-holder is, as far as possible, allotted chaks in conformity with the process of rectangulation in rectan- gulation units. (2) A consolidation scheme before it is made final under section 23, shall be provisionally drawn up in accordance with the provisions of section 19-A.] Substituted by s. 19 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 19-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer shall in consultation with the Consolidation Committee, prepare in the from prescribed, a provisional Consolidation Scheme for the unit. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 or any other law for the time being in force, it shall be lawfull for the Assistant Consolidation Officer where in his opinion it is necessary or expendient so to do to allot t o a tenure-holder, after determining its valuation any land vested in the Gaon Sabha. or any other local authority, as a result of notfication issued under section 117 or 117-A of the U. P Zamindri Abolition and Land Reforms Act, , 1950: Provided where any such land is used for a public purpose, it shall be allotted only after the Assistant Consolidation Officer has declared in writing that it is preposed to transfer the rights of the public as well as all individuals in or over that land to any other land specified in the declaration and earmarked for that purpose in the provisional Consolidation Scheme.] Added by section 20 of U.P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 20--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Upon the preparation of the provisional, consolidation scheme, the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall send or cause to be sent, to the tenure-holder concerned and persons intrested, notices containing relevant extracts therefrom. The previsional consolidation scheme shall; thereafter, be published in the unit. (2) Subject to the provisions contained in section 11-A y person to whom notice has been sent under sub-section (1), and any ether person affected by the provisional consolidation scheme, disputing the propriety or correctness of the entries in the provisional consolidation scheme, or in the extracts furnished therefrom, may, within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice or of the date of the publication of the consolidation scheme, as the case may be, file an objection before the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the Consolidation Officer. (3) Any person affected, or any person having any interest or right, in addition to the right of public highway in, or over any public land, or having other interest or right which is substantially prejudiced by the declaration made under sub-section (2) of section 19-A may, within fifteen days after the publication of the provisional consolidation scheme, file an objection before the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the Consolidation Officer stating the nature of such interest right.] Substituted by secton21 of U.P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 21--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) All objections received by the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall, as soon as may be, after the expiry of the period of limitation prescribed therefor ,be submitted by him to the Consolidation Officer, who shall dispose of the same, as also the objections received by him, in the manner hereinafter provided, after notice to the parties concerned and the Consolidation Committee.] (2) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Consolidation Officer under sub-section (1) may, within 2 [15] days of the date of the order, file an appeal before the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, whose decision shall, except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, be final. 3 [(3) The Consolidation Officer shall, before deciding the objections, and the Settlement Officer, Consolidation may, before deciding an appeal, make local inspection of the plots in dispute after notice to the parties concerned and the Consolidation Committee. (4) If, during the course of the disposal of an objection or the hearing of an appeal, the Consolidation Officer or the Settelment Officer, Consolidation, as the case may be, is of the opinion that material injustice is likely to be caused to a number of tenure-holders in giving effect to the provisional Consolidation Scheme, as prepared by the Assistant Consolidation Officer, or as subsequently modified by the Consolidation Officer, as the case may be, and that a fair and proper allotment, of land to the tenure-holders of the units is not possible without revising the provisional Consolidation Scheme, or getting a fresh one prepared, it shall be lawful, for reasons to be recorded in writing, for- (i) the Consolidation Officer to revised provisional Consolidation Scheme, after giving opportunity of being heard to the tenure-holders concerned, or to remand the same to the Assistant Consolidation Officer, with such directions as the Consolidation Officer may consider necessary ; and (ii) the Settlement Officer, Consolidation to revise the provisional Consolidation Scheme after giving opportunity of being heard to the tenure-holders concerned or to remand the same to the Assistant Consolidation Officer, or the Consolidation Officer, as the Settlement Officer, Consolidation may think fit, with such directions as the may consider necessary.] (5) [XXX]4 (6) [XXX]5 Substituted by s. 18 (1) of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 22 (1) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 22 (2) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Omitted by s. 22 (2) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Omitted by s. 22 (2) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 22--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Omitted by s. 23 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 23--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Settlement Officer, Consolidation shall confirm the provisional Consolidation Scheme- (a) if no objections are filed within the time specified in section 20 ; or (b) where'such objections are filed, after such modifications or alterations as may be necessary in view of the orders passed under sub-sections (1) to (4) of section 21. (2) The provisional Consolidation Scheme so confirmed shall be published in the unit and, except as otherwise provided by or under this Act. shall be final. (3) (i) Where the allotments made under section 19-A are not modified under section 21 and are Confirmed under sub-section (1), the extracts contained in the notice issued under section 20, shall 2 [except as provided by or under this Act] be treated as final allotment orders for the tenure-holders concernet.) (ii) In cases not. covered by clause (i), revised extract specifying the modified allotments, as confirmed under sub-section (1), shall be issued by- (a) the Consolidation Officer, where the allotments are not modified by the Settlement Officer. Consolidation ; and (b) by the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, where he has modified the allotment, and the same shall 3 [except as otherwise provided by or under this Act] be the final allotment orders for the tenure-holders concerned. Substituted by s. 24 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Inserted by s 46 of U. P. Act 12 of 1965. Inserted by s 46 of U. P. Act 12 of 1965.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 24--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Settlement Officer, Consolidation, shall fix the date to be notified in the unit, from which the 2 [final consolidation scheme] shall come into force. On and after the said date a tenure-holder shall be entitled to enter into possession of the plots allotted to him. (2) On from the date of obtaining possession every 'tenure- holder getting trees, wells and other improvements existing on the plots allotted to him in pursuance of the enforcement of the [final] consolidation schme]3 shall be liable 4 [for the payment of] and pay to the former tenure-holder thereof, compensation for the trees, wells and other improvements, allotted to him, to be determined in- the manner hereinbefore provided. Substituted by s. 21 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1963. Substituted by s. 25 (1) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 25 (2) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 25 (2) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 25--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by section 22 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 26--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXXX]1 Deleted by section 22 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 26-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXX]1 Deleted by section 22 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 27--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 [(1) As soon as may be, after the final consolidation scheme has come into force, the District Depute Director of Consolidation shall cause to be prepared for each village, a new map. filed-book and record-of rights in respect of the consolidation area, on the basis of the entries in the map, as corrected under section 7, the Khasra Chakbandi, the annual register prepared under section 10 and the allotment orders as finally made and issued in accordance with the provisions of this Act. The provisions of the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 shall, subject to such modification as may be prescribed, be followed in the preparation of the map and records.] 2 [(2) All entries in the record-of rights prepared in accordance with the provision of sub-section (1) shall be presumed to be true until the contrary is proved. (3) After the issue of notification under section 52, the Collector shall, instead of the map, field-book and record-of-rights previously maintained by him maintain the map. field-book and record-of rights prepared in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) 3 [and the provisions of the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901, relating to the maintenance and correction of such map, field book and record-of- rights shall mutatis muntandis apply.] Substituted by section 26 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 47 of U. P. Act. No. 121 of 1965. Substituted by s. 23 of U. P. Act. 34 of 1974
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 28--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer, on the application of the tenure-holder or the Land Management Committee, to whom chak or lands have been allotted under the final consolidation scheme, may, within six months of the date on which the said scheme has come into force, put the tenure-holder or the Land j Management Committee, as the case may be, in actual physical possession of the chak or lands allotted to the applicant, and for so doing shall have all the powers including powers as regards contempt, resistance and the like as are exercisable by a Civil Court in execution of a decree for delivery of possession of immovable property : Provided that the delivery of possession as aforesaid shall not affect the right of the person from whom possession is transferred to tend and gather the crops standing on such chaks or land or part thereof, on the date of the delivery, unless the Assistant Consolidation Officer decides, for reasons to be recorded, that the possession over the crop also shall be delivered : Provided further that the person lending and gathering the standing crop, in accordance with the first proviso, shall be able pay to the person who has been allotted the chak. or lands, competition for the use of the land at such rate and in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) On the expiry of six months from the date en which a tenure-holder or Land Management Committee became entitled to enter into possession of the chak or lands allotted, whether before or after t he-coming into force)of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1963, or on the expiry of six months from the date of the coming into force of that Act, whichever , is later, the tenure holder or the Land Management Committee, as the case may be; shall unless possession has been obtained earlier, be deemed to have entered in to actual physical possession of the alloted chak of land :] Provided that the fact that a tenure-holder or the Management Committee has thus entered in possession shall net affect the right of the person from whom possession is deemed to have been tranferred to tend and gather the crop standing on the chak or lands, or part thereof, on the date of the expiry of the period of six months aforesaid.] Substituted by s. 27 of U. P. Act. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 29--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Where possession over standing crops is also delivered under section 28, the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall determine in the manner prescribed the compensation payable in respect of such crops by the tenure-holder put in possession 2 [XXX] 3 [(1-A) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may, within fifteen days of the date of the order, prefer an appeal before the Consolidation Officer, whose decision therein, shall be final] (2) [XXX]4 (3) [XXX]5 Substituted by section 5 of U. P. Act No. 13 of 1955. Deleted by section 15 (1) of U. P. Act 24 of 1956. Added by section 28 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Deleted by section 15 (2) of U. P. Act No. 24 of 1956. Deleted by section 15 (2) of U. P. Act No. 24 of 1956.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 29A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Where a tenure-holder from whom compensation is recoverable under this Act. fails to pay the same within the period prescribed therefor, the person entitled to receive it, may in addition to any other mode of recovery open to him, apply to the Collector within such time as may be prescribed to recover the amount due on his behalf as if it were an arrear of land revenue payable to Government. (2) Where any compensation payable under this Act is not paid whether in whole or in part within three months of the date of obtaining possession [under section 24 or section 28, as the case may be,]2 interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum shall be charged on the amount not so paid.] Added by section 16 of U. P. Act No. 24 of 1956. Substituted by section 24 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 29-AA--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Where, as a result of contribution for public purposes under the provisions of section 8-A, the area of the original holding of a tenure-holder is reduced, the land revenue payable for the holding shall be reduced by the Assistant Consolidation Officer in the same proportion as the area so contributed bears to the original total area of the holding, and the reduced land revenue shall be shown in the provisional consolidation scheme. (2) A tenure-holder aggrieved by the reduction made under sub-section (1) may, within 15 days of the date of publication of the provisional consolidation scheme under section 20, file an objection before the Assistant Consolidation Officer or the Consolidation Officer for getting the reduction of the land revenue determined in accordance with the provisions of Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950.] Added by section 29 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 29-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) (a) Every tenure-holdter, any part of whose holding has been contributed for public purposes under this Act, shall be paid for the land so contributed, compensation equal to- (i) in the case of land of a bhumidhar, four times; and (ii) in the case of the land of a sirdar, two times of the land revenue reduced under section 29-AA. (b) In the case of trees, wells and other improvements, falling within the land so contributed, the amount of compensation shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 19. (2) The compensation payable to a tenure-holder shall, after adjustment of the cost of operations under this Act, if any, be paid to him in cash. (3) Where any land, in respect of which compensation is paid under sub-section (1), is in occupation of an asami, there shall be paid to the asami out of the compensation payable to 'the bhumidhar or sirdar, as the case may be, an amount equal to 5 per cent of such compensation in respect of the right tit1 e and interest of the asami therein.] Substituted by section 30 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 29-C--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The land contributed for public purposes under this Act shall, with effect from the date on which the tenure-holders became entitled to enter into possession of the chaks alloted to them under the provisions of this Act as amended from time to time, vest and be always deemed to have vested in the Gaon Sabha and shall be utilised for the purpose for which it was earmarked in the final consolidation scheme, or, in case of failure of that purpose, for such other purposes may be prescribed.] 2 [(2) The provisions of section 117 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, shall mutatis mutandis apply to such land as if the land had vested in the Gaon Sabha by virtue of a declaration made by the State Government under sub-section (1) of that section, and as if the declarations were made subject to the conditions respecting untilization specified in sub-section (1) of this section.] (3) 3 [XXXXX] Substituted by section 31 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 3 of U. P. Act No 21 of 1966. Deleted by section 3 (2) of U. P. Act No 21 of 1966.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 30--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 With effect from the date on which a tenure-holder enters, or is deemed to have entered in to possession of the chak allotted to him, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the following consequences shall ensue- (a) the rights, title, interest and liabilities (i) of the tenure-holder entering, or deemed to have entered, into possession ; and (ii) of the former tenure-holder of the plots comprising the chak, in their respective original holdings shall cease, and (b) the tenure-holder entering into possession, or deemed to have entered into possession, shall have in his chak the same rights, title interests and liabilities ,as the had in the original holdings together with such other benefits of irrigation from a private source, till such source exists, as the former tenure-holder of the plots comnrising the chak had in regard to them ; (c) land vested in the Gaon Sabha, or any local authority, and allotted to the tenure-holder shall be deemed to have boon resumed by the State Government under the provisions of section 117 or section 117-A, as the case may be, of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and settled with tenure-holder; (d) the rights of the public as well as all individuals in or over land included in a chak following a declaration made under the provision to sub-section (2) of section 19-A, shall cease and be created in the land specified for the purpose in the final consolidation scheme; and (e) the encumbrances if any, upon the original holding of j the tenure-holder entering, or deemed to have entered, into possession, whether by way of lease mortgage or otherwise, shall in respect of that holding, cease, and. be created on the holdings, or on such part thereof, as may be specified in the final consolidation scheme. Substituted by section 32 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 31--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXXX]1 Deleted by section 33 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 32--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 A transfer, whether by exchange or otherwise of rights, title, interest and liabilities of tenure- holders in their holdings, involved in giving effect to the final Consolidation Scheme affecting them, shall notwithstanding anything contained in the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 and the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 be valid and no tenure holder or other person shall be entitled to object or interfere with any such transfer.] Substituted by section 34 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 33--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The State Government shall fix the amount of costs of the operations conducted under the Act and shall recover from the tenure-holders of the unit such part thereof and in such manner as may be prescribed.] (2) If the State Government so decides, it may order that a specified amount be recovered in advance in the manner prescribed, as the first instalment of the cost of [the said operations.]2 (3) Any amount payable as costs under this section shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. Substituted by section 35 (1) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 35(2) of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 34--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 36 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 35--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 36 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 36--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 29 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 36-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXX]1 Deleted by section 29 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 37--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXXX]1 Deleted by section 29 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 38--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Director of Consolidation and Deputy Director of Consolidation, Settlement Officer, Consolidation, Consolidation Officer and Assistant Consolidation Officer shall have all such powers and " rights and privileges as are vested in a Civil Court on the occasion of any action, in respect of the following matters : (a) the enforcing of the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, affirmation or otherwise and the issue of a commission or request to examine witnesses abroad; (b) compelling any one for the production of any document; (c) the punishing of persons guilty of contempt ; and a summon signed by such officer may be substituted for and shall be equivalent to any formal process capable of being issued in any action by a Civil Court for enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of document. 1 [XXXX] Deleted by s. 30 25 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 39--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Subject to any conditions or restrictions that may be prescribed, the Director of Consolidation Deputy Director of Consolidation. Settlement Officer Consolidation, Consolidation Officer or Assistant Consolidation Officer may, by written order require any person to produce such documents, papers and registers or to furnish such information as he may deem necessary for the proper exercise of his powers or the proper discharge of his duties under this Act. (2) Every person required to produce any document, paper or register or to furnish an information under this section shall he deemed legally bound to do so within the meaning of sections 175 and 176 of the Indian Penal Code.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 40--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh A proceeding before a Director of Consolidation, Deputy Director of Consolidation, Settlement Officer, Consolidation, Consolidation Officer and Assistant Consolidation Officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 41--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the provisions of Chapters IX and X of the U. P. Land Revenue Act, 1901 shall apply to all proceedings including appeals and applications under this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 41-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 Affidavits to be filed in any proceedings under this Act, including an appeal or revision, shall be made in the same manner and conform to the same requirements as affidavits filed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and may be verified by any officer or other person appointed by the High Court under clause (b) or by an officer appointed by any other court under clause (c) of section 139 of the said Code.] Inserted by s. 2 of U. P. Act No 31 of 1970.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 42--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The State Government may appoint such authorities and officers, and for such areas, as may be necessary, to give effect to provisions of the Act ] (2) The District Deputy Director of Consolidation may subject to such directions as the director of Consolidation may. issue from time to time demarcate the circles to be assigned to Consolidation Lekhpals, Consolidators and other authorities appointed for the district under sub-section (1). Substituted by section 37 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 42-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force if' the Consolidation Officer or the Settlement Officer, Consolidation is satisfied that a clerical or arithmetical error apparent on the face of the rerord exists in any document prepared under any provision of this Act, he shall, either on his own motion or on the application of any person interested, correct the same.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 43--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [XXXXX]1 Omitted by s. 38 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 44--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may by notification in the official Gazette and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification : (i) delegate to any officer or authority any of the powers conferred upon it by this Act ; and (ii) confer power of the Director of Consolidation, Deputy Director, Consolidation, the Settlement Officer, Consolidation and the Consolidation Officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder on any officer or authority.]1 Substituted by s. 36 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 44-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Where powers are to be exercised or duties to be performed under this Act of the rules made thereunder, such powers or duties may also be exercised or performed by an authority superior to it.]1 Added by s. 37 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 45--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The officer mentioned in this Act or any person acting under the orders of any one of them may, in the discharge of any duty under this Act, enter upon and survey Land and erect survey marks thereon and demarcate the boundaries thereof and do all other acts necessary for the proper performance of that duty.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 45-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) Any person contravening the provisions of section 5 (c) (i) shall, on conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding rupees one thousand. (2) A transfer made in contravention of the provisions of section 5 (c) (ii) shall not be valid or recognised, anything contained in any other law for the time being to in force to the contrary notwithstanding.]1 Added by s. 39 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 46--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If any person destroys wilfully or injures or removes without lawful authority a survey mark lawfully erected, he may be ordered by a Consolidation Officer to pay such compensation not exceeding fifty rupees for each mark so destroyed, injured or removed, as may in the opinion of that officer be necessary to defray the expenses of restoring the same and of rewarding the person, if any, who gave information of the destruction, injury or removal. (2) The order for the payment of compensation under sub-section (1) shall not bar a prosecution under section 434 of the Indian Penal Code.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 47--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh No appeal and no application for revision shall lie from any order passed under the provisions of this Act except as provided by or under this Act.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 48--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) The D rector of Consolidation may call for and examine the record of any case decided or proceedings taken by any subordinate authority for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the regularity of the proceedings ; or as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any order 2 [other than an interlocutory order] passed by such authority in the case or proceedings and may, after allowing the parties concerned an opportunity of being heard, make such order in the case or proceedings as he thinks fit. (2) Power under sub-section (1) may be exercised by the Director of Consolidation also on a reference under sub-section (3). (3) Any authority subordinate to the Director of Consolidation may, after allowing the parties concerned an opportunity of being heard, refer the record of any case or proceedings to the Director of Consolidation for action under sub-section (1).] 3 Explanation.- 4 [(1)-For the purposes of this section, Settlement Officers Consolidation, Consolidation Officers, Assistant Consolidation Officers, Consolidators and Consolidation Lekhpals shall be subordinate to the Director of Consolidation.] 5 Explanation.- (2)-For the purposes of this section the expression 'interlocutory order' in relation to a case or proceeding, means such order deciding any matter arising in such case or proceedings or collateral thereto as does not have the effect of finally disposing of such case or proceeding.] Substituted by s. 39 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963. Inserted by s. 20 (1) of U. P. Act 20 of 1982 Added by s. 25 of U. P. Act 4 of 1969. Existing Explanation re-numbered as Explanation (1) and new Explanation (2) Inserted by s. 20 (ii) of U. P. Act 20 of 1982. Existing Explanation re-numbered as Explanation (1) and new Explanation (2) Inserted by s. 20 (ii) of U. P. Act 20 of 1982.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 48-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Act : (a) no decision of the Custodian Evacuee Property hereinafter- in this section referred to as the Custodian) in relation to title to any land vested in him as evacuee property under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, shall be called in question and varied or reversed by any officer or authority under this Act; and (b) nothing in this Act shall be construed as requiring the Custodian to stay any proceedings in relation to title to any such land pending before him on the date of the coming into force of those provisions of this Act under which proceedings in relation to title to land are required to be stayed or as empowering the Consolidation Officer or any other officer or authority to refer for determination of any question of title in relation to such land involved in any proceedings pending before the Custodian on such date. (2) Where as a result of consolidation operations in any village - (a) lands, which are vested as evacuee property in the Custodian under the provisions of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, are included in holdings which are hot vested' in the Custodian as evacuee property, such land shall, on and from the date of the coming into force of the consolidation scheme cease to be so vested in the Custodian, and the provision of the said Act shall thereupon cease to apply in relation thereto, and (b) in lieu of such lands, corresponding lands shall be included in holdings which are vested in the Custodian as evacuee property, and such lands shall, on and from the date of the coming into force of the consolidation scheme, be deemed to be evacuee property declared as such within the meaning of the aforesaid Act and be vested in the Custodian and the provision of the said Act shall thereupon apply, so far as may be, in relation to such lands.] Added by s. 19 of U. P. Act 26 of 1954.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 48-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) Where change of possession becomes necessary amongst tenure-holders including the Land Management Committee of the circle as a result of orders passed [XXX]2 under section 48, it shall be lawful for them to exchange possession amongst themselves in accordance with such orders. (2) Where change of possession cannot be effected by mutual arrangement, the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall effect delivery of possession to such tenure-holders and the Land Management Committee in accordance with the provisions of section 28.] Added by s. 41 of U. P. Act. 38 of 1958. Omitted by s. 40 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 49--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the declaration and adjudication of rights of tenure-holders in respect of land lying in an area, for which a 2 [notification] has been issued 3 [under sub-section (2) of section 4] or adjudication of any other rights arising out of consolidation proceedings and in regard to which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under this Act, shall be done in accordance -with the provisions of this Act and no civil or revenue court shall entertain any suit or proceeding with respect to rights in such land or with respect to any other matters for which a proceeding could or ought to have been taken under this Act.] 4 [Provided that nothing in this section shall preclude the Assistant Collector from initiating proceedings under section 122-B of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 in respect of any land possession over which has been delivered or deemed to be delivered to a Gaon Sabha under or in accordance with the provisions of this Act.] Substituted by s. 42 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958. Substituted by s. 41 of U. P. Act. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s. 48 of U. P. Act 12 of 1965. Inserted by s. 21 of U. P. Act 20 of 1982.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 49-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or rules made thereunder.] Added by s. 43 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 50--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 No court-fee shall be payable on any application made or any document filed, with the exception of a Vakalatnama, in any suit or proceedings under the provisions of this Act.] Substituted by s. 44 of U. P. Act 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 51--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no instrument in writing shall be necessary for effecting a transfer of holdings involved in giving effect to a final consolidation scheme nor shall any instrument, if executed, require registration.] Substituted by s. 42 of U. P. Act 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 52--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) as soon as may be after fresh maps and records have been prepared under sub-section (1) of section 27, the State Government shall issue a notification in the official Gazette that the consolidation operations have been closed in the unit and the village or villages forming part of the unit shall then cease to be under consolidation operations. 1 [Provided that the issue of the notification under this section shall not affect the powers of the State Government to fix, distribute and recover the cost of operations under this Act.] 2 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any order passed by a court of competent jurisdiction in cases of writs filed under the provisions of the Constitution of India, or in cases or proceedings pending under this Act on the date of issue of the notification under sub-section (1), shall be given effect, to by such authorities as may be prescribed and the consolidation operations shall, for that purpose. l:e deemed to have not closed.] 3 [(3) Where the allotment or lease of any land made before the consolidation scheme becomes final under section 23, is cancelled by an order under sub-section (4) of section 198 of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and such order becomes final, then notwithstanding anything contained in the provision of this Act, such order shall be given effect to by such authorites, as may be prescribed in the following manner, and the consolidation operation shall, for that purpose, be deemed to have not closed, namely:- (a) the value of the land which was the subject-matter of such allotment or lease shall first be ascertained in the manner prescribed ; (b) the value referred to in clause (a) shall be deducted from the total value of land allotted to the tenure-holder concerned during consolidation proceedings; (c). the tenure-holder shall be entitled, during consolidation proceeding, to land equivalent in valuation of the said land.] Added by s. 43 of the U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Added by section 43 of the U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Inserted by s. 32 of U. P. Act. No 35 of 1976.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 52-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh 1 (1) In the case of a unit in relation to which a notification under sub-section (1) of section 52 has been" issued before the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1970. the Collector may, if he is of opinion that there exists no provision or inadequate provision of chak roads of chak guls in the unit, and shall, if a representation in that behalf by not less than ten per cent of the total number of tenure-holders is made to him within six months of the said commencement, proceed to take action under sub-section (2), anything to the contrary contained in section 52 notwithstanding. (2) The Collector shall cause a notice of the proposal to take action under this section and also of the representation, if any, received under sub-section (1) to be given in the unit by beat of drum and in such other manner, if any, as he thinks fit and direct, any Consolidation Officer to inspect the locality and take reasonable steps to ascertain the wishes of the tenure-holders, or as the case may be. of such of them as have not joined in the representation, and to make such other inquiry into the matter as he thinks fit. (3) Such Consolidation Officer shall make a report to the Collector on the advisability or otherwise of drawing up a plan making provision or, as the case may be, more adequate provision for chak roads or chak guls in the unit, and the Collector on being satisfied after considering such report that it is necessary or expedient so to do, shall cause a draft plan to be prepared. (4) The Assistant Consolidation Officer shall thereupon, after ascertaining informally the wishes of as many tenure-holders of the unit as he considers practicable, prepare a draft plan in the prescribed form proposing such provision or additional provision of chak roads or chak guls as may be necessary. In preparing the draft plan the Assistant Consolidation Officer shall have regard to the following principles, namely- (a) that as far as practicable, provision of chak roads and chak guls should be made primarily by utilising land vested in the Gaon Sabha and secondarily out of land held by those tenure- holdeis whose chaks are connected with the proposed chak roads or chak guls and in the last resort, out of any other land. (b) the re-arrangement of chak should be made only to the extent it is really necessary for making provision of chaks roads and chalk guls with minimum possible dislocation in the consolidation scheme already confirmed. (5) The draft plan prepared under sub-section (4) shall be published in the prescribed manner. (6) Any person affected by the draft plan may, within 15 days from the date of such publication, file an objection in writing before the Consolidation Officer. (7) (a) The Consolidation Officer shall dipose of all objections after notice to the parties concerned. (b) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Consolidation Officer under clause (a) may, within 15 days from the date of the order, file an appeal before the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, whose decision thereon shall be final. (c) Before deciding the objections under clause (a) the Consolidation Officer, and before deciding the appeal under clause (b) the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, may make a local inspection of the site in dispute after notice to the parties concerned. (d) It shall be lawful, for reasons to be recorded in writing, for the Consolidation Officer under clause (a) and the Settlement Officer, Consolidation under clause (b) to modify the draft plan in the Settlement with the principles specified in sub-section (4) and for the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, to remand the same either to the Consolidation Officer or to the Assistant Consolidation Officer with such directions as he thinks fit. (8) The Settlement Officer, Consolidation, shall confirm the plan- (a) if no objections are filed within the time specified in sub-section (6); or (b). where such objections are filed, after the modifications or alternations as may be necessary in view of the orders passed on objections and appeal under sub-section (7). (9) The plan confirmed under sub-section (8) shall be published in the unit in the prescribed manner and. shall come into force on the date of such publication, and thereupon the consolidation scheme and the allotment orders made final under section 23 shall stand amended to the extent indicated in the plan, and fresh allotment orders shall be issued by the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, accordingly. (10) The provisions of Chapter IV shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to the said plan as they apply in relation to the final, consolidation scheme, and for the purposes of application of Chapter IV land contributed for chak roads and chak guls provided under this section shall be deemed to be. land contributed for public purposes under section 8-A.] Inserted by s. 3 of U. P. Act No. 31 of 1970.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 53--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh It shah be lawful for the Settlement Officer, Consolidation, at any stage of the consolidation proceedings but before the preparation of the final records under section 27, to allow mutual exchange of chaks, or part thereof 1 [by agreement] between the tenure-holders, where he is satisfied that the exchange will improve the shape of chaks, or reduce their number and generally lead to greater satisfaction amongst them. Inserted by section 44 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 53-A--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Deputy Director of Consolidation may recognise a 1 [consolidation scheme] in respect of a village within or without a consolidation area, prepared voluntarily by the tenure-holders of the village, where he is satisfied that it conforms to the broad principles of consolidation under this Act, and has support of all the tenure-holders concerned and is otherwise fair to all concerned. (2) The 2 [consolidation scheme] recognised under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been prepared and confirm under the provisions of this Act and shall fee enforced thereunder. Substituted by section 45 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 45 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 53-B--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The provision of section 5 of 1 [the Limitation Act, 1963] shall apply to the application, appeals, revisions and other proceedings under this Act or the rules made thereunder.]2 Substituted by section 26 of U. P. Act No. IV of 1969. Inserted by section 46 of U. P. Act No. 38 of 1958.
Uttar Pradesh Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953_Section 54--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The State Government may 1 [by notification in the Gazette make rules] for the purposes of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing power, such he may provide for :- (a) the form of 2 [notification] 3 [under sub-section (2) of section 4 ;] (b) the constitution of consolidation committee under clause (2-AA) of section 3, determination of the terms of members of the Consolidation Committee and action to be taken on a vacancy occurring therein ; (c) the procedure for the disposal of suits and proceedings stayed under section 5 ; 4 [(cc) the condition to be observed by the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) in granting permission referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5, for transfer of holdings of in the consolidation area ;-] 5 [(d) procedure relating to the revision of maps and records including declaration of rights, partition of joint-holdings, valuation of plots, determination and apportionment of compensation for wells, trees and other improvements and the preparation and publication of. the statement of principles under sections 7 to 11 and 12 ;] (e) the determination of land revenue over new holdings and distribution thereof on the portions of old holdings under section 12-A '; 6 [(f) . procedure relating to amalgamation of holding under section 12-D ; (g) the procedure and the manner relating to the preparation publication and confirmation of the consolidation scheme under sections 19-A, 21 and 23; (h) the procedure and the manner of issue of allotment orders under section 23 ;] (i) the procedure and the manner in which the views of the Consolidation Committee shall be obtained on matters specified for this purpose ; (j) the determination of the public purposes for which areas may be earmarked and the manner in which this shall be done ; (k) the matters relating to transfer of rights from the public land to other land earmarked for public purposes ; (l) the procedure. for entering into possession under sections 24 and 28 ; (m) the procedure and the manner for determination of compensation to be paid to or recovered from any person under this Act: (n) the circumstances and the matters which shall be taken into consideration in distributing the cost of consolidation, including the proportion in which the distribution may be made ; (o) the maters relating to the mode of service of notice or documents under this Act ; (p) the procedure to be followed in all proceedings including applications and appeals under this Act ; (q) the duties of any officer, or authority Having jurisdiction under this Act and the procedure to be followed by such officer and authority ; (r) the time within which applications and appeals may be presented under this Act in cases for which no specific provision in that behalf has been made herein ; (s) imposing limits of time within which things to be done for the purposes of the rules must be done, with or without powers to any authority therein specified to extend limits imposed ; (t) the transfer of proceedings from one authority or officer to another ; and (u) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 7 [(3) All rules made under this section shall, as soon as may, after they are made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature, while it is in session, for a total period of not less than thirty days comprised in its one session or two or more successive sessions and shall, Unless some later date is appointed, take effect from the date of their publication-in the Gazette, subject to such modification or annulments as the two Houses of the Legislature may, during the said period agree to make so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.] Substituted by section 47(1) of U. P. Act No. 30 of 1975. Substituted by section 46 (1) of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 50 of U. P. Act No. XII of 1965. Inserted by section 33 of U. P. Act 35 of 1976 and shall be deemed always to have been inserted. Substituted by section 46 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by section 46 of U. P. Act No. 8 of 1963. Substituted by s- 47 of U. P. Act No. 30 of 1975. 
