Cattle Trespass (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Whereas it is expedient to amend the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 in its application to U.P. for certain purposes; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Cattle Trespass (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Cattle Trespass (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1954. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall come into force at once.
Cattle Trespass (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Amendment made by section 2 has been incorporated in the principal Act.
Cattle Trespass (U.P. Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The State Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, with respect to any local area specified in the notification, declare that section 26 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act and section 28 of the principal Act, shall stand farther amended and modified as specified in the Schedule and with effect from the case of the said declaration the principal Act shall stand amended accordingly. Schedule 1 for section 26 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, the following shall be substituted: "26. Any owner, keeper or attendant of cattle, who through neglect or otherwise, damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land or any corp or produce of land by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable- (a) for the first offence to a fine not less than Rs. 10 but not exceeding Us. 250 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or to both; (b) for the second or subsequent offence to an imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months and fine not exceeding Rs. 500." 2. For section 28 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted: "28. All fines recovered under section 25, clause (a) of section 26 or section 27 may be appropriated in whole or in part as compensation for loss or damage proved to the satisfaction of the Convicting Magistrate." 
