Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to extend the provions of the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890, in its application to Uttar Pradesh for certain purposes Whereas it is expedient to provide for greater powers to the State Government to frame schemes for charitable endowments for educational purposes ; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Statement of Object For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Gazette, dated January 28, 1950, Pt VII, pp 9-10.
Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act, 1950_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act,1950. 2. It shall extend to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. 3. It shall come into force at once.
Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act, 1950_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) If, upon any representation made or otherwise it appears to the State Government that any property held in trust for the advancement of education is being wasted or mal-administered, it may, by notice, require the person or persons acting in the administration thereof to show cause, within a time to be specified, why the same be not vested in the Treasurer Charitable Endowments and a scheme for its administration be not settled. (2) The notice required by sub-section (1) shall be served in such manner as may be specified.
Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act, 1950_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Where the person or persons served with the notice under the next preceding section fail to show cause within the time allowed, or the State Government is satisfied, after considering their explanation, if any, and making such enquiries, as it may deem necessary, that the property is being wased or mal-administered, it may make an order to that effect.
Uttar Pradesh Charitable Endowments (Extension of Powers) Act, 1950_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Upon the making of the order mentioned in section 3 it shall be lawful for the State Government to proceed against a such property under the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890, and the provisions of the said Act shall have effect as if- (a) in sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act, the words "on application made as hereinafter mentioned, and", and "as may be agreed on between the appropriate Government and the person or persons making the application", were omitted; (b) in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 5 of the said Act, the words "on application made as hereinafter mentioned and with the concurrence of the person or persons making the application" and the "comma" thereafter, were omitted ; and (c) for section 6 of the said Act, the following was substituted : "6 No scheme shall be settled, modified or substituted under the provisions of the foregoing sections, except after a draft thereof, has been published in such manner as the appropriate Government may direct for the information of persons or interests likely to be affected thereby." 
