Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to amend the Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan Adhiniyam, 1962 with a view to providing for registration of shops and commercial establishments and for matters connected therewith. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on October 15, 1976.
Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan Adhiniyam, 1962, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act- (i) after clause (1) the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(1-A) 'Chief Inspector' means the Chief Inspector appointed under section 29, and includes a Deputy Chief Inspector or Inspector appointed under that section ; " (ii) after clause (13) the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(13-A) 'Owner', in relation to a shop or commercial establishment, includes a person who runs or is in-charge of such shop or commercial establishment : "
Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After Chapter I of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely :- "Chapter I-A Registration of Shops and Commercial Establishments 4-A. Register of shops and commercial establishments:-The Chief Inspector shall maintain in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed, a register of all shops and commercial establishments, to which this Act applies : Provided that different such registers may be maintained for different areas and for different classes of shops and commercial establishments. 4-B. Registration:- (1) Every owner of a shop or commercial establishment shall within three months of the commencement of such business or within three months of the commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhishthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976, whichever is later, apply to the Chief Inspector for registration of his shop or commercial establishment. (2) Every application for registration under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. (3) The Chief Inspector shall, on being satisfied that the prescribed fee has been deposited, register the shop or commercial establishment in the register maintained under section 4-A and shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 4-C. Term and renewal of registration certificate:-The registration certificate granted under section 4-B shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed, and shall on an application being made in that behalf and upon payment of the prescribed fees, be renewable from time to time by the Chief Inspector for such further period as may be prescribed. 4-D. Duplicate Registration certificate:-When a registration certificate is lost, destroyed or torn, or is defaced or otherwise becomes illegible, the Chief Inspector shall in the manner prescribed and on payment of the prescribed fee, issue a duplicate registration certificate."
Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 40 of the principal Act- (i) in sub-section (1) for the words "may make rules" the words "may by notification make rules" shall be substituted ; (ii) in sub-section (2) after clause (6) the following clauses shall be inserted, namely :- "(b-1) the form of register of shops and commercial establishments under Chapter 1-A ; (b-2) the fees for registration, for renewal of registration certificate and for issue of duplicate registration certificate under Chapter 1-A ; (b-3) the form of registration certificate under Chapter 1-A ; " (iii) sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Dookan Aur Vanijya Adhisthan (Sanshodhan) Adhyadesh, 1976 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
