Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax Act 1979. IT is HEREBY enacted in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act maybe called the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on February 3, 1999.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax at, 1979, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in the proviso the words "in a local area having a population not exceeding one lac" shall omitted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 9 of the principal Act for the words "District Magistrate, wherever occurring, the words "Assistant Commissioner or Entertainment Tax Officer, as the case may be" shall be substituted
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 11 of the principal Act,- (a) for sub-section (4) the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- (4) Where the entire gross proceeds of an entertainment are to be devoted to philanthropic, religions or charitable purposes without any deductions whatsoever on account of the expenses of the entertainment, the District Magistrates:- (a) may, in the case of the entertainment whose entire gross proceeds do not exceed rupees twenty thousand, subject to the rules made under this Act, grant exemption to such entertainment from payment of tax under this Act on such terms and conditions as he may deem fit to impose; (b) shall, in the ease of the entertainment whose entire gross proceeds exceeds rupees twenty thousand, refer the matter to the Entertainment and Betting Tax Commissioner along with his recommendations and other relevant records and the Commissioner may, subject to the rules made under this Act, grant exemption to such entertainment from payment of Tax under this Act on such terms and conditions as he may deem fit to Impose." (b) in sub-sections (5) and (6) for the words "District Magistrate", wherever occurring, the words "District Magistrate or Entertainment and Betting Tax Commissioner, as the case may be," shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh ln section 12 of the principal Act for the words "ten thousand rupees" the words "twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 24 of the principal Act for the words "two thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 25 of the principal Act for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 26 of the principal Act for the words "one thousand rupees" the words five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh in section 27 of the principal Act for the words "five thousand rupees" the words ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 28 of the principal Act for the words "one thousand rupees" wherever occurring, the words "five thousand rupees shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 29 of the principal Act for the words "three thousand rupees" the words "six thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 29-A of the principal Act for the words "five thousand rupees" the words "ten thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 30 of the principal Act for the words "two thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" hall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 14--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1999 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the Corresponding provisions, of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force, at all material times. 
