Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax Act, 1979 IT IS HERE BY enacted in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 12 of the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax Act, 1979, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for 'the words "one thousand rupees" the words"two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 24 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "twenty times" the words "fifty times" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b) for the words "two hundred rupees" the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 27 of the principal Act, for the words three thousand rupees" the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 29 of the principal Act, for the words "two thousand rupees" the words "three thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 30 of the principal Act, for the words "one thousand rupees" the words "two thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1985_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "30-A. Enhanced penalty after previous conviction:-Whoever having been convicted of an offence punishable under section 24, or sub-section(1) of section 25 or clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 26, or section 27, or section 29 or section 30 is again found guilty of an offence punishable under the same provision, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence, to a fine which may extend to one and half times of the amount of fine provided in such provision, besides the sentence of imprisonment if any, provided in such provision." 
