Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax Act, 1979. IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as Follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on November 5, 1999.
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 3-A of the Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax Act, 1979, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act. the following sections shall be inserted , namely ; - "3B. Extra-charges for Film Development:- (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, the proprietor of a cinema shall realise from the person making payment for admission to an entertainment In such cinema, an extra charge of fifty paise for Film Development. (2) All moneys realised under sub-section (1) shall he deposited with such officer or authority in such manner as may be prescribed. 3C.Fund:-(1) There shall be established a fund to be known as 'Film Development Fund to which shall be credited all extra charges realised under section 3-B. (2) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes namely:- (a) to finance films; (b) to provide subsid y to regional films; (c) to develop infrastructure for films; (d) to establish Film Development Board; (e) to give awards and scholarships; (f) to organise film festivals; (g) to purchase equipments; or (h) any other purpose connected with the development of films."
Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Entertainments and Betting Tax (Amend-ment) Ordinance, 1999 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act as if the provisions of this Act ware in force at all material times. 
