Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to re-enact and validate the United Provinces Excise (Amendment) Act, 1972 WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest to provide for the adoption of the system of grant of licences prevailing in respect of country liquor with necessary modifications for the grant of licences in respect of foreign liquor ; AND WHEREAS the Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Ordinance, 1972 (U. P. Ordinance no. 13 of 1972), which was replaced by The Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Act, 1972 (U. P. Act no. 30 of 1972) , was adjudicated by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in its judgment in Sheo Pat Rai and. Others versus State of Uttar Pradesh and Others, reported in 1972 Allahabad Law journal Reports, 1000, to be beyond the competency of the State Legislature ; AND WHEREAS subsequently, in the case of Nashirwar and Others versus State of Madhya Pradesh and Others, reported in All India Reporter, 1975 Supreme Court, 360, the Supreme Court has upheld the power of the State Legislature to make provision for holding of public auction for the grant of right or privilege to possess and sell foreign liquor ; AND WHEREAS it has become necessary to repeal and re-enact The Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Act, 1972 (U. P. Act no. 30 of 1972); Now, therefore, it is hereby enacted in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may he called the Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976.
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Act, 1972 is hereby, with effect from August 16, 1972, repealed and re-enacted with the following modifications :- (i) Section 1 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted :- "(2) It shall be deemed to have been in force ever since the commencement of the United Provinces Excise Act, 1910, and accordingly, all references to the State Government in the amendments made in that Act by this Act shall, in relation to the period before January 26, 1950, be construed as references to the Provincial Government." ; (ii) for section 3, the following section shall be substituted :- "3. Insertion of new sections 24-A and 24-B:- After section 24 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "24-A.Grant of exclusive or other privilege in respect of foreign liquor:-(1) Subject to the provisions of section 31, the Excise Commissioner may grant to any person a licence or licences for the exclusive or other privilege,- (a) of manufacturing or of supply by wholesale, or of both ; or (6) of manufacturing or of supplying by wholesale, or of both and selling by retail ; or (c) of selling by wholesale (to wholesale or retail vendors); or (d) of selling by retail at shops (for consumption 'off' the premises only); any foreign liquor in any locality. (2) The grant of licence or licences under clause (d) of sub-section (1) in relation to any locality shall be without prejudice to the grant of licences for the retail sale of foreign liquor in the same Ideality in hotels and restaurants for consumption in their premises. (3) Where more licences than one are proposed to be granted under clause (d) of sub-section (1) in relation to any locality for the same period, advance intimation of the proposal shall be given to the prospective applicants for every such licence. (4) The provisions of section 25, and proviso to section 39 shall apply in relation to grant of a licence for an exclusive or other privilege under this section as they apply in respect of the grant of a licence for an exclusive privilege, under section 24.' "24-B.Removal of doubts:-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared- (a) that the State Government has an exclusive right or privilege of manufacture and sale of country liquor and foreign liquor ; (b) that the amount described as licence fee in clause (c) of section 41 is in its essence the rental or consideration for the grant of such right or privilege by the State Government ; (c) that the Excise Commissioner as the head of the Excise Department of the State shall be deemed, while determining or realising such fee, to act for and on behalf of the State Government'." (iii) after section 3, the following section shall be inserted :- "3-A.For section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted and be deemed always to have been substituted, namely :- 30.Substitution of new section for section 30:-(1) Instead of or in addition to any duty leviable under the Chapter, the State Government or on its behalf the Excise Commissioner may accept payment of a sum in consideration of the grant of licence for any exclusive or other privilege under section 24 or section 24-A. (2) The sum payable under sub-section (1) may be determined either by auction or by calling tenders or otherwise'." (iv) after section 4, the following section shall be inserted :- "4-A. In section 41 of the principal Act, for clause (c), the Amendment of following clause shall be substituted and be deemed section 41. always to have been substituted, namely :- '(c)' prescribing the scale of fees or manner of fixing the fees payable for any licence, permit or pass including any consideration for the grant of any exclusive or other privilege granted under section 24 or section 24-A or for storing of any intoxicant. Explanation (1)-Fees may be prescribed under this sub-clause at different rates for different classes of licences, permits, passes or storage, and for different areas. (2) The manner of fixing fee or consideration shall include auction or invitation of tenders or both'."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 40 of the principal Act- (a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso thereto shall be inserted, namely :- "Provided that the Uttar Pradesh Licensing under the Surcharge Fee System Rules, 1968 made by the Excise Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh, with the previous sanction of the State Government, as amended by the Excise Commissioner, Uttar Pradesh, from time to time, before the commencement of this Act, shall, until altered or repealed by the State Government by rules made under this section, be deemed to be and always to have been as valid and effective as if the said rules were duly made by the State Government under this section." ; (b) in sub-section (2), for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely :- "(c) prescribing the manner in which appeals or revisions shall be presented and the procedure for dealing with such appeals and revisions
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court to the contrary, anything done or purporting to be done and any action taken or purporting to have been taken under any provision of the Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) Act, 1972, before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be and always to have been as valid as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times.
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Excise (Amendment) (Re-enactment and Validation) Ordinance, 1976 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the aforesaid Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had come into force on February 28, 1976. 
