Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the U. P. Excise Act, 1910, for the purposes hereinafter appearing It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970.
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 3 of the U. P. Excise Act, 1910, hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after clause (20). the following new clause shall be inserted, namely: "(20-a) 'cultivation', with its grammatical variations, means the raising of a plant from seed, and includes the tending or protecting of a plant during its growth;".
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "57. Duty of owner, occupier, lekhpal or village policeman to report certain matters:- Every person who owns or occupies any land or building and the agent of such owner or occupier, on or in which there has been any unlawful manufacture of any intoxicant, or any unlawful cultivation or collection of any plants from which an intoxicating drug can be produced, and every owner of a vessel or Vehicle in which any intoxicant is manufactured contrary to the provisions of this Act, and every lekhpal or village policeman in whose jurisdiction such land or building is situate or vessel or vehicle is found, shall, in the absence of reasonable excuse, be bound to give notice of the same to a Magistrate ox to an officer of the excise, police or land revenue department immediately the same comes to his knowledge."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 60 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "60.Penalty for unlawful import, export, transport, manufacture, possession, sale etc.:- Whoever, in contravention of this Act or of any rule or order made under this Act, or of any licence, permit or pass obtained under this Act- (a) imports, exports, transports or possesses any intoxicant; or (b) manufactures any intoxicant ; or (c) cultivates any hemp plant (cannabis sativa); or (d) collects or sells any portion of the hemp plant (cannabis sativa) from which any intoxicating drug can be manufactured; or (e) constructs or works any distillery or brewery; or (f) uses, keeps or has in his possession any materials, stills utensils implements or apparatus whatsoever for the purpose of manufacturing any intoxicant other than tori; or (g) removes any intoxicant from any distillery, brewery or w????? house licensed, established or continued under this Act; or (h) bottles any liquor for purposes of sale; or (i) sells any intoxicant, save in the case provided for by section 1 or (j) taps, or draws tari, from any tori-producing tree in areas notification under section 42, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine or with both : Provided that in the case of conviction for an offence under clause (b) a sentence of not less than three months' imprisonment shall, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the Court, be passed."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 61 of the principal Act the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "61. Penalty for unlawful selling to persons under eighteen, or employing persons under eighteen or women:- If any licensed vendor, or any person in his employ an acting on his behalf- (a) in contravention of section 22 sells or delivers any liquor of intoxicating drug to any person apparently under the age of eighteen years; or (b) in contravention of section 23 employs or permits to be employed on any part of his licensed premises referred to in that section, any person under the age of eighteen years or any woman; he shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.'
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 62 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "62. Penalty tor rendering denatured spirit fit for human consumption:- Whoever renders or attempts to render fit for human consumption any spirit whether manufactured in India of not which has been denatured, or has in his possession any denatured spirit which has been rendered fit for human consumption or in respect of which any attempt has been made to render it so fit shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with, both."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 64 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- Penalty for certain acts by licensee or his servant. "64. Whoever, being the holder of a licence, permit or pass granted under this Act, or being in the employ of such holder and acting on his behalf- (a) fails to produce such licence, permit or pass on the demand of any Excise Officer or of any other officer duly empowered to make such demand; or (b) in any case not provided for in section 60, wilfully contravenes any rule made under section 40; or (c) wilfully does or omits to do anything in breach of any of the conditions of the licence, permit or pass not otherwise provided for in this Act, shall be punishable for each such offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 65 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "65. Penalty for consumption in chemists shop etc.:- (1) If any chemist, druggist, apothecary or keeper of dispensary allows any intoxicant which has not been bona fide medicated for medicinal purposes to be consumed on business premises by any person not employed in his business, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. (2) If any person not employed as aforesaid consumes any such intoxicant on such premises, he shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 68 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "68. Penalty for offences not otherwise provided for:-Whoever is guilty of any act or intentional omission in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act, or of any rule or order made under this Act and not otherwise provided for in this Act, shall be punished for each such act or omission with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 69 of the principal Act, for the proviso thereto the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:-, "Provided that in the case of conviction for a second or subsequent offence under clause (a) or any of the clauses (c) to (j) of section 60, section 62, section 63 or section 65, a sentence of imprisonment for a term of not less than one month with or without fine, and in the case of conviction for a second or subsequent offence under clause (6) of section 60, a sentence of imprisonment for a term of not less than six months, with or without fine, shall in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment of the court, be passed : Provided further that nothing in this section shall prevent any offence which might otherwise have been tried summarily under Chapter XXII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, from being so tried."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 11--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 69 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "69-A. Demand for security for abstaining from commission of certain offences:- (1) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence punishable under the provisions of clause (b) 60, or section 62, the court convicting such person may, at the time of passing the sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond for a sum proportionate to his means, with or without sureties, to abstain from the commission of any offence punishable under the said provisions during such period not exceeding three years as it may direct. (2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall mutatis mutandis apply to all matters connected with such bond as if it were a bond to keep the peace ordered to be executed under section 106 of the said Code. 69-B. Penalty for abetment.:- Whoever abets an offence punishable under this Act shall, whether such offence be or be not committed in consequence of such abetment and notwithstanding anything contained I in section 116 of the Indian Penal Code, be punished on conviction for such abetment with the same punishment as is pro- vided for the principal offence. 69-C. Offence by companies:- (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, managing agent, secretaries and treasurers, or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or managing agent, secretaries and treasurers, or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation-For the purposes of this section- (a) 'company' means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals ; and (b) 'director', in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 12--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For sub-section (1) of section 70 of the principal Act, the following subsection shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) No Magistrate shall take cognizance- (a) of an offence punishable under section 60, section 63 or section 65, except on his own knowledge or suspicion or on the complaint or report of an Excise Officer; or (b) of an offence punishable under section 64, section 66, section 67 or section 68 except on the complaint or report of the Collector or an Excise Officer authorised by him by a general or special order in that behalf."
Uttar Pradesh Excise (Second Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 13--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 71 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "71-A. Provisions regarding pardon etc. to apply to offences punishable under the Act:- The provisions of sections 337, 339 and 339-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply in relation to offences punishable under this Act as they apply in relation to offences mentioned in the said section 337." 
