Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act further to amend the Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety Act, 2005 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety Act, 2005 (U.P. Act No. 5 of 2005) has been enacted to provide for making effective provisions for the fire prevention and fire safety measures in certain buildings and premises in the State. In the said Act, the occupiers and the owners have been made responsible for ensuring fire prevention and fire safety measures. At present, mostly multi-storied building are being constructed by private builders and promoters (be it a person, company, firm, association or cooperative societies) without following the norms of fire prevention and fire safety. In the said Act, there is no provision for making them responsible for obtaining the permission from fire service Authority. It has, therefore, been decided to amend the said Act to include the said builder or promoter in the definitions of "owner" and "occupier" so as to make them liable for following the norms of fire prevention and fire safety. The Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety (Amendment) Act, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Fire Prevention and Fire Safety Act, 2005,- (a) in clause (g) after sub-clause (v) the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(vi) any association of building owners or occupiers as formed under the building bye-laws or any other law of similar nature to which the builder/ promoter (be it a person, company, firm, association or cooperative society) who is responsible for construction of a building, has handed over such fire prevention and fire safety measures as are warranted by any law for the time being in force.". (b) in clause (h) after sub-clause (ii) the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(iii) any builder or promoter (be it a person, company, firm, association or cooperative society) responsible for construction of a building or premises, for which, obtaining of the permission from fire service is mandatory under any law for the time being in force, till such time that the building is handed over to the association of building owners or occupiers as formed under the building bye- laws or any other law of similar nature after implementation of all fire fighting and prevention measures as warranted.". 
