Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to amend the Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2004 It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2004 has been enacted to provide for the responsibility of the State Government to ensure fiscal stability and sustainability and to enhance the scope for improving social and physical infrastructure and human development by achieving sufficient revenue surplus, reducing fiscal deficit and removing impediments to the effective conduct of fiscal policy and prudent debt management through limits on State Government borrowings. Government guarantees, debt and deficit, greater transparency in fiscal operation of the State Government and use of a medium term fiscal framework. 2. Clauses (a), (c) and (f) of sub-section (3) of Section 4, of the said Act, provide that the State Government shall reduce fiscal deficit to not more than three per cent of the estimated Gross State Domestic Product within the period commencing on 1st day of April, 2004 and ending with the 31st day of March, 2009 and reduce fiscal deficit as percentage of Gross State Domestic Product in each of the financial years and the goal referred to above. 3. The Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended for the shifting the target years for achieving fiscal targets mentioned in Para 2 above. It has, therefore, been decided to amend the said clauses (a), (c) and (f) to provide respectively for reducing revenue deficit, fiscal deficit and debt stock as percentage of Gross Domestic Product as per the recommendations of the Thirteenth Finance Commission. Besides, the Thirteenth Finance Commission has recommended to make the medium term fiscal restructuring policy to be made more comprehensive, and to constitute an independent authority to review the fiscal position of the State with special reference to the implementation of various clauses of the said Act of 2004. The Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Bill, 2011 is introduced accordingly.
Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011.
Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2004 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(6) The State Government shall endeavour to make the Medium Term Fiscal Restructuring Policy more comprehensive giving details of all significant items of receipt and expenditure.".
Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),- (a) for clause (a) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) reduce revenue deficit to nil by the end of the fiscal year 2011-12, and maintain revenue balance or attain a surplus thereafter.". (b) for clause (c) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) reduce fiscal deficit to not more than three per cent of the estimated Gross State Domestic Product by the year referred to in clause (a) and maintain this level thereafter.". (c) for clause (f) the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(f) ensure that the total debt stock at the end of the fiscal year 2014-15 does not exceed forty-two per cent of the estimated gross state domestic product for that year.".
Uttar Pradesh Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In Section 6 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(6) The Government shall appoint an independent agency to review the status of financial position of the Government with special reference to the compliance of the provisions of this Act. The periodicity of such review shall be such as may be prescribed.". 
