Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh [Enacted by the President in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India]. An Act further to amend the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 and the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Samities and Zila Parishads Adhiniyam, 1961, for the purposes hereinafter appearing In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of the U.P. State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1968 (7 of 1968), the President is pleased to enact as follows : Statement of Object 1. The question of reorganisation of the various Panchayati Raj bodies with a view making them better instruments for the development of rural areas had been under consideration of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh for some time. Further, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Santhanam Committee on the methods of elections to the Panchayati Raj bodies it was proposed that the existing terms of these bodies should be so synchronized that the next general elections thereto could be held one after the other in the minimum possible time. It was also proposed that the next general elections to the Gaon Panchayats should be held on the basis of the Assembly electoral rolls through secret ballot. Exhaustive amendments in the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947 and the U. P. Kshettra Samities and Zila Adhiniyam, 1961, in that behalf were accordingly contemplated. Pending consideration of these amendments, general elections to the Panchayati Raj bodies were held over. The term of office of the existing Gaon Panchyats and Kshettra Samities had consequently to be extended which is now due to expire on June 30, 1968 and May 4, 1968, respectively. As the process of amending the aforesaid Acts is likely to take a some more time, it is necessary to empower the State Government to extend the term of Gaon Panchayats and Kshetta Samities for a further period of one year. 2. The Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968, is being enacted accordingly. 3. The Committee constituted under the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the U.P. Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1968 (7 of 1968), has approved the enactment of this measure as a President's Act.
Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968.
Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Amendment incorporated in the relevant Act.
Uttar Pradesh Gaon Panchayats and Kshettra Samities (Extension of Term) Act, 1968_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Amendment incorporated in the relevant Act. 
