Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to amend the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) Act, 1962. WHEREAS the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1964 was promulgated by the Governor on December 14, 1964 to amend the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) Act, 1962; AND WHEREAS it is expedient and necessary that the said Ordinance be replaced by an enactment of the Legislature ; It is hereby enacted in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965.
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) Act, 1962, hereinafter called the principal Act, for the words "two years", the words "four years" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 4 of the principal Act- (i) in clause (a) of sub-section (1), for the words "A Commissioner" the word "Commissioners" shall be substituted. (ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "the Commissioner" the words "a commissioner" shall be substituted. (iii) in sub-section (4), for the words "The Commissioner" the words "A Commissioner" shall be substituted ; and (iv) in sub-section (5), for the words "The Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner and the Investigation Officer" the words "A Commissioner, an Assistant Commissioner and an Investigation Officer' shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 5 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted. "5. Only Hindus to be Commissioners, etc.:- A Commissioner, an Assistant Commissioner and an Investigation Officer shall be appointed out of persons professing the Hindu religion."
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In sub-section (2) of section 6 of the principal Act, for the words "the Commissioner" the words "A Commissioner" shall be substituted.
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 7 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted : "7. Previous approval necessary for transfer of property:- (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, no transfer of property belonging to a Hindu Public religious institution shall be valid unless prior written sanction of the Commissioner or, where the value of the property sought to be transferred does not exceed rupees two hundred and fifty, of the Assistant Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the institution, on the ground of the transfer being necessary or beneficial to the institution, has been obtained. Explanation- For the purposes of this section transfer does not include the customary use or distribution of any movables as Bhog, Prasad and the like. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of a Commissioner or an Assistant Commissioner may within thirty days from the date thereof, appeal against that order to the District Judge within whose jurisdiction the headquarter of the Hindu public religious institution or the property concerned lies and the order passed by the District Judge in the appeal shall be final."
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 7--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 15 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted : "(ii) the procedure to be followed for seeking sanction for the proposed transfer of property under section 7."
Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Adhiniyam, 1965_Section 8--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The Uttar Pradesh Hindu Public Religious Institutions (Prevention of Dissipation of Properties) (Temporary Powers) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1964 is hereby repealed and the provisions of sections 6 and 24 of the U. P. General Clauses Act, 1904 shall apply as if it were an enactment repealed and re-enacted by an Uttar Pradesh Act. 
