Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act Further To Amend The Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine Act, 1951 It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object (1) The U. P. Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1974 was passed to provide for the constitution of a Faculty of Homoeopathic System of Medicine and for the reconstitution of the Board of Homoeopathic Medicine. Due to certain litigation, the constitution of the Faculty and the reconstitution of the Board could not be possible. It is therefore, considered necessary to amend the U. P. Homoeopathic Medicine Act, 1951 so as to provide that during the interim period, the State Government could nominate the members of the Boards so that the Board may start functioning at an early date. (2) It was also brought to the notice of the State Government that the Faculty could not effectively discharge its duties for want of adequate funds. It is. therefore, being provided that adequate funds shall be placed at the disposal of the Faculty by the Board each year. (3) Opportunity has also been availed to remove certain other minor lacunae in the Act. (4) This Bill is being introduced to give effect to the above proposals.
Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1975.
Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 2-9--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Incorporated In The Text At Appropriate Places.
Uttar Pradesh Homoeopathic Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1975_Section 10--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh All examinations held in March, 1975 by the Board of Homoeopathic Medicine, Uttar Pradesh in pursuance of Government Order No. 492/V-9-102-72, dated February 4, 1975 shall be deemed to be and always to have been valid, anything contained in the principal Act notwithstanding. 
