Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 in its application to Uttar Pradesh. IT IS hereby enacted in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on January 4, 1986.
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 39 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 hereinafter referred to as the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "39. Penalty for theft of energy:- (1) Whoever dishonestly abstracts, consumes, uses or draws, or abets or attempts such dishonest abstraction, consumption, use or drawal of, any energy- (a) otherwise than through a meter referred to in section 26; or (b) by tampering with such meter or its seals, or apparatus, or circuits; or (c) by obstructing or interfering in the functioning of such meter; or (d) by manipulating change of phase of the electric supply lines; or (e) by manipulating any meter, indicator or apparatus referred to in sub-section (7) of section 26; or (f) from a disconnected connection; or (g) by any other means whatsoever shall be punished with fine and shall also be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years : Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, used or drawn or abetted or attempted to be abstracted, consumed, used or drawn- (a) does not exceed 7.46 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be less than Rs. 500 and in the event of second or subsequent conviction the fine imposed shall not be less than Rs. 2,000; (b) exceeds 7.46 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be less than Rs. 2,000 and in the event of second or subsequent conviction the sentence shall be imprisonment for a term not less than 6 months with fine not less than Rs. 10,000. (2) the existence of any means for such abstraction, consumption, use or drawal shall be prima facie evidence of such dishonest abstraction, consumption, use or drawal of energy or, as the case may be, an attempt therefor. (3) without prejudice to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to search and seizure where a licensee or any person authorised by it has reason to believe that any offence under sub-section (1) has been, or is being or is about to be committed in any premises, vehicle, vessel or other place, he may with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, at any time :- (a) enter, inspect and search such premises, vehicle, vessel or other place and may use such minimum force as may be necessary for the purpose; (b) seize any means referred to in sub-section (2) which may be found in such premises, vehicle, vessel or other place; (c) require the owner, occupier or any other person incharge of such premises, vehicle, vessel or other place to produce any books of accounts or other documents or furnish such information as may, in his opinion, be useful for or relevant to any proceedings in respect of the offence under sub-section (1) ; (d) examine or seize any books of account or documents which in his opinion shall be useful for or relevant to, any proceedings in respect of the offence under sub-section (1) and allow the person from whose custody such bocks of accounts, or documents are seized to make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in his presence."
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For section 40 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "40.Penality for maliciously wasting energy or injuring work:- Whoever maliciously causes energy to be wasted or diverted or, with intent to cut on the supply or energy, cuts or injures, or attempts to cut or injure, any electric supply line or works, shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend to five thousand rupees and shall also be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years: Provided that in the event of second or subsequent conviction the sentence shall be imprisonment for a term not less than three months with fine not less than Rs. 500."
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh In section 44 of the principal Act, after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) abets or attempts any of the acts referred to in the preceding clauses;"
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 49-A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "49-B. Certain offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.-Any offence under section 39 or section 40 shall be cognizable and non-bailable within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973."
Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 6--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Indian Electricity (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Ordinance, 1986, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act as amended by the Ordinance referred to in sub-section (1), shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
