Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to amend the Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine Act, 1939, for certain purposes Whereas it is expedient to amend the Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine Act, 1939, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the fifth year of the Republic of India as follows :
Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Incorporated in U. P. Act X of 1939.
Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Incorporated in U. P. Act X of 1939.
Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 9 and 14 of the Principal Act the term of office of- (a) the members elected to the Board at the General Election immediately preceding the commencement of this Act; and (b) the chairman elected by such members consequent upon the said General Election, shall and be deemed to be for a period of five years.
Uttar Pradesh Indian Medicine (Amendment) Act, 1954_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that notwithstanding anything contained in Section 14 of the Principal Act as it existed prior to its amendment by this Act all acts done including orders made, action or proceedings taken, directions issued or jurisdiction exercised by the Board consisting of members and the Chairman referred to in Section 4 or by any member or Chairman elected in any casual vacancy thereafter or by any person acting under the direction of the said Board shall not be questioned merely on the ground that the term of office of the said members or the Chairman had, but for Section 4, and all such acts are hereby made and declared to be lawful and are confirmed as on and from the time of performance of such acts. 
