Indian Tolls (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1974_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh AN ACT to amend the Indian Tolls Act, 1851, in its application to Uttar Pradesh IT IS HEREBY enacted in the Twenty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Indian Tolls (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Indian Tolls (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1974. (2) It extends to the whole of Uttar Pradesh. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of April, 1974.
Indian Tolls (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 2 of the Indian Tolls Act, 1851, as amended in its application to Uttar Pradesh, hereinafter called the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely "2-A. Tolls on roads, and bridges made, maintained or repaired by the Corporation:- The provisions of section 2 shall apply to any road or bridge which has been, or shall hereafter be made, maintained or repaired at the expense of the Uttar Pradesh State Bridge Corporation Limited, a Government company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) as they apply to roads and bridges made or repaired at the expense of the State Government. 2-B. Powers of a Corporation to manage and collect tolls, etc.:- (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sections 2 and 2-A, and subject to any rules made under this Act, or to any general or special orders of the State Government, the State Government may authorise the Corporation to manage and collect all tolls levied upon any road or bridge which has been or shall hereafter be made, maintained or repaired at the expense of the Corporation, or the ownership, maintenance and repairs whereof has been or shall hereafter be transferred to the Corporation by the State Government. (2) Where the Corporation is authorized to manage and collect any tolls under sub-section (1), the State Government shall, at the beginning of each financial year, after due appropriation has been made by law, withdraw from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State an amount equivalent to the tolls so collected by the Corporation and deposited by it in the Government treasury in the preceding financial year, and pay the same to the Corporation, and such payment shall be an expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State. 2-C. Power of the State Government and the Corporation to lease and levy of tolls:- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 2, section 2-A or section 2-B the State Government or the Corporation as the case may be, may lease the right to collect the tolls levied under the said sections upon any road or bridge to any person by public auction or by private negotiations for a period not exceeding five years at any one time, on such teems and conditions as the State Government or the Corporation, as the case may be, may deem fit: Provided that the lessee shall be required to furnish such security for due fulfilment of the terms and conditions of the lease as the State Government or the Corporation, as the case may be, may direct (2) Where any sum payable by a lessee under a lease granted under sub-section (1) is due, then, in the case of State Government, such officer as may be authorized in that behalf by the State Government by general or special order, and in the case of the Corporation, the Managing Director thereof, may send a certificate to the Collector, mentioning the sum due from such lessee and requesting that such sum together with costs of the proceedings be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue. (3) The Collector on receiving the certificate shall proceed to recover the amount stated therein as an arrear of land revenue. (4) No suit for the recovery of any sum due aforesaid shall lie in the civil court against such lessee. 2-D. Powers of lessee and their agents:- All persons employed by the Corporation in the management and collection of tolls levied under section 2 and section 2-A and where the right to collect toll has been leased under section 2-C, me lessee and every person appointed by the lessee as his agent for the purpose of collection of such tolls shall be deemed within the meaning of section S to be an officer appointed to collect the tolls and shall, except as otherwise provided, exercise all the powers and be subject to all the obligations and liabilities attaching persons so appointed, including the obligation to exhibit a table of toll and statement of penalties required by section 7. 2-E. Liability to issue receipt:- The lessee or any person collecting; the toll on his behalf shall issue a receipt therefor duly signed by him in such form and manner as may be prescribed by rules. 2-F. General penalty:- Any person guilty of any act or omission in contravention of the provisions of this Act, for which no other punishment is provided in this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Indian Tolls (Uttar Pradesh Amendment) Act, 1974_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "9. (1) The State Government may make rules to carry out the Power to make purposes of this Act rules, (2) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days extending in its one session or more than one successive sessions, and shall unless some later date is appointed, take effect from the date of their publication in the Gazette, subject to such modifications or annulments as the two Houses of the Legislature may during the said period agree to make, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder." 
