Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section Preamble--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh An Act to provide for the removal of doubts in respect of certain provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 and to validate certain acts and proceedings thereunder It is hereby enacted in the Forty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows : Statement of Object Clause (d) of Section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development Act, 1976 defines the expression 'industrial development area' to mean an area declared as such by the State Government by notification. Section 3 of the said Act provides for the constitution of an authority for an industrial development area. In exercise of the powers thereunder the Sataharia Industrial Development Authority, Gorakhpur Industrial Development Authority and the Greater New Okhala Industrial Development Authority were constituted by the State Government on November 30,1989, November 30, 1989 and January 28, 1991 respectively. The notification constituting the Greater New Okhala Development Authority was challenged in a writ petition filed in the Allahabad High Court on the ground that the said clause (d) is merely a definition clause and not a substantive provision, as such, the Government has no power to declare an industrial development area thereunder. Besides, the said clause (d) of Section 2 is not mentioned in the notification constituting the industrial development area. It was apprehended that if the notification is declared invalid by the Allahabad High Court, all the proceedings with respect to the constitution of Greater New Okhla Industrial Development Authority would be in jeopardy and the planned industrial development of the State would be adversely affected. In order to avoid this situation, it was considered necessary to validate the notifications of the said Industrial Development Authorities and to clarify that the said clause (d) is a substantive provision by an enactment. 2. Since the State Legislature was not in session and immediate legislative action in the matter was necessary, the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Ordinance, 1991 (U. P. Ordinance No. 33 of 1991) was promulgated by the Governor on July 19, 1991. 3. This Bill is introduced to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section 1--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991. (2) Section 2, 3 and 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on July 19, 1991 and the remaining provisions shall come into force at once.
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section 2--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh For the removal of doubts it hereby declared that the Removal provisions of claused (d) of section 2 of the Uttar Pradesh of doubts Industrial Area Development Act 1976, herein after referred to as the principal Act empower and shall be deemed always to have empowered, the State Government to declare any area as industrial development area.
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section 3--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The area specified in the respective Schedule to Validation Government's notifications on :- (a) 8452 Bha. U. XVIII-11-223 BhA-88 Dated November 30, 1989; (b) 8425(1) B.U. XVIII-11-233 BhA-88, Dated November 30, 1989; and (c) 7436-Bha. U. XVIII-11-107-BhA-85, Dated January 28, 1991 shall be deemed to be, and always to have been, declared by the State Government as industrial development areas under clause (d) of section 2 of the principal Act and the said notification shall be, and be deemed always to have been valid and lawful as if the provisions of this Act where in force at all material times.
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section 4--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh The provisions of this Act shall have effect not with standing anything to the contained in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or authority.
Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Act, 1991_Section 5--> State(s): Uttar Pradesh (1) The Uttar Pradesh Industrial Area Development (Removal of Doubts and Validation) Ordinance, 1991, is hereby repealed. (2) Not with standing such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance referred join sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act as if the provisions of this Act were in force at all material times. 
