West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal 1 An Act to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, in its application to West Bengal and The Land Acquisition (West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1997, and to validate the action taken thereto. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Act 1 of 1894), in its application to West Bengal, and The Land Acquisition (West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1997 (West Ben. Act VII of 1997), and to validate the action taken thereto and in the manner hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:- Published in the Kolkata Gazette, Extra-ordinary, Part III, No. 722-L, dated 29th May, 2012.
West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 1st day of April, 1997.
West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), shall, in its application to West Bengal, be amended for the purpose and in the manner hereinafter provided. (2) In sub-section (3B) of section 9 of the principal Act, to the second proviso, the following proviso shall be added:- "Provided also that in respect of acquisition of land made in accordance with the provisions of law in force prior to coming into force of the Land Acquisition (West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1997 (West Ben. Act VII of 1997) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act) and subsequently notice issued and published under sub-section (la) of section 4 of the West Bengal Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948 (West Ben. Act II of 1948), as re-enacted by the West Bengal Land (Requisition and Acquisition) Re-enacting Act, 1977 (West Ben. Act XV of 1977), but lapsed, such notice shall be deemed to be valid and the process of acquisition shall be concluded within the British Calendar year 2015 in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3B) of this section.". (3) In section 11A of the principal Act, in the second proviso, for the words, figure, letter and brackets "and sub-section (3B),", the words, figure, letter and brackets "and sub-section (3B) except cases mentioned in the third proviso," shall be substituted.
West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal The Land Acquisition (West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1997, for sub-section (2) of section 1, the following sub-section shall be substituted:- "(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1997.".
West Bengal Land Acquisition Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority,- (i) the notices issued under the principal Act as amended by section 2 above, or (ii) the notices issued under the principal Act as amended by section 3 above, as the case may be, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been validly issued in accordance with the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Act 1 of 1894), as amended by the said Act and this Act, and accordingly- (a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for claiming compensation; (b) no court or other authority shall enforce any decree or order directing payment of compensation; (c) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been taken or done under the principal Act shall be deemed to be, and to have always been for all purposes, as validly and effectively taken or done as if the said amendments had been in force at all material time. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1) of this section shall be construed as preventing any person from claiming compensation in accordance with the provisions of section 23, read with first proviso to sub-section (3B) of section 9, of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
