National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to prohibit unauthorised collection in West Bengal for the National Defence Fund. WHEREAS it is necessary to prohibit unauthorised collection in West Bengal for the National Defence Fund; It is hereby enacted in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962 (2) It extends to the whole of West Bengal.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) "collection" means collection in West Bengal of any money or valuable thing; (2) "the Fund" means the National Defence Fund created by the Central Government for purposes relating to the defence of India.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal No collection shall be made for the fund except by persons or institutions duly authorised by the State Government by order made in this behalf or by their authorised agents: Provided that the State Government may, by order, exempt any person or institution or class of persons or institutions from the provisions of this section.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal No collection shall be made expect in accordance with such procedure and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf: Provided that the State Government may, by order, grant exemption to any person or institution from the provisions of this section.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal No person or institution not specially authorised in this behalf by the State Government or by any officer empowered by the State Government, shall make any street collection for the fund.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal All collection for the fund made by persons or institutions authorised or exempted under section 3 or authorised under section 5 shall be made over by the persons or institutions making the collections to such officers, other persons or Banks as may be specified by the State Government by order made in this behalf.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal Any person making or aiding in any collection for the fund except in accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal An offence punishable under section 7 shall be cognizable.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 9--> State(s): West Bengal Nothing in this Act shall affect contributions voluntarily made over or remitted to any person in authority, or any Bank authorised by the Central Government or the State Government to receive such contributions.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 10--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government may make rules to carry out purposes of this Act.
National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Act, 1962_Section 11--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Ordinance, 1962, is hereby repealed. (2) Anything done or any action taken under the National Defence Fund (West Bengal Collection) Ordinance, 1962, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 11th day of November, 1962. 
