West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the prevention of unauthorised sale of Nationalised Text-Books and unauthorised production and publication of keys of such Nationalised Text-Books. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the prevention of unauthorised sale of Nationalised Text-Books and unauthorised production and publication of keys of such Nationalised Text-Books, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-eighth Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977. (2) It extends to the whole of West Bengal.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "Director" means the Director of Public Instruction, Government of West Bengal and includes the Director of Primary Education, Government of West Bengal and also any other officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Schools, as may be appointed by the State Government, by notification published in the Official Gazette, for discharging any of the functions of the Director under this Act; (b) "key" includes any help book, notebook, meaning book, solution, made-easy, suggestion, hint, comment, answer or annotation of a Nationalised Text-Book; (c) "Nationalised Text-Book" means any book prescribed for studies in schools which is published under the authority of the State Government and declared as such by notification issued by the State Government.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall sell any Nationalised Text-Book except under and in accordance with an authority issued by the Director or at a price higher than that fixed by the State Government and no person shall sell any such Nationalised Text-Book as is meant for free distribution.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 3A--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall possess any Nationalised Text-Book except under and in accordance with an authority issued by the Director. Section 3A was inserted by s. 3 of the West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books (Amendment) Act. 1983 (West Ben. Act XXVIII of 1983).
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall print or publish any Nationalised Text-Book except under and in accordance with an authority issued by the Director.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall print, publish, produce or sell any key of a Nationalised Text-Book without the prior approval in writing of the State Government.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of section 3, 3A, 4 or 5 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both. (2) A court taking cognizance of any offence punishable under this section may order confiscation of any stock of books in respect of which the offence has been committed. (3) An offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly; Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the office has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation - For the purposes of this section,- (a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Director for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 9--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Act, 1977_Section 10--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Ordinance, 1976, is hereby repealed. (2) Anything done or any action taken under the West Bengal Nationalised Text-Books Ordinance, 1976, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 30th day of December, 1976. 
