West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to prohibit smoking in show houses and public halls in West Bengal. WHEREAS it is expedient to prohibit smoking in show houses and public halls in West Bengal; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950. (2) It extends to the whole of West Bengal. (3) It shall come into 1 force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. This Act came into force on the 1st December, 1950, vide notification No. PH. 2E62/2R-13/50, dated the 24th November. 1950, published in the Calcutta Gazette, Extraordinary of 1950
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act,- (a) "show house" means any building, or any roofed and enclosed structure, used ordinarily or occasionally for die demonstration or exhibition to the public, whether on payment or otherwise, of cinematographic films, dramatical, pantomime, or musical performances, dances, physical feats of human beings or animals, conjuring tricks or sleights of hand, boxing, wrestling, skating, billiards or table-tennis competitions, or any other indoor amusement or diversion whatsover; (b) "public hall" means a chamber or hall used ordinarily or occasionally as a place of public assembly or meeting.
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal Whoever smokes, during a demonstration, exhibition or meeting, in any part of a show house or public hall reserved for the audience or the spectators shall be punishable with fine which for a first offence may extend to twenty-five rupees and for a second of subsequent offence to one hundred rupees.
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal Any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector may arrest without warrant any person committing in his presence an offence under section 3.
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every person responsible for the management of a demonstration or exhibition in a show house and every person who controls the deliberations of a public assembly or meeting in a public hall, shall bring to the notice of the audience or the spectators, by posting notices prominently or by exhibiting slides, that any person smoking during a demonstration, exhibition or meeting in any part of such show house or public hall reserved for the audience or spectators shall be liable to arrest without warrant and to fine. (2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
West Bengal Prohibition of Smoking in Show Houses and Public Halls Act, 1950_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government or any officer of the State Government authorised in this behalf may, by general or special order in writing, direct that the provisions of this Act shall not apply in respect of any show house or public hall or any demonstration, exhibition or public meeting therein. 
