Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to make better provision for the control, management and maintenance of the institution known as the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha at Kamarpukur, Hooghly, with a view to promoting education and to take over for that purpose for a limited period the management of all the property belonging to the said institution or held for the benefit thereof. Whereas it is expedient in the public interest to make better provision for the control, management and maintenance of the institution known as the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha at Kamarpukur, Hooghly, with a view to promoting education and to take over for that purpose for a limited period the management of all the property belonging to the said institution or held for the benefit thereof; It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal This Act may be called the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973.
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "appointed day" means the date of the order made under section 3; (b) "the institution" means the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha at Kamarpukur, Hooghly, and includes all lecture rooms, laboratories, libraries, hostels and boarding houses used in connection with or as accessories to or adjuncts of the said Mahapitha.
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government may, by an order in writing, take over the management and control of the institution.
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal With effect from the appointed day and for a period of 2 [eight years] thereafter the Administrator appointed under section 6 shall have all the powers of management and control in relation to the institution together with- (a) all lands thereof and appurtenant thereto and all buildings, erections and fixtures on such lands. (b) all furniture, equipments, stores, moneys, and other assets of the institution, and (c) all other properties of the institution which immediately before the appointed day vested in the Anur Jana Shiksha Samsad, a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. Section 4 was substituted for the original by s. 2 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1973 (West Ben, Act XXVII of 1973). The words "four years" were first substituted for the words "two years" by s. 2 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1975 (West Ben. Act X of 1975). Then, the words "six. years" were substituted for the words "four years" by s. 2 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1977 (West Ben. Act III of 1977). Finally. The words within the square brackets were substituted for the words "six years" by s. 2 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act VII of 1979).
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal All properties which remain under the management and control of the State Government under this Act shall be used for the purposes for which they were being used immediately before the appointed day and upon the expiry of the period of 2 [eight years] the management and control of such properties shall revert to the Anur Jana Shiksha Samsad. Section 5 was substituted for the original by s. 3 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1973 (West Ben. Act XXVII of 1973). The words "four years" were first substituted for the words "two years" by s. 3 of the Sri Ramkrishnn Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (Amendment) Act, 1975 (West Ben. Act X of 1975). Then, the words six yeas" were substituted for the words "four years" by s. 3 of the Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha (A mendment) Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act VII of 1977).
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government shall, by an order in writing, appoint an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Collector or a lecturer of not less than five years' standing in any College affiliated either to the Calcutta or to the Burdwan University (hereinafter referred to as the Administrator) for managing the institution in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act the State Government may take such steps or issue such orders not inconsistent with this Act as may be necessary for the removal of the difficulty.
Sri Ramkrishna Sarada Vidya Mahapitha Act, 1973_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) the management of the institution; (b) the terms and conditions of service of the Administrator and other persons employed in the institution. (3) Until such rules are made under clause (b) of sub-section (2), persons employed in the institution shall continue to remain under the terms and conditions of service in force immediately before the appointed day. 
