West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal Statement of Object To combat the situation of rising process of some essential foodstuffs, the State Government have adopted measures to give relief to the people as also maintaining supplies of essential commodities and securing their equitable distribution and availability at fair prices. It appears that in spite of State Government's best efforts, the rise of prices of essential foodstuffs could not be checked, rather there is a gradual increasing trend. In the circumstances, to check gradual increasing trend of rising process of some essential foodstuffs, it has become necessary and expedient to amend the West Bengal Anti-profiteering Act, 1958 (West Ben. Act XXIV of 1958) (hereinafter referred as the said Act), inter-alia, with a view to- (a) intensifying drive against dealer, for the purpose of preventing the profiteering of scheduled articles by storing them; (b) checking the increasing price trend of scheduled articles, it has been proposed to authorized an Officer to direct the dealer to sell the scheduled articles as per the provision contained in the said Act; (c) imposing penalty on any dealer, if he fails to comply with the order made under the said Act. The punishment has also been increased upto two years by amending section 8 of the said Act; (d) empowering the court to reduce the punishment on the ground of good and sufficient reason. 2. The Bill has been framed with the above objects in view. 3. There is no expenditure involved in giving effect to the Provision of this Bill. [Vide statement of Objects and Reasons printed in the Kolkata Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV, dated March 2, 2010]
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In section 2 of the West Bengal Anti-profiteering Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in clause (a), after the word "wholesaler", the word "storage" shall be inserted; (2) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted:- (ff) "storager" means any person who keeps in store on his own account or an account of anyone else, and not for own consumption, any scheduled article.'.
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted :- "3A. Dealer to sell at the direction of authorised officer:- Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 a dealer shall sell the scheduled article at such price, within, such time and to such person as the authorised Officer of the State Government, by order, direct.".
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted :- "8. Penalty for contravention of section 3A or section 6 of section 7:- Any dealer who fails to comply with the order made under section 3A or fails to comply with any of the provisions of section 6 or with a requisition issued thereunder or obstructs any officer in the exercise of his powers under section 7 shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years but shall not be less than three months: Provided that the Court on being, satisfied that, good and sufficient reasons have been made out may reduce the minimum punishment for three months to one month.".
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, after the word "wholesaler", the word "storager" shall be inserted.
West Bengal Anti-profiteering (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, after the word "wholesaler'", the word "storage" shall be inserted. 
