West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the imposition and levy of additional tax and onetime tax on motor vehicles in the State of West Bengal. WHEREAS it is necessary, in the public interest, to provide for the imposition and levy of additional tax and one-time tax on motor vehicles in the State of West Bengal; It is hereby enacted in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows :-
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989. (2) It extends to the whole of West Bengal. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st April, 1989.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [In this Act] unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "additional tax" means the tax imposed under this Act and leviable in respect of motor vehicles as shown in Schedule I; 2 [(1a) "ambulance or clinic van" means an omnibus or motor vehicle adapted to be used as such of carrying patients or other medical purpose;] 3 [(1b) "autorickshaw" means a motor vehicle having three wheels constructed or adopted and used to carry not more than three passengers for hire or reward excluding the driver. Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, a motor vehicle having three wheels constructed or adopted and used to carry more than three passengers but not more than twelve passengers for hire or reward excluding the driver shall not be treated as autorickshaw. Such motor vehicle shall be regarded as motorcab or maxicab, considering its seating capacity under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988);] (b) "bus of a company" means the bus or omnibus registered as a private service vehicle or as a contract carriage and owned by a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or by any firm (proprietorship or partnership) or any society or any corporate body or any trust or any educational institution or any organisation, whether registered or not: Provided that a motor vehicle not registered in the name of any individual shall be deemed to be owned by a company, firm, society, corporate body, trust, educational institution or organisation; 4 [(b1) "crane" means any motor vehicle fitted with a mechanical crane of a designed capacity and is capable of being used for touring vehicles or lifting materials, and includes a breakdown van;] (c) "Deluxe bus" means an omnibus as conforms to the specifications and standards laid down for tourist vehicles under 5 [the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988),] not covered by any tourist permit (All Bengal or All India), or any other bus that may be specified as such by the State Government from time to time; 6 [(d) "Express bus" means an omnibus plying under a contract carriage permit or stage carriage permit or special stage carriage permit with a limited or selected number of stages; (d1) "Limited Service bus" means an omnibus plying under a stage carriage permit and designated as limited service bus by the permit issuing authority;] 7 [(d2) "life-time tax" means the tax imposed on motor cycle or motor cycle combination under the Act and leviable for the entire lifetime of such motor cycle or motor cycle combination, as the case may be;] (e) "motor car" means any motor vehicle other than a transport vehicle, omnibus, road-roller, tractor, motor-cycle 8 [or invalid carriage and includes battery operated motor car]; (f) "motor cycle" means a motor cycle as defined in 9 [the 10 [ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and includes battery operated motor cycle] (59 of 1988) and includes battery operated motor cycle];] (g) "motor vehicle" means the motor vehicle as defined in 11 [the 12 [ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and includes battery operated motor vehicles] and includes battery operated motor cycle];] 13 [(g1) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;] (h) "omnibus" means an omnibus as defined in 14 [the 15 [ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and includes battery operated motor vehicles] and includes battery operated omnibus];] 16 [(i) "one-time tax" means the tax imposed under the Act- (A) on motor cycle or motor cycle combination for a period of fifteen years from the date of its registration before the commencement of the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003 (West Ben. Act XX of 2003); and (B) on motor car and omnibus as specified in Schedule IV for a period of five years from the date of its registration;] (j) "permit" means the permit as defined in 17 [the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;] (k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (l) "Taxing Officer" means a Taxing Officer as defined in the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979); (m) "Tourist bus" means a bus or an omnibus registered or plying as a contract carriage and covered by a tourist permit under 18 [the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,] and includes a tourist omnibus; (n) "tractor" means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any load (other than equipment used for the purpose of propulsion), but does not include a road-roller 19 [ * * * ]; (o) "trailer" means any vehicle drawn or intended to be drawn by a motor vehicle; (p) all other words and expressions used in this Act but not defined 20 [shall have the same meaning as in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.] Subs, for (1) In this Act by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Ins. by ibid (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 2(1) (w.e.f. 22.7.1999). Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1.1.2003). Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939)," by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 2(2) (w.e.f. 22.7.1999) for existing clause (d). Before substitution, it stood as under: '(d) "Express bus" means an omnibus plying under a contract carriage permit, or under a stage-carriage permit or special stage carriage permit with a limited or .Selected number of stages commonly known as Express bus or Limited Service bus;'. Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004), for existing clause (d2). Before substitution it was inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2(a) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003) as under: '(62) "life-time tax" means the tax imposed under this- Act and leviable in respect of, motor vehicles as shown in Schedule III;'. Subs, for "or invalid carriage" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 2(1). Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939;" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "[ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988" Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939;" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "[ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988" Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004). Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939;" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "[ Motor Vehicles Act, 1988" Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing clause (i). Before substitution it was earlier substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on-Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2(b) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003) and stood as under: (i) "one-time tax" means the tax imposed under this Act and leviable in respect of motor vehicles as shown in Schedule IV;' Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939;" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Subs, for "the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939;" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). The words "or a tractor used solely for agricultural purposes" omitted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Subs, for "shall have same meaning as in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939." by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, (w.e.f. 25.11.1991).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every owner of a registered motor vehicle or every person, who owns or keeps in his possession or control any motor vehicle as described in Schedule I, shall pay the additional tax at the rate specified therein against such vehicle : Provided that in the case of a motor vehicle registered outside West Bengal, whether temporarily 1 [under section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,] or otherwise and which is used or kept for use in West Bengal temporarily, additional tax shall be payable for every week or part thereof for which the motor vehicle is so used or kept for use in West Bengal, at the rate of one fifty-second part of the additional tax payable for the year. 2 [(1A)A motor vehicle registered as an omnibus, or public service vehicle other than a stage carriage, or otherwise, in respect of which no permit has been granted under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rates specified in item (0 of serial 1 under the heading "B. Motor vehicles (for carrying passengers) plying for hire." in Schedule I to this Act.] 3 [(2) (a) A motor car or omnibus registered as a non-transport vehicle in any State other than West Bengal, and plying in West Bengal on any special occasion, seasonal business or particular temporary need, shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rate specified under the heading "A. Motor vehicles for carrying passengers not plying for hire." in Schedule I. (b) An omnibus registered as a private service vehicle in any State, other than West Bengal, and plying in West Bengal under a temporary permit on any special occasion, seasonal business or particular temporary need, shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rate specified under the heading "A. Motor vehicles for carrying passengers not plying for hire." in Schedule I.] 4 [(c) Where a transport vehicle registered in any State other than West Bengal is found to be plying within West Bengal without valid permit or without payment of additional tax payable under this Act, the duration of such plying shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this section or elsewhere in this Act, be reckoned as the duration for a period of seventeen weeks retrospectively from the date of interception and such transport vehicle shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rates specified in item (c) of serial No. 4 under the sub-heading "B. Vehicles for carrying passengers for hire or reward." or, as the case may be, in serial No. 2 under the sub-heading "C. Goods carriages and those owned by motor training schools", of heading "Description of Motor Vehicles and Rate of Additional Tax", in Schedule I, for a period of seventeen weeks retrospectively from the date of every interception of the transport vehicle together with a fine of an equivalent sum.] 5 [(d) Where motor vehicles registered as stage carriages in any State other than West Bengal have been paying only the tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), on change of address, and now registration mark has been assigned to such motor vehicles by the registering authority of West Bengal, such motor vehicles shall not be required to pay any additional tax under this Act: Provided that for so long as the registration numbers of such motor vehicles are not changed, such motor vehicles for which additional tax is payable, shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rates specified for such categories of motor vehicles in Schedule I.] 6 [(e) Where vehicles, not being transport vehicles registered outside West Bengal but kept for any temporary period, are found to be plying in West Bengal without paying the additional tax under this Act while continuing to have their registration outside West Bengal, such vehicles shall be liable to pay the additional tax at the rates specified under the heading "A. Motor vehicles for carrying passengers not plying for hire;" in Schedule I. In every such case, the additional tax shall be realised for a period of one year preceding the date of interception of the vehicle together with a fine of an equivalent sum, in addition to the realisation of such tax for a further period of one year from the date of interception of the vehicle without fine. (f) If the registered owner of a motor vehicle, which is registered outside West Bengal and which has been brought to West Bengal, approaches a registering authority of West Bengal for making payment of tax under this Act or for recording change of address or for assignment of new registration mark, such owner shall be asked to produce a convincing document regarding arrival of the vehicle in West Bengal, failing which the duration of stay of such motor vehicle after its arrival in West Bengal shall be reckoned as the duration for a period of more than one year and, in such case, additional tax together with fine shall be realised at the rate and in the manner provided in clause (e) : Provided that on submission of any convincing document regarding arrival of the motor vehicle in West Bengal, additional tax shall be realised from the date of arrival of such motor vehicle together with fine at the rate provided in section 23.] (3) The State Government may exempt any motor vehicle if it thinks it necessary, and expedient so to do, and may specially exempt any motor vehicle belonging to the Government of India or any State transport undertaking carried on by the State Government or any motor vehicle which is exempted from the provisions of the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979. Subs, for "under section 25 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939," by Ibid, (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 3(1) (w.e.f. 22.7.1999). Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 3 for existing sub-section (2). Before substitution, it stood as under: "(2) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette from time to time, increase the rate of tax specified in Schedule I.". Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 3 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing clause (c). Before substitution it was inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 3(2) (w.e.f. 8.10.1990) as under: "(c) Where transport vehicles registered in any State other than West Bengal are found to be plying within West Bengal without valid permit or without payment of additional tax payable under this Act, the duration of such plying shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this section or elsewhere in this Act, be reckoned as the duration for a period of seventeen weeks retrospectively from the date of interception and such transport vehicles shall be liable to pay additional tax at the rates specified in item (f) of serial 2 under the heading "B. Motor vehicles (for carrying passengers) plying for hire." in Schedule I for a period of seventeen weeks retrospectively from the date of every interception of the transport vehicle together with a fine of an equivalent sum.". Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 3(2) (w.e.f. 24.10.1989). Clauses (e) and (l) ins. by ibid, (w.e.f. 11.6.1991).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal Every owner of a motor vehicle as described in Schedule I and registered in any State other than West Bengal and plying in West Bengal shall pay the additional tax at the rate specified in Schedule I, notwithstanding anything contained in any inter-State Reciprocal Transport Agreement1 [under sub-section (6) of section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.] Subs, for "under section (3B) of section 63 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939", by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every owner of a motor vehicle registered in West Bengal or on change of address to West Bengal, who is liable to pay additional tax under section 3, shall pay such tax at the rate specified in Schedule I, to the Taxing Officer having jurisdiction. (2) In the case of motor vehicle temporarily registered 1 [under section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988),] which is subject to additional tax under section 3, shall pay only one-twelfth of such tax payable for the year in respect of such vehicle. (3) The additional tax payable under section 3 shall be paid for the year and in advance by the person liable to pay such tax within such period as may be determined by the Taxing Officer or by the Stage Government by order from time to time, provided that in the case of transport vehicles, the Taxing Officer shall allow payment of additional tax 2 [for periods of three months] in the manner determined by him. Such tax shall not exceed a quarter of the tax payable for the year. A rebate of five per cent, shall be allowed if the tax is paid for the year in advance. (4) The additional tax as leviable under section 4 shall be realised by the permit issuing authority while granting the permit for areas falling within West Bengal and shall endorse the fact of having realised the due additional tax on the permit and remit the proceeds to the State Transport Authority, West Bengal, by a Bank Draft on any Nationalised Bank having its branch in Calcutta. (5) The additional tax as leviable under section 3 and section 4 shall be computed on the basis of the annual rate of tax as shown in Schedule I and such tax for any period of every week or any part thereof shall be one-fifty second of the annual additional tax. Subs, for "under section 25 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939)," by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 5(1) (w.e.f. 25.11.1991). Subs, for "for quarterly periods of three calendar months" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 5(2) (w.e.f. 25.11.1991).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal The additional tax leviable under section 4 shall be realised by the authority where under any law for the time being in force such authority has to countersign the permit, and in such case the tax shall be leviable for the entire duration for which the counter-signature subsists.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal The additional tax leviable under section 4 shall be computed on an annual basis and shall be payable to the authority concerned before the date on which the tax becomes payable, that is, the date on which the validity of the counter-signature commences.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Whenever a motor vehicle of any description is converted to a motor vehicle of other description referred to in Schedule I, the motor vehicle as so converted shall be subject to additional tax as leviable under this Act with effect from the date on which such conversion takes place. (2) Whenever a motor vehicle ceases to be a motor vehicle of any description referred to in Schedule I, such portion of the additional tax shall be refundable on claim within fifteen days of such conversion as may seem to the taxing authority to be refundable, calculation being made on the basis of the period for which the vehicle bore the description of the motor vehicle referred to in Schedule I to come within the purview of additional tax under this Act. (3) No additional tax under this Act shall be payable in respect of a motor vehicle for the period for which such additional tax has already been paid by any person.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 9--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...] Omitted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15.9.2003). Before omission section 9 stood as under: "9. One-time tax:- (1) A one-time tax in lieu of annual tax as leviable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), shall be leviable on motor cycles as shown in Schedule II at the rate specified therein. (2) With effect from the date of commencement of this Act, the owner of any motor cycle being less than fifteen years old, when applying for first registration or assignment of fresh registration mark or change of address on removal of the motor cycle from another State other than West Bengal, shall pay one-time tax as specified in Schedule II in lieu of any tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979). (3) The owner of any motor cycle being less than fifteen years old, which is already registered in West Bengal and the tax in respect of which is being paid annually under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, shall, from the date of commencement of this Act, pay one-time tax at the rate specified in Schedule II in lieu of the annual tax under that Act on the expiry of the period for which the annual tax under that Act has been paid. (4) The owner of any motor cycle of the description referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), which is more than fifteen years old, shall pay the annual tax, in lieu of one-time tax, under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979. (5) The State Government may require the manufacturer or the dealer of motor cycles to furnish to it the names and addresses of the purchasers of motor cycles with effect from such date as may be determined by the State Government by notification published in the Official Gazette. (6) If one-time tax in respect of a motor cycle has already been paid under subsection (2) or sub-section (3), and if the said motor cycle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of such motor cycle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule II.".
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 9A--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [2 [(1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the 3 [owner of any motor cycle other than battery operated motor cycle,] other than battery operated motor cycle,] being less than fifteen years old, when applying for first registration, or assignment of fresh registration mark, or change of address on removal of 4 [such motor cycle] from a State other than the State of West Bengal, on or after the date of coming into force of the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, shall pay life-time tax as specified in Schedule III in lieu of tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), and under this Act: 5 [Provided that the owner of a motor cycle registered after the 25th day of November, 1991, shall be liable to pay the difference of the rate of life-time tax payable as specified in Schedule III, and the one-time tax already paid, and if the difference amount is not paid within such period as may be notified by the State Government, a penalty at the rate specified under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10, shall be charged : Provided further the owner of that a motor cycle registered before the 25th day of November 1991, shall continue to pay the annual rate of tax as payable under the provisions of the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979. 6 [(2) If life-time tax 7 [in respect of a motor cycle other than battery operated motor cycle] other than battery operated motor cycle] has already been paid under sub-section (1) and the said motor cycle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or the registration of the same has been cancelled or it is destroyed or rendered permanently incapable of being used under section 55 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988), the owner of the said motor cycle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule III.]] 8 [(3) No further tax need be paid under this Act, or the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), for such motor cycle, once such life-time tax or the difference of tax has been paid under sub-section (1). (4) Where a Taxing Officer is satisfied, that 9 [the owner of a motor cycle other than battery operated motor cycle,] other than battery operated motor cycle,] has paid the one-time tax or the life-time tax but the vehicle has become temporarily unusable and that the certificate of registration and the tax token under section 14 of the Act have been duly surrendered or that 10 [such motor cycle] has not been used or kept for use for a complete calender month, he shall, on claim by the owner of 11 [such motor cycle], refund or remit for each such calendar month 1/360th of the life-time tax or 1/180th of the one-time tax, as the case may be, for such motor cycle.] Substituted, by ibid, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15.9.2003) for existing section 9A. Before substitution it was inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 6 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991) as under: "9A. Owner of motor cycle to pay one-time tax at other rate:- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the owner of any motor cycle being less than fifteen years old, when applying for first registration or assignment of fresh registration mark or change of address on removal of the motor cycle from another State, other than West Bengal, on or after the date of coming into force of the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, shall pay one-time tax as specified in Schedule III in lieu of any tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), or under this Act. (2) The owner of any motor cycle in respect of which one-time tax has already been paid under this Act before or after the coming into force of the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1992, shall pay the annual tax on the expiry of the period for which one-time tax has already been paid, in lieu of one-time tax, under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979. (3) If one-time tax in respect of a motor cycle has already been paid under subsection (1) and if the said motor cycle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of the said motor cycle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule III.". Substituted for "Owner of motor cycle" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 3(1). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "[owner of any motor cycle" Substituted for "owner of any motor cycle" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 3(2). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 4(1) (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing first proviso. Before substitution it stood as under: "Provided that the owner of a motor cycle registered after the 25th day of November, 1999 shall be liable to pay the difference of the rate of life-time tax payable and the one-time tax already paid, within such period as specified in Schedule III and if the difference amount is not paid within the date to be notified by the State Government, a penalty at the rate of 100 per cent of the difference amount payable shall be charged:". Substituted by ibid, s. 4(2) (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing sub-section (2). Before substitution it stood as under: "(2) If life-time tax in respect of a motor cycle has already been paid under sub-section (1) and if the said motor cycle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of the said motor cycle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule III.". Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "7[in respect of a motor cycle" Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 4(3) (w.e.f. 9.6.2004). Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008 previous text was:- "9[the owner of a motor cycle" Substituted for "the motor cycle" by ibid. Substituted for "the motor cycle" by ibid.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 9AA--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) The owner of any battery operated motor cycle or motor cycle combination as described in Part I of Schedule V, shall pay a life-time tax at the rate specified therein against such motor cycle or motor cycle combination. (2) If such life-time tax in respect of a battery operated motor cycle or motor cycle combination has already been paid under the provision of subsection (1) and the said battery operated motor cycle or motor cycle combination is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of such battery operated motor cycle or motor cycle combination shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule V. (3) The life-time tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid for the year for which it is due and the mode of payment shall be such as is laid down in section 10.] Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 9B--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [2 [(1) A one-time tax for a period of five years, in lieu of annual tax leviable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, and this Act, shall be leviable on 3 [motor cars and. omnibuses other than battery operated motor cars and omnibuses,] not being transport vehicles, as specified in Part I of Schedule IV, registered and used for non-transport purposes only, 4 [at the rates specified in item A (for first time registration only), and in item B, of Part I of the said Schedule]. (2) With effect from the date of coming into force of the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, the 5 [owner of any motor vehicle other than battery operated motor vehicle,] being less than ten years old, when applying for first registration or assignment of fresh registration mark or change of address on removal of 6 [such motor vehicle] from another State, shall pay one-time tax at the rates specified in Part I of Schedule IV for a period of five years, in lieu of annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979), and this Act. (3) The 7 [owner of any motor vehicle other than battery operated motor vehicle,] being less than ten years old, which is already registered in West Bengal and the annual tax in respect of which is being paid under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, and this Act, shall, from the date of commencement of the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, pay one-time tax for a period of five years, at the rate specified in Part I of Schedule IV, in lieu of annual tax under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, and this Act, on the expiry of the period for which the annual tax as aforesaid has been paid : 8 [ * * * ] (4) The owner of any motor vehicle of the description referred to in sub section (2) or sub-section (3), which is more than ten years old, shall pay annual tax, and not one-time tax, under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, and this Act. 9 [(5) (a) If one-time tax in respect of 10 [a motor vehicle other than battery operated motor vehicle] has already been paid under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, and if the said motor vehicle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or the registration of the same has been cancelled or it is destroyed or rendered permanently incapable of being used under section 55 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988), the owner of the said motor vehicle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule IV. (b) Where a Taxing Officer is satisfied that any such motor vehicle for which one-time tax has been paid and that it has become temporarily unusable and the certificate of registration along with the tax token under section 14 have been surrendered or that such motor vehicle has not been used or kept for use for a complete calendar month, he shall, on claim by the owner of the motor vehicle, refund or remit for each such calendar month in respect of such motor vehicle 1 /60th of the one-time tax for such motor vehicle.] (6) The one-time tax payable under sub-section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) shall be paid for the years for which it is due and the mode of payment shall be such as is laid down in section 10. (7) The State Government may require the manufacturer or the 11 [dealer of motor vehicles other than battery operated motor vehicles] to furnish to it the names and addresses of the purchasers 12 [of such motor vehicles] and also the prices at which 13 [such motor vehicles] have been sold to the purchasers with effect from such date as may be appointed by the State Government by notification published in the Official Gazette. (8) Every 14 [owner of a motor vehicle other than battery operated motor vehicle,] registered under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, and every person who owns, or keeps in his possession or under his control, any such motor vehicle, shall in addition to the one-time tax payable under sub-section (1), sub-section (2), or sub-section (3), pay a special tax at the rate specified in Part I of Schedule IV. if such motor vehicle is air-conditioned.] Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 4 (w.e.f. 22.7.1999). Substituted for "motor cars, omnibuses, etc." by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 5(1). Substituted for "motor cars and omnibuses," by ibid, s. 5(2). Substituted for "at the rates specified in the said Schedule" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 5(2). Substituted for "owner of any motor vehicle," by ibid, s. 5(3). Substituted for "the motor vehicle," by ibid. Substituted for "owner of any motor vehicle," by ibid, s. 5(4). Omitted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15.9.2003). Before omission the proviso stood as under: "Provided that the owner of any motor vehicle, referred to in this sub-section, may, if he so desires, pay annual tax leviable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, and this Act, in lieu of one-time tax, by submitting an application to the Taxing Officer within whose jurisdiction such tax is leviable.". Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing sub-section (5). Before substitution it stood as under: "(5) If one-time tax in respect of motor vehicle has already been paid under subsection (2), or sub-section (3), and if the said motor vehicle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of such motor vehicle shall be entitled to claim refund of such tax at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule IV.". Substituted for "a motor vehicle" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 5(5). Substituted for "dealer of motor vehicles" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 5(6). Substituted for "of motor vehicles" by ibid s. 5(6). Substituted for "the motor vehicles" by ibid, s. 5(6). Substituted for "owner of a motor vehicle," by ibid, s. 5(7).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 9BA--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) A one-time tax for a period of five years shall be leviable on battery operated motor cars and omnibuses, not being transport vehicles, as described in Part I of Schedule VI, at the rates specified in the said Schedule. (2) If such one-time tax in respect of a battery operated motor vehicle has already been paid under the provision of sub-section (1) and the said battery operated motor vehicle is removed from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration, the owner of such battery operated motor vehicle shall be entitled to claim refund at the rate specified in Part II of Schedule VI. (3) The one-time tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid for the year for which it is due and the mode of payment shall be such as is laid down in section 10. (4) The State Government may require the manufacturer or the dealer of the battery operated motor vehicles to furnish to it the names and addresses of purchasers of such motor vehicles and also the prices at which such battery operated motor vehicles have been sold to the purchasers with effect from such date as may be appointed by the State Government by notification published in the Official Gazette. (5) Every owner of a battery operated motor vehicle registered under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988), and every person who owns, keeps in his possession or under his control, any such battery operated motor vehicle, shall, in addition to the one-time tax payable under sub-section (1), pay a special tax at the rate specified in Part I of Schedule VI, if such battery operated motor vehicle is air-conditioned.] Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 10--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) The Registered Owner of a motor vehicle as specified 2 [in Schedules I, III, IV, V and VI] or the person legally in possession of such motor vehicle shall be liable to make payment of the additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, in the manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. (2) When the Registered Owner of a motor vehicle or the person legally in possession of a motor vehicle as aforesaid fails to make payment of the additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax as may be due by the date on which it becomes payable, he shall be liable, to make payment of the tax along with the penalty in the manner as follows:- (a) there shall be a grace period for 15 days for payment of the additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax from the date on which it becomes payable; (b) the registered owner of a motor cycle or motor cycle combination or the person legally in possession of the motor vehicle, as the case may be, shall, for the delay for payment of additional tax or life-time tax, be liable to pay penalty at the following rate :- (i) for the delay up to 15 days after the expiry of the day on which the additional tax or life-time tax becomes payable Nil (ii) for the delay from 16th to 45th day after the expiry of the day on which the additional tax or life-time tax becomes payable 25% of the tax payable (iii) for the delay from 46th to 75th day after the expiry of the day on which the additional tax or life-time tax becomes payable 50% of the tax payable (iv) for the delay for more than 75 days after the expiry of the day on which the additional tax or life-time tax becomes payable The amount equal to the amount of tax payable (c) the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the person legally in possession of the motor vehicles, as the case may be, shall, for the delay for payment of one-time tax shall be liable to pay penalty at-the following rate :- (i) for the delay in payment of such one-time tax up to one year from the date when such one-time tax becomes payable- (a) for the delay up to 15 days after the expiry of the day on which the one-time tax becomes payable Nil (b) for the delay from 16th to 45th day after the expiry of the day on which the one-time tax becomes payable 1 the part of the one-time tax payable  20 (c) for the delay from 46th to 75th day after the expiry of the day on which one-time tax becomes payable 1 the part of the one-time tax payable  10 (d) for the delay for more than 75 days after the expiry of the day on which one-time tax becomes payable 1 the part of the one-time tax payable  5 (ii) for the delay in payment of such one-time tax beyond one year and up to two years from the date when such one-time tax becomes payable 2 the part of the one-time tax payable  5 (III) for the delay in payment of such one-time tax beyond two years and up to three years from the date when such one-time tax becomes payable 3 the part of the one-time tax payable  5 (iv) for the delay in payment of such one-time tax beyond three years and up to four years from the date when such one-time tax becomes payable 4 the part of the one-time tax payable  5 (v) for the delay in payment of such one-time tax beyond four years from the date when such one-time tax becomes payable The amount equal to the amount of one-time tax payable.] Substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 6 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing section 10. Substituted for "in Schedules I, III or IV" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 7.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 11--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where, in respect of any motor vehicle, it is detected that the additional tax under section 3 or section 4 1 [or one-time tax 2 [under section 9B or section 9BA or life-time tax under section 9A or section 9AA]] is leviable but the owner of such motor vehicle has failed to make payment of such tax in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this Act, the motor vehicle shall be liable to seizure by the authority detecting the default and the total tax together with the penalty under clause (b) of subsection (2) of section 10 shall be recoverable from such owner. (2) The authority to seize any motor vehicle under sub-section (1) of this section shall be 3 [any officer of the Transport Department not below the rank of Motor Vehicles Inspector or any other officer as may be prescribed,] or any Executive Magistrate, or any Police Officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector of Police, or any officer authorised by a court having jurisdiction. 4 [(3) If a motor vehicle is seized under sub-section (1), the officer seizing the motor vehicle may detain the motor vehicle in respect of which additional tax is due until the person liable to pay the additional tax- (a) has satisfied the Taxing Officer having jurisdiction within thirty days of detention of the motor vehicle that the additional tax has actually been paid, or (b) has within thirty days of detention of the motor vehicle paid to the Taxing Officer having jurisdiction to collect the additional tax together with the penalty under section 10 within the prescribed time.] Substituted for "or one-time tax under section 9" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and Onetime Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 6(1) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003). Substituted for "under section 9B or life-time tax under section 9A" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 8. Substituted for "the Taxing Officer or Motor Vehicles Inspector or any Officer authorized by him" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 6(2) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003). Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 4.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 12--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Upon the seizure of a motor vehicle under sub-section (1) of section 11, the officer, other than the police officer, who seizes the motor vehicle shall issue a notice upon the owner through the driver of the motor vehicle to make payment to the Taxing Officer of the area in which the motor vehicle has been seized, of the dues calculated at the rate specified in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10 1 [within thirty days from the date of detention of the motor vehicle under sub-section (3) of section 11 or of double the amount of the total additional tax due together with the penalty under section 10 (hereinafter referred to as the aggregate amount) within a further period of fifteen days, as the case may be.] 2 [(2) Where the driver leaves the motor vehicle, the officer who seizes the motor vehicle shall issue a notice to the owner of the motor vehicle by registered post with acknowledgement due, calling upon him to make payment of the due additional tax or the aggregate amount, as the case may be, to the Taxing Officer of the area in which the motor vehicle has been seized.] (3) Where the officer who seizes the vehicle, is a police officer of the area where the vehicle has been seized, the officer seizing the vehicle shall immediately send a report with all the particulars to the Taxing Officer of the area in which the vehicle has been seized. (4) Upon receipt of the report under sub-section (3), the Taxing Officer shall proceed in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) or subsection (2) of this section, as the case may be. (5) As soon as a motor vehicle is seized in accordance with the provisions of section 11, the authority which seizes the motor vehicle shall issue a seizure list and bring the motor vehicle to the nearest police-station where the officer-in-charge, upon receipt of the report of seizure, shall take the motor vehicle into custody after preparation of an inventory, in triplicate, in the presence of the officer seizing the motor vehicle and the driver or the owner of the motor vehicle, if available, or in their absence, in the presence of two disinterested persons of the locality as may be available. The officer-in-charge of the police-station, the officer who seized the motor vehicle, and the driver or the owner of the motor vehicle or the witnesses, as the case may be, shall sign the inventory and the officer-in-charge of the police-station shall issue one copy of the inventory to the officer who seized the motor vehicle and one copy to the driver or the owner of the motor vehicle, if available, and shall retain one copy or, in the absence of the driver or the owner of the motor vehicle, two copies and shall issue a receipt in the prescribed form. 3 [(6) If the owner fails to make payment of the aggregate amount under sub-section (1), the motor vehicle shall be sold in auction by the concerned Taxing Officer, and a notice specifying the date on which the motor vehicle shall be sold in auction, unless the owner of the motor vehicle makes payment of the aggregate amount together with 20 per cent, thereof as administrative cost on or before the date of auction, together with the particulars of the motor vehicle, shall be published in at least two newspapers of the same date, of which one shall be in Bengali. In such case, the date of auction shall not be earlier than one month from the date of publication of the notice in the newspapers :] 4 [Provided that the terms and conditions in respect of auction of a motor vehicle under this section shall be specified by the State Government by order made in this behalf.] 5 [(7) If the driver leaves the motor vehicle as soon as it is seized and the owner is not immediately available and his address cannot be ascertained despite enquiry from the registering authority, or if no person turns up claiming the ownership of the motor vehicle within forty-five days from the date of seizure of the motor vehicle, the motor vehicle shall be sold in auction by the concerned Taxing Officer in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (6).] 6 [(8) If in any auction under sub-section (6) or sub-section (7), the price realised falls short of the dues, the balance shall be recoverable from the owner of the motor vehicle as if it were a public demand under the Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Ben. Act III of 1913). If the price obtained at the auction is higher than the dues together with the incidental costs as may be assessed by the officer conducting the auction, any other claim on the same motor vehicle by the State Government shall be recovered first from the excess amount, and if there is still any excess amount, any claim on the same motor vehicle by any bank or other financier shall be recovered from such excess amount, If there is any amount left after the recovery of the claims as aforesaid, the same shall be payable to the registered owner of the motor vehicle. If the owner is not available on notice, the amount shall remain in deposit for three years from the date on which it is refundable and shall thereafter be forfeited to the State.] 7 [(9) If a motor vehicle is seized for default in payment of tax under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979) and additional tax under this Act, the officer who seizes the motor vehicle shall issue a single seizure list and a single notice of demand. In the case of sale of the same motor vehicle in auction, the Taxing Officer shall cause publication of a single notice in newspapers in the manner prescribed.] 8 [(10) After seizure of the motor vehicle, it shall be kept under the custody of any police station or any other Government place or under the custody of any private custodian having capacity to accommodate adequate number of vehicles in his garage or premises. (11) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribed the terms and conditions in respect of selection and appointment of private custodians and shall prescribe the rate of fee to be realized from the owner of the seized vehicle, for the period during which such vehicle is under custody of either police station or any other Government place or private custodian.] Subs, for "within fifteen days from the date of issue of the notice." by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 5. Subs, by ibidior existing sub-section (2). Before substitution it stood as under: "(2) Where the driver leaves the motor vehicle, the officer who seizes the motor vehicle shall issue a notice in the prescribed form to the owner of the motor vehicle by registered post with acknowledgement due, calling upon him to pay the dues calculated at the rate specified in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10 together with a further penalty equivalent to ten per cent, of the amount so calculated to the Taxing Officer within whose area the vehicle has been seized.". Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 5 for existing sub-section (6). Before substitution it stood as under: "(6) If the owner fails to make payment of any dues within one month of the demand, the motor vehicle shall be liable to be sold in auction by the Taxing Officer or the District Magistrate in whose jurisdiction the vehicle has been seized or the Director, Public Vehicles Department, if the motor vehicle is seized within the jurisdiction of the Calcutta Metropolitan district.". Added by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 7(1) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003). Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 5 for existing sub-section (5). Before substitution it stood as under: "(7) If the driver leaves the motor vehicle as soon as it is seized and the owner is not immediately available and his address cannot be ascertained despite enquiry from the registering authority, the notice of demand together with the particulars of the motor vehicle shall be published in at least two newspapers having wide circulation, of which one must be in Bengali, specifying therein the date on which the motor vehicle shall be sold in auction in the event of failure of the owner to make payment of the dues. In such case, the date of auction shall not be earlier than three months from the date on which seizure is made.". Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 5, for existing sub-section (8). Before substitution it stood as under: "(8) If in any auction under sub-section (2), the price realised falls short of the dues, the balance shall be recoverable from the owner of the motor vehicles as if it were a public demand under the Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Ben. Act III of 1913). If the price obtained at the auction is higher than the dues together with the incidental cost as may be assessed by the officer conducting the auction, the excess shall be payable to the registered owner of the motor vehicle. If the owner is not available on notice, the amount shall remain in deposit for three years from the date on which it is refundable and shall thereafter be forfeited to the State.". Ins. by ibid;a. 5{f). Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 7(2) (w.e.f. 15.9.2003).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 13--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Whenever a motor vehicle is seized under this Act and is found to contain perishable commodities and the owner is not readily available or does not take back the motor vehicle after making payment of the dues by such time that the commodities do not get deteriorated or perished, the Taxing Officer within whose jurisdiction the motor vehicle has been seized shall dispose of the same by public auction after publicity in the locality and the markets nearby. (2) Whenever a motor vehicle is seized under this Act and is found to contain non-perishable commodities and the owner does not take back the motor vehicle after making payment of the dues within one month of the demand, the said commodities shall be disposed of in the same manner and by the same authority as referred to in sub-section (6) or sub-section (7) or sub-section (8) of section 12, as the case may be.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 14--> State(s): West Bengal Every owner of a motor vehicle shall be granted a receipt by the Taxing Officer, on his making payment of the additional tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, together with the penalties, if any, in the prescribed form and the fact of payment shall be endorsed on the tax token issued under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 15--> State(s): West Bengal No court shall release a motor vehicle seized under this Act unless the person in whose favour the motor vehicle is released, furnishes bank guarantee equivalent to one and half times the demand with an undertaking to make payment of the demand within four weeks from the date on which the vehicle is released.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 16--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every person, who is liable to pay additional tax or one-time tax in respect of a motor vehicle under this Act, shall fill up and sign a declaration in the prescribed form stating the prescribed particulars and shall deliver the declaration as so filled up and signed to the Taxing Officer and shall pay to the Taxing Officer the additional tax or one-time tax to which he appears to be liable, upon such declaration, to pay in respect of such motor vehicle. (2) Any person who submits a false or incorrect declaration under subsection (1) shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 1 [(3) Where a person is liable to pay the additional tax or one-time tax under this Act as well as the tax under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, in respect of any motor vehicle, he may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Act, 1979, sign a single declaration in the form prescribed under sub-section (1).] Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 6.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 17--> State(s): West Bengal The Taxing Officer shall, at the time of granting a receipt for the additional tax, make an endorsement in the tax token on that behalf.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 18--> State(s): West Bengal If the additional tax payable in respect of any motor vehicle remains unpaid by any person liable for the payment thereof and such person, before paying the additional tax, transfers the ownership of such motor vehicle or ceases to be in possession or control of such motor vehicle, the person to whom the ownership of the motor vehicle has been transferred or the person who is in possession or control of such motor vehicle, shall be liable to pay the said additional tax: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the liability to pay the said additional tax on the person who has transferred the ownership or has ceased to be in possession or control of the motor vehicle.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 19--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), if the additional tax or one-time tax due in respect of a transport vehicle is not paid within the due period, the permit shall be invalid from the date of expiry of the said period till the tax is actually realised.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 20--> State(s): West Bengal Any person liable to pay additional tax or one-time tax under this Act shall not use or allow the use of any motor vehicle where he has reason to believe that the endorsement on tax token, additional tax or one-time tax receipt and permit have been forged, tampered with or fraudulently obtained.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 21--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) Every person who is entitled to claim refund of additional tax under sub-section (2) of section 8, or 2 [life-time tax under sub-section (2) of section 9A or sub-section (2) of section 9AA,] or 3 [one-time tax under sub-section (5) of section 9B or subsection (2) of section 9BA], shall make such claim in plain paper to the Taxing Officer concerned, and such application shall be accompanied by supporting evidence to show that certificate of registration and tax token were surrendered or that the motor vehicle was permanently removed from West Bengal on change of address or that the registration of the vehicle was cancelled, as the case may be. (2) Where a Taxing Officer is satisfied that the certificate of registration and the tax token under section 14 of the Act, in respect of a motor vehicle has been surrendered or that a motor vehicle has not been used or kept for use for a complete calendar month, he shall, on claim by the owner of the motor vehicle, refund or remit for each such calendar month 1/12th of additional tax or 1/360th of life-time tax or 1/180th or 1/60th of one-time tax, as the case may be: Provided that where a motor vehicle for the transport of goods or a motor vehicle for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward or otherwise, has not been used for any period in West Bengal by reason of its being removed and kept outside West Bengal during such period, the Taxing Officer shall not refund or remit any sum in respect of such motor vehicle for any period during which the motor vehicle is removed and kept outside West Bengal. (3) Where an excess of additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax has been paid for any period on account of over assessment by the Taxing Officer or otherwise, the amount paid in excess of the amount payable under the Act shall be refunded in the manner, as may be prescribed. (4) Where, after the payment of additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax in respect of a motor vehicle, it is found that such motor vehicle is not subject to any additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax under the Act, the additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax so paid shall be refunded by the Taxing Officer in the manner as may be prescribed: Provided that such refund or remission for such period shall be made by the Taxing Officer under the appropriate head of account subject to the condition that provisions of rule 95 of the West Bengal Treasury Rules, Volume I, shall be followed authorizing such refund or remission and such refund or remission shall be recorded in the revenue register of the Taxing Officer against the original entry of credit in the Books of Accounts : Provided further that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this sub-section, the State Government may, if it thinks fit and necessary so to do, by notification, prescribe guidelines for such refund or remission. (5) Any amount to be refunded or remitted under sub-section (1) may, at the option of the person entitled to the refund or remit of such amount, be adjusted towards the additional tax or life-time tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, for any subsequent period: Provided that if any amount being the penalty due from the person entitled to the refund or remit remains outstanding, the amount to be refunded or remitted shall first be adjusted towards the outstanding dues, and the balance, if any, shall be refunded.] Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 7 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing section 21. Before substitution it was earlier substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 4 and amended by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 6 (w.e.f. 22.7.1999) and finatly stood as under: "21. Refund or remit of tax:- (1)(a) Every person who is entitled to claim refund of additional tax under sub-section (2) of section 8, or one-time tax under sub-section (6) of section 9 or sub-section (3) of section 9A or sub-section (5) of section 9B, shall make such claim in plain paper to the Taxing Officer concerned and such application shall be accompanied by supporting evidence to show that certificate of registration and tax taken were surrendered. (b) Where a Taxing Officer is satisfied that the certificate of registration and the tax token issued under section 14 in respect of a motor vehicle have been surrendered or that a motor vehicle has not been used or kept for use for a complete calendar month, he shall, on claim under sub-section (2) of section 8 or sub-section (6) of section 9, refund or remit for each such calendar month in respect of such motor vehicle one-twelfth of additional tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, payable for the year : Provided that where a motor vehicle, other than a motor vehicle for the transport of goods or a motor vehicle plying for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward or otherwise, has not been used for any period in West Bengal by reason of its being removed and kept outside West Bengal during such period, the Taxing Officer shall not refund or remit in respect of such motor vehicle any portion during which the motor vehicle is removed and kept outside West Bengal. (c) Where an excess additional tax or one-time tax has been paid for any period on account of over assessment by the Taxing Officer or otherwise, the amount paid in excess of the amount payable under this Act shall be refunded. (d) Where after the payment of additional tax or one-time tax in respect of a motor vehicle, it is found that the motor vehicle is not subject to any additional tax or one-time tax under this Act, the additional tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, so paid shall be refunded : Provided that no additional tax or one-time tax shall be refunded unless the person claiming refund has made an application in that behalf to the concerned Taxing Officer within one year from the date on which the additional tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, was paid, and every such refund shall be subject to such conditions as may be prescribed : Provided further that the Taxing Officer shall be competent to sanction refund up to such limit as may be prescribed. In the case of any amount which exceeds the prescribed limit, the Taxing Officer shall refer the matter to the Transport Department of the Government of West Bengal. (2) Any amount to be refunded or remitted under sub-section (1) may, at the option of the person entitled to the refund or remit of such amount, be adjusted towards the additional tax or one-time tax, as the case may be, for any subsequent period : Provided that if any amount being the penalty due from the person entitled to the refund or remit as aforesaid remains outstanding, the amount to be refunded or remitted shall first be adjusted towards the outstanding dues, and the balance, if any, shall be refunded.". Subs, for "life-time tax under sub-section (2) of section 9A" by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 9. Subs, for "one-time tax under sub-section (5) of section 9B" by ibid.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 22--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a Taxing Officer under this Act may prefer an appeal against such order before such authority, in such manner, within such time, and on payment of such fees, as may be prescribed. (2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be heard by the appellate authority in such manner as may be prescribed and the decision of the appellate authority on such appeal shall be final : Provided that no order shall be passed by the appellate authority without giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 23--> State(s): West Bengal Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for such contravention, be punishable for the first offence, with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees and, for any second or subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 23A--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [The State Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do, by order exempt wholly or partly any person from any penalty imposed on him under any provision of this Act for non-payment of additional tax or one-time tax.] Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 7 (w.e.f. 22.7.1999).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section 24--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters, which may be, or are required to be prescribed by rules.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.1--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule I (See sections 3 and 4) DESCRIPTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND RATE OF ADDITIONAL TAX A. Motor Vehicle for carrying passenger not plying for hire 1. Motor cycle and motor cycle combination. At the rate of 25% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979). 2. (i) Motor cars owned by individual or societies registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Ben. Act XXVI of 1961) or any organization having exemption from income-tax. At the rate of 50% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 plus Rs. 1000/-. (ii) Motor cars owned by others. At the rate of 50% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979) plus Rs. 1000/-. 3. Omnibus registered as non-transport vehicles. At the rate of 50% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979) plus Rs. 1000/-. 4. Omnibus registered as Private Service Vehicle or Educational Institute Bus: (i) Seating capacity up to 35 Rs. 3000/- (ii) Seating capacity above 35 Rs. 6000/- B. Vehicles for carrying passengers for hire or reward 1. Ordinary Stage Carriages and Special Stage Carriages (Mini Bus) plying with permits issued by STA or any RTA of this State At the rate of 10% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979). 2. Express/Limited Stage Carriages plying with permit issued by STA or any RTA of this State Rs. 7000/- 3. Contract Carriages including those owned by motor training school: (a) autorickshaw Rs. 400/- (b) meter taxi Rs. 800/- (c) Contract Carriages registered in this State other than autorickshaw and meter taxi: (i) seating capacity of 6 including driver 2 [Provided that for the three hilly sub-divisions of the district of Darjeeling, the amount of such tax shall be Rs. 1500/-.] Rs. 3000/- (ii) seating capacity above 6 including driver Rs. 7000/- 4. (a) All omnibuses plying under permanent inter-State permits, stage carriage or contract carriage or under tourist permit or under temporary stage inter-State permit in specified routes and plying in West Bengal in respect of which permits have been issued by the Regional Transport Authority of a State, other than the State of Wet Bengal. Rs. 2000/- per seat per annum or 1/52nd part thereof, for every week or part thereof as the case may be, plus Rs. 1000/-. (6) All omnibuses plying under inter-State permits, temporary or special permit and entering West Bengal for casual trips in respect of which permits have been issued by the Regional Transport Authority or the State, other than the State of West Bengal. Rs. 30/- per seat plus Rs. 1000/- for every entry of the omnibus into the State of West Bengal. (c) Omnibuses registered in any State, other than West Bengal and plying within West Bengal as express bus, tourist bus, deluxe bus or ordinary bus, whether under a stage carriage permit or a contract carriage permit. Rs. 5000/- per seat per annum or 1/52nd part thereof, for every week or part thereof as the case may be, plus Rs. 1000/-: Provided that if the inter-State permit in respect of any omnibus referred to in items (a) and (b) of SI. No. 4, have been issued by the Regional Transport Authority or the State transport Authority of a State with which the State of West Bengal has a reciprocal agreement, such payment of the additional tax may be condoned by the State Government. 3 [C. Goods carriages and those owned by motor training schools- (1) 50% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979) in respect of vehicles registered in the State of West Bengal; (2) 80% of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979, in respect of vehicles registered in any State other than the State of West Bengal till allotment of a new registration made by the appropriate transport authority in West Bengal.] D. Trailers and Articulated trailers for carrying goods 50 per cent, of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979) plus Rs. 1000/-. E. Ambulance (including Clinic Van) 40 per cent, of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979. F. Tractor, Crane, Breakdown Van, Fork-lift vehicle, Trailor filled with equipment like rig/generator/compressor, tower-wagon and tree trimming vehicles, mobile crane, audio visual van, and any other vehicle not specified elsewhere in this Schedule 50 per cent, of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 plus Rs. 1000/-.] Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15.9.2003) for existing Schedule I. Before substitution it was subsequently amended by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax (Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1.1.2003) and the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17.8.1994) Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004). Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004) for existing sub-heading 'C. Before substitution it stood as under: "C. Goods carriages and those owned by motor training schools 50 per cent of the annual tax payable under the West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1979 (West Ben. Act IX of 1979).".
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.2--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...] Omitted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15.9.2003).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.3--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule III (See section 9A) Part I Sl. No. Life-time tax on motor cycle Up to 80 cc Above 80 cc Above 170 cc Above 250 cc (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. New up to 1 year   1560 3125 4685 6250 2. Between 1 and 2 years 1460 2925 4375 5835 3. Between 2 and 3 years 1360 2725 4065 5420 4. Between 3 and 4 years 1260 2525 3755 5000 5. Between 4 and 5 years 1160 2325 3445 4585 6. Between 5 and 6 years 1060 2125 3135 4170 7. Between 6 and 7 years 960 1925 2825 3755 8. Between 7 and 8 years 830 1675 2485 3330 9. Between 8 and 9 years 725 1475 2165 2900 10. Between 9 and 10 years 625 1250 1850 2475 11. Between 10 and 11 years 525 1050 1540 2060 12. Between 11 and 12 years 425 850 1230 1645 13. Between 12 and 13 years 325 650 920 1230 14. Between 13 and 14 years 225 450 610 815 15. More than 14 years 125 250 300 400 2 [Part II Rate of refund for motor cycle and motor cycle combination in cases where removal or cancellation of registration taken place after registration under section 9A Sl. No. Life-time tax on motor cycle Up to 80 cc Above 80 cc Above 170 cc Above 250 cc (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  Rs. RS. Rs. Rs. 1. New up to 1 year 1460 2925 4375 5835 2. Between 1 and 2 years 1360 2725 4065 5420 3. Between 2 and 3 years 1260 2525 3755 5000 4. Between 3 and 4 years 1160 2325 3445 4585 5. Between 4 and 5 years 1050 2125 3135 4170 6. Between 5 and 6 years 960 1925 2825 3755 7. Between 6 and 7 years 830 1675 2485 3330 8. Between 7 and 8 years 725 1475 2165 2900 9. Between 8 and 9 years 625 1250 1850 2475 10. Between 9 and 10 years 525 1050 1540 2060 11. Between 10 and 11 years 425 850 1230 1645 12. Between 11 and 12 years 325 650 920 1230 13. Between 12 and 15 years 225 450 610 815 14. After 15 years 125 250 390 585.]] Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 10 (w.e.f. 25.11.1991) for existing Schedule III. Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 9 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004).
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.4--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule IV (See sections 9B and 10) 2 [Part I A. One-time tax for a period of five years on motor cars and omnibuses (not being transport vehicles) for first time registration only and on motor cars and omnibuses (not being transport vehicles) for change of address or assignment of fresh registration mark on removal from any State other than West Bengal SI. No. Description of motor vehicles Engine capacity One-time tax payable (Rs.) Special tax as one-time tax payable (Rs.) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1. Motor cars and omnibuses owned by individual or societies registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Ben. Act XXVI of 1961) or any organisation having exemption from income tax (a) Engine capacity up to 900 cc 10550.00 4000.00  (b) Engine capacity beyond 900 cc and up to 1490 cc 13900.00 7500.00  (c) Engine capacity beyond 1490 cc and up to 2000 cc 21800.00 10000.00  (d) Engine capacity beyond 2000 cc and up to 2500 cc 28000.00 12500.00  (e) Engine capacity beyond 2500 cc 30000.00 15000.00 2. Motor cars and omnibuses owned by others (a) Engine capacity up to 900 cc 11900.00 4000.00  (b) Engine capacity beyond 900 cc and up to 1490 cc 15250.00 7500.00  (c) Engine capacity beyond 1490 cc and up to 2000 cc 24500.00 10000.00  (d) Engine capacity beyond 2000 cc and up to 2500 cc 30000.00 12500.00  (e) Engine capacity beyond 2500 cc 32000.00 15000.00 Note.-A special tax at the rate specified in column (5) shall be required to be paid as one-time tax of a motor vehicle, if such motor vehicle is air-conditioned as provided in sub-section (8) of section 9B. B. One-time tax for a period of five years on motor cars and omnibuses (not being transport vehicles) other than motor cars and omnibuses mentioned in item A SI. No. Description of motor vehicles Engine Capacity One-time tax payable (Rs.) - Special tax as one-time tax payable (Rs.) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (1) Motor cars and omnibuses owned by individual or societies registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Ben. Act XXVI of 1961) or any organisation having exemption from income tax (a) Engine capacity up to 900 cc 8550.00 4000.00  (b) Engine capacity beyond 900 cc and up to 1490 cc 9900.00 7500.00  (c) Engine capacity beyond 1490 cc and up to 2000 cc 15300.00 10000.00  (d) Engine capacity beyond 2000 cc 20000.00 12500.00 (2) Motor cars and omnibuses owned by others (a) Engine capacity up to 900 cc 9900.00 4000.00  (b) Engine capacity beyond 900 cc and up to 1490 cc 11250.00 7500.00  (c) Engine capacity beyond 1490 cc and up to 2000 cc 18000.00 10000.00  (d) Engine capacity beyond 2000 cc 22000.00 12500.00 Note.-A special tax at the rate specified in column (5) shall be required to be paid as one-time tax of a motor vehicle, if such motor vehicle is air-conditioned as provided in sub-section (8) of section 9B.] Part II Rate of refund under section 9B of one-time tax on motor cars and omnibuses in the case of removal of such motor cars or omnibuses from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration. If the period elapsed after payment of one-time tax on a motor vehicle or omnibus is- (a) less than one year 78 per cent, of one-time tax paid (b) more than one year but not more than two years 58 per cent, of one-time tax paid (C) more than two years but not more than three years 38 per cent, of one-time tax paid (d) more than three years but not more than four years 18 per cent, of one-time tax paid (e) more than four years Nil.] Ins. by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 9 (w.e.f. 22.7.1999). Subs, by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008, s. 10 for existing Part I. Before substitution It was earlier substituted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2004, s. 10 (w.e.f. 9.6.2004)
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.5--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [SCHEDULE V (See section 9AA) Part I Life-time tax on battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination Sl. No. Power of battery operated motor cycle Life-time tax payable (Rs.) (1) (2) (3) 1. Power of battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination beyond 0.25 KW and up to 0.35 KW 1560.00 2. Power of battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination beyond 0.35 KW and up to 0.50 KW 3125.00 3. Power of battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination beyond 0.50 KW and up to 0.75 KW 4685.00 4. Power of battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination beyond 0.75 KW. 6250.00 Part II Rate of refund under section 9AA of life-time tax on battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination in case of removal of such battery operated motor cycle and motor cycle combination from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration. SI. No. Period elapsed after payment of lifetime tax Life-time tax refundable on battery operated motor cycle having power beyond 0.25 KW and up to 0.35 KW Life-time tax refundable tin battery operated motor cycle having power beyond 0.35 KW and up to 0.50 KW Life-time tax refundable on battery operated motor cycle having power beyond 0.50 KW and up to 0.75 KW Life-time tax refundable on battery operated motor cycle having power beyond 0.75 KW (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)  Rs. Rs. RS. Rs. 1. New up to 1 year 1460.00 2925.00 4375.00 5835.00 2. Between 1 and 2 years 1360.00 2725.00 4065.00 5420.00 3. Between 2 and 3 years 1260.00 2525.00 3755.00 5000.00 4. Between 3 and 4 years 1160.00 2325.00 3445.00 4585.00 5. Between 4 and 5 years 1050.00 2125.00 3135.00 4170.00 6. Between 5 and 6 years 960.00 1925.00 2825.00 3755.00 7. Between 6 and 7 years 830.00 1675.00 2485.00 3330.00 8. Between 7 and 8 years 725.00 1475.00 2165.00 2900.00 9. Between 8 and 9 years 625.00 1250.00 1850.00 2475.00 10. Between 9 and 10 years 525.00 1050.00 1540.00 2060.00 11. Between 10 and 11 years 425.00 850.00 1230.00 1645.00 12. Between 11 and 12 years 325.00 650.00 920.00 1230.00 13. Between 12 and 15 years 225.00 450.00 610.00 815.00 14. After 15 years 125.00 250.00 390.00 585.00] Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008.
West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles Act, 1989_Section Sch.6--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule VI (See section 9BA) Part I One-time tax for a period of five years on battery operated motor cars and omnibuses (not being transport vehicles) SI. No. Power of battery operated motor cars and omnibuses One-time tax payable (Rs.) Special tax as one-time tax payable (Rs.) (1) (2) (3) (4) 1. Power of battery operated motor cars and omnibuses up to 2.5 KW 8550.00 13500.00 2. Power of battery operated motor cars and omnibuses beyond 2.5 KW 4000.00 7500.00 Note.-A special tax at the rate specified in column (4) shall be required to be paid as one-time tax of a battery operated motor vehicle, if such battery operated motor vehicle is air-conditioned as provided in sub-section (5) of section 9BA. Part II Rate of refund under section 9BA of one-time tax on battery operated motor cars and omnibuses in case of removal of such motor cars and omnibuses from West Bengal on change of address or on cancellation of registration. If the period elapsed after payment of one-time tax on a motor car or omnibus is- (a) less than one year 78 per centum of one-time tax paid (b) more than one year but not more than two years 58 per centum of one-time tax paid (c) more than two years but not more than three years 38 per centum of one-time tax paid (d) more than three years but not more than four years 18 per centum tax paid of one-time (e) more than four years Nil.] Inserted by the West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2008 vide Notification No. 1299-L, dated 11.08.2008. 
