Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the abolition of the Albert Victor Leper Hospital and for the disposal of the funds and other properties thereof. Whereas circumstances have arisen which render the continuance of the Albert Victor Leper Hospital unnecessary; And whereas it is expedient that provision should be made for the application of the funds and other properties of the Hospital in a suitable and appropriate manner; It is hereby enacted in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956. (2) It shall come into force1 on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, This Act was brought into force with effect from the 1st day of November, 1956, vide Notification No. Medl/76458/2L-6/55. dated the 9th October, 1956 of the Department of Health, published in the Calcutta Gazette, Extraordinary, dated the 10th October, 1956 Part I.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act,- (a) "the Hospital" means the Albert Victor Leper Hospital; (b) "the Board" means the Board of Trustees constituted under the Albert Victor Leper Hospital Act, 1935, for the Hospital.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal The Hospital is hereby abolished and the Board is hereby dissolved.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) All funds and other properties of the Hospital which immediately before the commencement of this Act were vested in the Board are hereby transferred to and vested in the State Government free of trusts (if any) existing immediately before such commencement. (2) The said funds and properties shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), be applied by the Stale Government for any purpose connected with the prevention, treatment or relief of leprosy or for the promotion of any research work on leprosy, as the Stale Government thinks fit. (3) The State Government shall discharge out of the said funds and properties, all debts and pecuniary liabilities of the Board (including claims, if any, relating to pensions, provident fund and gratuities of officers and servants of the Board) for which the Board would have been liable if this Act had not been passed. (4) The State Government may from time to time vary the manner of the investment of any of the said funds, or capitalize any of the said funds or properties by sale or other manner of disposal.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pro visions of this Act, the State Government may by order do or cause to be done anything which may be necessary to remove the difficulty.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Stale Government or any servant or officer of the State Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.
Albert Victor Leper Hospital (Abolition) Act, 1956_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal The Albert Victor Leper Hospital Act, 1935, is hereby repealed. 
