West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to levy tax on sale of goods in West Bengal on the basis of value added to such goods at each stage of sale of such goods and on purchases of certain goods in West Bengal in specified circumstances and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. whereas it is expedient to provide for the levy of tax on sale of goods in West Bengal on the basis of value added to such goods at each stage of sale of such goods and on purchases of certain goods in West Bengal in specified circumstances and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003. (2) It extends to the whole of West Bengal. (3) This section shall come into force at once; and the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date or dates as the State Government may, by notification, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) "Additional Commissioner" means an Additional Commissioner of Sales Tax appointed under sub-section (1) of section 5; (2) "Appellate and Revisional Board" means means 1 [the West Bengal Sales Tax Appellate and Revisional Board] constituted under section 7; (3) "appointed day", in relation to any provision of this Act, means the date on which such provision comes into force; 2 [(3A) "appropriate Government Treasury" means- (a) in the case of a dealer in Kolkata,- (i) the Kolkata Branch of the Reserve Bank of India for payments under the Act exceeding five hundred rupees, and (ii) such head office, main office, branch or branches of any bank in Kolkata as may be authorised in this behalf by the State Government for the purpose of accepting deposits for payments under the Act, and (b) in other cases, the treasury or sub-treasury of the sub-division where the dealer's place of business is situated or, in the event of a dealer having more than one place of business, where the chief branch or head office of the business is situated;] (4) "Bureau" means the Bureau of Investigation constituted under section 8; (5) "Business" includes- (a) any trade, commerce, manufacture, execution of works contract or any adventure or concern in the nature of trade, commerce, manufacture or execution of works contract, whether or not such trade, commerce, manufacture, execution of works contract, adventure or concern is carried on with the motive to make profit and whether or not any profit accrues from such trade, commerce, manufacture, execution of works contract, adventure or concern; and (b) any transaction in connection with, or ancillary or incidental to, such trade, commerce, manufacture, execution of works contract, adventure or concern; (6) 3 [Capital goods" means such goods meant for use in the manufacture or for execution of works contract in West Bengal, and such other goods as are required by a reseller to keep the goods in saleable condition or to effect the sale properly in West Bengal] 4 [(7) "casual dealer" means a person, other than a dealer who, whether as principal, agent or in any other capacity, has occasional transaction involving buying, selling, supplying or distributing goods in West Bengal, whether for cash or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration and includes, whether he has fixed place of business in West Bengal or not,- (a) a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, as defined in clause (52) who, while carrying any goods in his goods vehicle as defined in clause (16) , fails to disclose the name and address of the consignor or consignee in West Bengal or fails to furnish a copy of the invoice, challan, transport receipt or consignment note or document of like nature in respect of such goods, or (b) an owner or lessee or occupier of a warehouse who fails to disclose the name and address of the owner of any goods stored at his warehouse or fails to satisfy the Commissioner that such goods are for his personal use or consumption, and such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, or owner or lessee or occupier of a warehouse, shall be deemed to have purchased such goods on his own account;] (8) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Sales Tax appointed under sub-section (1) of section 3; (9) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and includes a body corporate or corporation within the meaning of clause (7) of section 2, or a foreign company referred to in section 591, of that Act; 5 [(10) "contractual transfer price", in relation to any period, means the aggregate of the amount received or receivable by a dealer in respect of transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) in execution of any works contract, as defined in clause (57) , whether executed fully or partly during such period. 6 [...];] (11) "dealer" means any person who carries on the business of selling or purchasing goods in West Bengal or any person making sales under section 14, and includes- (a) an occupier of a jute-mill or shipper of jute, (b) Government, a local authority, a statutory body, a trust or other body corporate which, or a liquidator or receiver appointed by a court in respect of a person, being a dealer as. defined in this clause, who, whether or not in the course of business, sells, supplies or distributes directly or otherwise goods for cash or for deferred payment or for commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration, 7 [(ba) 8 [a person who has set up an establishment with an intention of selling or purchasing goods in West Bengal]] 9 [(c) a society including a co-operative society, club or any association which sells goods to its members or others for cash, or for deferred payment, or for commission, remuneration, or for other valuable consideration,] (d) a factor, a broker, a commission agent, a del credere agent, an auctioneer, an agent for handling or transporting of goods or handling of document of title to goods, or any other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, and whether of the same description as hereinbefore mentioned or not, who carries on the business of selling goods and who has, in the customary course of business, authority to sell goods belonging to principals; (12) "digital signature" means authentication of any electronic record by a person by means of an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) ; (13) "director", in relation to a company, includes any person occupying the 1 [position of director] by whatever name called; 10 [(14) "electronic record" means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or sent in an electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) , and includes micro film or computer generated micro film;] 11 [(15) "goods" includes all kinds of movable property other than- (a) 12 [...], actionable claims, stocks, shares or securities, (b) country liquor, (c) foreign liquor, whether made in India or not, including brandy, whisky, vodka, gin, rum, liqueur, cordials, bitters and wines or a mixture thereof, beer, ale, porter, cider, perry, and other similar potable fermented liquors, (d) lottery tickets, and (e) motor spirit of any kind;] (16) "goods vehicle" means any motor vehicle as defined in clause (28) of section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) , constructed or adapted for use for transportation of goods or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the transportation of goods, and includes a trailer attached to such vehicle and any means of transportation including an animal to carry goods from one point to another point; (17) "Government" means the Central Government, the Government of any State or the Government of any Union Territory; 13 [(17A) "import" means bringing goods in West Bengal from any place outside West Bengal or from any other country;] 14 [(18) "input tax", in relation to a tax period on or after coming into force of this Act, means the amount of tax,- (a) paid or payable under the Act, 15 [other than those enjoying composition under subsection (3) , sub-section (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18], to a registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, at the time of purchasing taxable goods, other than such taxable goods as may be prescribed, during that period, (b) 16 [...] (c) 17 [...] (19) "input tax credit" or "input tax rebate", in relation to any period, means the setting off of the amount of input tax, or part thereof, by a registered dealer against the amount of his output tax; (20) "interest due" means the amount of interest which remains unpaid after the expiry of the date specified in the notice of demand issued in this behalf under this Act or the rules made thereunder; 18 [(20A) "interest payable" means the amount of interest payable under section 33 or section 34 or section 34A; (20B) "jute" means the plant known botanically as belonging to the genus corchorous, and includes all the species of that genus, whether known commonly as pat, kosta, nalia, or by any other name, and also means the plant known botanically as hibiscus cannabinus or commonly known as mesta;] (21) "jute-mill" means a factory as defined in, or declared to be a factory under, the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) , which is engaged wholly or in part in the manufacture of jute products; 19 [(22) "manufacture", with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means producing, making, extracting or processing any goods and includes 20 [rearing] of seedlings or plants, and raising of man-made forest or other natural resources like minerals, coal etc. for sale;] 21 [(22A) "maximum retail price", in respect of goods taxable under the Act, means maximum price printed on the package of any goods at which such goods may be sold to the ultimate consumer, whether such price is inclusive of tax or not; (22B) "motor spirit" means any liquid or admixture of liquids which is ordinarily used directly or indirectly as fuel for a motor vehicle or stationary internal combustion engine. Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, the expression "motor vehicle" shall include any means of carriage, conveyance or transport by land, air or water;] 22 [(23) "net tax", in relation to any period, means- (a) in case of a registered dealer, other than those referred to in sub-clause (c) and sub-clause (a) , the amount of output tax in excess of the net tax credit, as referred to in sub-section (17) of section 22, claimed by such registered dealer in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, (b) in case of any dealer other than a registered dealer, the amount of output tax, (c) 23 [in case of a registered dealer paying tax at a compounded rate under sub-section (3) , sub-section (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18, the amount of output tax,] (d) in case of a registered dealer, other than those referred to in sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (c) , enjoying deferment of payment of tax, or tax holiday, or remission of tax under clause (a) , clause (b) , or clause (c) 24 [respectively of sub-section (1) of section 118], the amount of output tax;] (24) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (25) "occupier of a jute-mill" means the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the jute-mill; 25 [(26) "output tax", in relation to any period, means the aggregate amount of tax payable by a dealer liable to pay tax under section 10, section 11, section 12, section 14, sub-section (3) of section 24, and section 27C, and includes tax payable at the compounded rate under sub-section (3) of section 16 or 26 [subsection (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18], in respect of any sale, or purchase, of goods, or execution of works contract, made by him in West Bengal;] (27) "partnership", "partner" and "firm" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) ; 27 [(28) "penalty due" means the penalty found to be unpaid after the expiry of the date specified in the notice of demand issued in this behalf under this Act or rules made there under;] 28 [(29) "place of business" means any place where a dealer has set up a business of selling or purchasing goods or a place from where a dealer sells any goods or where he keeps accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic records relating to sales or purchases of goods or execution of works contract and digital signature certificate granted under sub-section (4) of section 35 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) , relating to his business and includes any place where the dealer processes, produces or manufactures goods or executes works contract and any warehouse of such dealer;] (30) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 29 [(31) "principal officer", in relation to a company, means the director or managing director of such company, or the secretary authorised to act as principal officer by the Board of Directors of such company;] 30 [(31A) "principal place of business" means any place of business where a dealer keeps all accounts, registers, documents, including those in the form of electronic records, and digital signature certificate granted under sub-section (4) of section 35 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) , relating to his business, and includes the chief branch or head office within West Bengal;] (32) [Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005]. (33) [Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005]. (34) "purchase" means any transfer of property in goods to the person making the purchase for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration, but does not include a transfer by way of mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge; 31 [(35) "purchase price" means the amount of valuable consideration paid or payable by a person for the purchase of any goods, less any sum allowed as cash discount, commission or commercial rebates granted at the time of delivery, or before delivery, of such goods but including cost of freight or delivery or distribution or installation or insurance, or any sum charged for anything done by the seller in respect of the goods at the time of delivery of such goods or before delivery thereof, other than interest if separately charged;] (36) "raw jute" means the fibre of jute which has not been subjected to any process of spinning or weaving, and includes jute, cuttings, whether loose or packed in drums or bales; 32 [(36A) "resale" means sale of any goods purchased within West Bengal in the same form in which such goods are purchased or without using such goods in such manner which amounts to or results in manufacture; (36B) "return period" means a period, as may be prescribed, for which a return is due under the Act; (36C) "reverse credit" means reversal or returning by a dealer, by way of deduction from the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate for a period, the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate availed by him during any period which he was not entitled to or became disentitled subsequent to the enjoyment of such input tax credit or input tax rebate;] (37) "rules" means the rules made under this Act; (38) "registered" means registered under section 24; (39) "sale" means any transfer of property in goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, and includes- (a) any transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a contract, of property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, (b) any delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any system of payment by instalments, (c) any transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, (d) any supply, by way of, or as part of, any service or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) , where such supply or service is for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, (e) any supply of goods by any unincorporated association or body of persons to a member thereof for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration, and such transfer, delivery, or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person or unincorporated association or body of persons making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such transfer, delivery, or supply is made, but does not include a mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge. Explanation I.-A sale shall be deemed to take place in West Bengal if the goods are within West Bengal,- (a) in the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time the contract of sale is made, and (b) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time of their appropriation to the contract of sale by the seller, whether the assent of the buyer to such appropriation is prior or subsequent to the appropriation: Provided that where there is a single contract of sale in respect of goods situated in West Bengal as well as in places outside West Bengal, 33 [provisions of this Explanation] shall apply as if there were a separate contract of safe in respect of the goods situated in West Bengal. Explanation II.-The transfer of property involved in the supply or distribution of goods by a society (including a Co-operative Society) , club, firm or any association to its members for cash, or for deferred payment or other valuable consideration, whether or not in the course of business, shall be deemed to be a sale for the purpose of this Act; (40) "sale in West Bengal", when used with respect to 34 [a sale deemed to have taken place in West Bengal in the course of inter-State trade or commerce or in the course of export out of the territory of India]; 35 [(41) "sale price" means the amount payable to a dealer or casual dealer as valuable consideration for the sale, other than the sale referred to in section 14, of any goods and includes- (a) any sum charged for anything done by the dealer or casual dealer in respect of such goods at the time of delivery, or before delivery, of such goods, (b) any sum charged for freight, delivery, distribution, installation or insurance, by such dealer at the time of delivery, or before delivery, of such goods, (c) any tax, duty or charges levied or leviable [other than the tax charged separately under this Act, subject to the provision as mentioned in the Explanation and cess levied under the West Bengal Transport Infrastructure Development Fund Act, 2002 (W.B. Act XXI of 2002) ], in respect of such goods, but does not include any sum allowed as cash discount, commission or other commercial rebate on the value of such goods at the time of delivery, or before delivery, of such goods and interest if separately charged. Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, the expression "sale price" of a dealer, enjoying payment of tax at a compounded rate under sub-section (3) of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18, or selling to any person other than a dealer of goods upon which maximum retail price as referred to in clause (22A) is applicable and where such maximum retail price is inclusive of sales tax, shall include any tax payable under this Act, including the tax referred to in section 10, or section 12;] (42) "shipper of jute" means any person who purchases raw jute and supplies it himself or by an agent to any person including himself outside West Bengal; (43) "Special Commissioner" means a Special Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4; (44) "State Government" means the Government of West Bengal; 36 [(45) "tax" means the tax due as defined in clause (46) or tax payable as defined in clause (49) under this Act;] (46) "tax due" means the amount of tax which remains unpaid after the expiry of the date specified in the notice of demand issued in this behalf under this Act or the rules made thereunder; (47) "taxable goods" means goods other than those specified in Schedule A; 37 [(48) "tax invoice" means an invoice containing such particulars as may be prescribed;] 38 [(49) "tax payable" means the tax payable under this Act on sales or purchases effected or for execution of works contract by a dealer or casual dealer but does not include tax due as defined in clause (46) ;] 39 [(50) "tax period" means such period, as may be prescribed, for which tax is payable under the Act;] (51) "Tax Recovery Officer" means a Tax Recovery Officer appointed by the State Government under sub-section (4) of section 55; (52) "transporter, carrier or transporting agent" means a person who carries on the business of transporting goods on account of any other person into, or outside, or within, West Bengal. 40 [Explanation.-For the purposes of this Act, the expression "transporting agent" shall also include a clearing, forwarding, shipping and handling agent;] (53) "Tribunal" means the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal established under section 3 of the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal Act, 1987 (West Ben. Act VIII of 1987) ; 41 [(54) "turnover of purchases", in relation to any period, means,- (a) 42 [...] (b) in case of a shipper of jute liable to pay tax under section 11, the aggregate of the purchase prices or parts of purchase prices payable by such shipper of jute in respect of the quantities of raw jute purchased by him in West Bengal and despatched by him during such period to any place outside West Bengal by any means of transit, (c) in case of any dealer liable to pay tax under section 12, the aggregate of the purchase prices or parts of purchase prices payable by such dealer in respect of the goods purchased by him during such period for use of such goods in West Bengal, after deducting the amounts, if any, refunded to the seller during such period in respect of any such goods purchased but returned to the seller within six months of such purchase.;] 43 [(55) "turnover of sales", in relation to any period, means the aggregate of the sale-prices or parts of sale-prices received or receivable by a dealer in respect of sales as defined in clause (39) of the Act and in clause (g) of section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , of goods made during such period after deducting therefrom- (a) the sale-prices or the parts of sale-prices, if any, in respect of sales of goods during such period, which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been purchased by the dealer in West Bengal, upon payment of tax on the maximum retail price of such goods or, where tax on maximum retail price of such goods was paid in West Bengal on an earlier occasion, and (b) the amounts, if any, refunded by the dealer in respect of any such goods returned or rejected by the purchaser within six months from the date of such sales;] 44 [(56) "warehouse" means any enclosure, building or place where a dealer, casual dealer or any other person keeps stocks of goods, and includes a vessel, vehicle or godown;] (57) "works contract" means any agreement for carrying out for cash, deferred payment or other valuable consideration- (a) the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of any building, road, bridge or other immovable property, (b) the installation or repair of any machinery affixed to a building or other immovable property, (c) the overhaul or repair of- 45 [(i) any motor vehicle,] (ii) any sea-going vessel, river craft or steamer, (iii) any other vessel propelled by internal combustion engine or by any other mechanical means, (iv) railway engine, (v) any aircraft, or (vi) any component or accessory part of any of the goods mentioned in items (i) to (v) , or (d) the fitting of, assembling, altering, ornamenting, finishing, furnishing, improving, processing, 46 [treating, adapting or printing on,] any goods; (58) "year" means the year commencing on the first day of April and ending on 47 [the last day of March;] 48 [(59) "zero-rated sale" means a sale of any goods on which no tax is chargeable but credit for the input tax related to that sale is admissible.] Substituted for the words "the West Bengal Commercial Taxes Appellate and Revisional Board" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L Dated 08.08.2005 Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "[3 (6) "Capital goods" means such goods meant for use in the manufacture or for execution of works contract, and such other goods required by a reseller to keep the goods in saleable condition or to effect the sale properly, as may be notified by the State Government in the Official Gazette;]" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L Dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006. Prior text was "Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, the expression "partly during such period" means the year or part of the year for which assessment is made whether or not any tax invoice, invoice or bill has been raised in respect of such contract" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following :"a person who has set up a business of selling or purchasing goods in West Bengal,". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. "newspaper" Omitted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L Dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following : "other than section 11, by a registered dealer, other than those enjoying composition under subsection (3) of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18". Omitted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006. Prior text was "payable under section 11 by a registered dealer on his turnover of purchases, referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (54) of section 2, of raw jute during that period, and". Omitted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006. Prior text was "payable under section 12 by a registered dealer, other than those enjoying composition under sub-section (3) of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18, on his turnover of purchases referred to in sub-clause (c) of clause (54) of section 2, where such purchases made during that period, other than purchases of such taxable goods as may be prescribed;" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following :"printing, rearing". Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following : "in case of a registered dealer who has been allowed to pay tax at a compounded rate under sub-section (3) of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18, the amount of output lax". Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following : "respectively of section 118". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following :"sub-section (4) of section 18". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following : "a sale made by a dealer, includes a sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by The West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006. Prior text was "in case of an occupier of a jute-mill liable to pay tax under section 11, the aggregate of the purchase prices or parts of purchase prices payable by such occupier for the quantities of raw jute purchased by him during such period after deducting the amounts, if any, refunded to him by the seller during such period in respect of any quantity of raw jute returned to the seller within ninety days from the date of its purchase and such other amounts as may be prescribed," Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal (1) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, the State Government may appoint a person to be the Commissioner of Sales Tax. (2) The Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise such powers as may be conferred, and perform such duties as may be required, by or under this Act. (3) The Commissioner may- (a) withdraw to himself from a Special Commissioner, or an Additional Commissioner, or any person appointed under section 6 any case or matter which the Special Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner or such person is competent to deal with in exercise or performance of the powers or duties specified under sub-section (2) of section 4 or sub-section (2) of section 5 or sub-section (2) of section 6 respectively; or (b) transfer any case or matter from a Special Commissioner competent to deal with the same to another Special Commissioner so competent; or (c) transfer any case or matter from an Additional Commissioner competent to deal with the same to another Additional Commissioner so competent; or (d) transfer any case or matter from any person appointed under section 6 competent to deal with the same to another person appointed under that section so competent. (4) Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the Commissioner may, by an order in writing, delegate any of his powers under this Act except those under sub-section (13) of section 93. (5) Any person appointed as the Commissioner under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , and continuing in office as such immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed under this Act and shall continue in office as such till such person ceases to be the Commissioner.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may appoint one or more persons to be the, Special Commissioners of Sales Tax. (2) The Special Commissioner shall have such powers, and shall be entitled to perform such duties, of the Commissioner as the State Government may, by notification, specify. (3) Any reference to the Commissioner in this Act shall, in respect of the powers and duties specified in the notification under sub-section (2) , be deemed to include a reference to the Special Commissioner. (4) Any person appointed as the Special Commissioner under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, and continuing in office as such immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed under this Act and shall continue in office as such till such person ceases to be the Special Commissioner.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may appoint one or more persons to be Additional Commissioners of Sales Tax, and such person or persons shall assist the Commissioner. (2) An Additional Commissioner shall have such of the powers, and shall be entitled to perform such of the duties, of the Commissioner as the State Government may, by notification, specify. (3) Any reference to the Commissioner in this Act shall, in respect of the powers and duties specified in the notification under sub-section (2) , be deemed to include a reference to an Additional Commissioner. (4) Any person appointed as the Additional Commissioner under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , and continuing in office as such immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed under this Act and shall continue in office as such till such person ceases to be the Additional Commissioner.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may appoint such other persons to assist the Commissioner as it thinks fit and may specify the area or areas over which such persons shall exercise jurisdiction. (2) The persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall exercise such powers as may be conferred or prescribed by this Act or delegated to them in writing by the Commissioner under sub-section (4) of section 3. (3) Any person appointed to assist the Commissioner, under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, and continuing in office as such immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed under this Act and shall continue in office as such till such person ceases to be the person appointed to assist the Commissioner,
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may constitute a West Bengal Sales Tax Appellate and Revisional Board for discharging the functions as referred to in section 87. (2) The State Government shall appoint such number of members of the Appellate and Revisional Board as the State Government thinks fit and shall appoint one of the members of the Appellate and Revisional Board to be the President thereof (hereinafter referred to in this section as the President) . (3) The qualifications, conditions of service and tenure of the members constituting the Appellate and Revisional Board shall be such as may be prescribed. (4) No decision or action of the Appellate and Revisional Board shall be called in question merely on the ground of any vacancy in the Appellate and Revisional Board. (5) The functions of the Appellate and Revisional Board may be discharged by any of the members sitting either singly, or in Benches of two or more members, as may be determined by the President. (6) If the members of a Bench are divided, the decision shall be the decision of the majority, if there be a majority, but if the members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the President for hearing on such point or points to one or more of the members of the Appellate and Revisional Board, and such point or points shall be decided according to the majority of the members of the Appellate and Revisional Board, who heard the case including those who first heard it: Provided that if, at any time, the Appellate and Revisional Board consists of only two members and they are divided, the decision of the Appellate and Revisional Board shall be that of the President. (7) Subject to the previous sanction of the State Government, the Appellate and Revisional Board shall, for the purpose of regulating its procedure (including the place or places at which the Appellate and Revisional Board, the Benches or the members thereof shall sit) and providing the rules of business, make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder: Provided that the regulations so made shall be published in the Official Gazette. (8) The Appellate and Revisional Board shall have the power to award costs in any matter decided by it for such amount as it may consider reasonably justified in the facts and circumstances of the case. (9) The amount of cost awarded by the Appellate and Revisional Board against a dealer shall be recoverable from him as if it were the tax due from him under this Act and, in case of default by him, such dues shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue: Provided that the provisions of section 9 and section 10 of the Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Bengal Act III of 1913) , shall not apply to a proceeding for recovery of any cost awarded under this sub-section. (10) On the cost being awarded by the Appellate and Revisional Board against the State Government, the Commissioner shall arrange for the payment of such cost. (11) The President or any member of the West Bengal Commercial Taxes Appellate and Revisional Board appointed under West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , and continuing in office as such immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed as the President or the member of the Appellate and Revisional Board under this Act and shall continue in office as such till he ceases to be such President or member.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may constitute a Bureau of Investigation for discharging the functions referred to in sub-section (3) . (2) The Bureau shall consist of a Special Commissioner or an Additional Commissioner (hereinafter referred to as the Special Officer) and such number of other persons appointed under sub-section (1) of 1 [section 6] to assist the Commissioner as the State Government may deem fit to appoint. (3) The Bureau may, on information or of its own motion or when the State Government or the Commissioner so directs, carry out investigation or hold inquiry into any case of alleged or suspected evasion of tax as well as malpractices so connected therewith and send a report in respect thereof to the Commissioner. (4) The Bureau may, for the purpose of carrying out any investigation or inquiry under sub-section (3) , exercise all the powers under section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70, section 74, 2 [section 76, section 77, section 78], section 79, section 80 and section 81. (5) The Commissioner may, on receipt of a report under sub-section (3) , require the Bureau to transfer to him 3 [any accounts, register or documents including those in the form of electronic records] relating to the said report seized by the Bureau and such accounts, registers or documents shall be retained by the Commissioner for further period, if necessary, subject to the provisions of section 67. (6) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner, require any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner to transfer to it 4 [any accounts, register or documents including those in the form of electronic records] seized by him from any dealer or person under section 67 and, on such transfer, such accounts, registers or documents shall, subject to the provisions of that section, be retained by the Bureau for carrying out the purposes referred to in sub-section (3) and sub-section (7) . (7) The Bureau may, after a case has been investigated or inquired into by it, by order, 5 [assess or reassess net tax or any other tax], impose penalty, determine interest, or collect or enforce payment of tax, penalty or interest in respect of such case under this Act. (8) The Special Officer shall assign such functions of the Bureau to such of the persons referred to in sub-section (2) as the Special Officer may think fit. (9) The Bureau shall have, for carrying out the purposes of this Act, the same powers as are referred to in section 91. (10) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Special Officer shall be competent to exercise all the powers which are exercisable under this Act 6 [by a Special Commissioner or an Additional Commissioner, as the case may be,] and any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner when appointed in the Bureau, shall be competent to exercise all the powers which are exercisable by such person under this Act and the rules made thereunder. (11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 6, the Special Officer and the other persons appointed in the Bureau shall have jurisdiction over the whole of West Bengal. (12) The Bureau of Investigation constituted under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , and continuing to have jurisdiction and powers under that Act immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been constituted, and shall have jurisdiction and powers under this Act, and the Special Officer, and other persons appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act to assist the Commissioner, appointed in the Bureau of Investigation as aforesaid and continuing in office immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have been appointed in the Bureau under this Act and shall continue in office as such till such Special Officer or other person ceases to be appointed in the Bureau. Substituted for the word and figure "section 3" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 31.07.2006 for the following :"section 76, section 78". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 8A--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) The State Government may, by notification, establish a Commission to be known as the West Bengal Value Added Tax Settlement Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "Settlement Commission") to discharge the function assigned to it under the Act. (2) The Settlement Commission shall consist of not less than three members. (3) No person shall be eligible for appointment as a member of the Settlement Commission, unless- (a) he is an Additional Commissioner or a Special Commissioner; or (b) he has been, prior to his retirement on superannuation from the service of the State Government, an Additional Commissioner or a Special Commissioner. (4) A member of the Settlement Commission shall hold office for a term of two years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-two years, whichever is earlier. (5) The other terms and conditions of appointment, salary or allowances payable to a member shall be such as may be prescribed. (6) A member of the Settlement Commission shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.(45 of 1860) (7) The Settlement Commission shall sit in the bench of three members at such place, and discharge its functions in such manner, as may be prescribed.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No.947-L dated 30.07.2006.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 8B--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) A dealer who intends to make an application for settlement of any case to the Settlement Commission, shall- (a) in case of any pending case, within one hundred and twenty days from the date of coming into force of this section; or (b) in any other case, within one hundred and twenty days from the date of receipt of notice of demand, the date of commencement of proceedings under section 93 or the date of registration of a dealer as a sick unit, as the case may be, apply, in such form, and in such manner, as may be prescribed: Provided that an appeal which has been preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed for filing of such appeal, shall not be taken into consideration for the purpose of this section. (2) The dealer shall, in his application, state the terms and conditions on which he is willing to settle the case. Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "case" means- (a) any proceedings arising out of an offence alleged to have been committed under section 93; (b) a notice of demand served to a dealer for realisation of tax. interest or penalty, if any, on an assessment which is inconsistent with an assessment made earlier under the Act due to application of different rate of tax in respect of any goods or non-admissibility of a claim of such dealer in respect of this assessment, in spite of the fact that no amendment in the provisions of, or no addition, alteration or modification in the Schedule to, the Act has been made during the period of such earlier assessment and this assessment or in spite of the fact that a particular practice or procedure has been followed by the dealer in respect of such earlier assessment; (c) a notice of demand served to a dealer for realisation of tax, interest or penalty, if any, on an assessment made under the Act where the dealer claims by producing verifiable documents that the rate of tax made applicable in respect of any goods in such assessment is different from the rate of tax applicable in respect of such goods under the normal trade practice; (d) a notice of demand served to a dealer for realisation of tax, interest or penalty, if any, on an assessment made under the Act, where such amount of tax, interest or penalty, if any, remains unrealised on the date of its registration as a sick unit with the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 8C--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) On receipt of the application under section 8B, the Settlement Commission shall give an opportunity of hearing to the dealer making such application. (2) After hearing the dealer concerned, the Settlement Commission shall refer the matter to the Commissioner for obtaining his views thereon. (3) Where the Commissioner on the reference of the application under sub-section (2) for his views, finds that such application is not a fit case for settlement by the Settlement Commission, the Settlement Commission shall, prima facie, reject such application based on such findings of the Commissioner. (4) Where the Commissioner on the reference of the application under sub-section (2) for his views, agrees to the terms and conditions of the dealer, the Settlement Commission shall prepare a report, in writing, in respect of such terms and conditions of settlement. (5) The Settlement Commission shall, after preparing the report under sub-section (4) , forward it to the State Government for approval, and upon approval of such report by the State Government, the Settlement Commission shall settle the case on payment by the dealer concerned of such sum as may be determined by it and in such manner as may be prescribed. (6) The Settlement Commission shall settle the case within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the application and in case the dealer and the Commissioner cannot agree to the terms and conditions of settlement, the application shall stand rejected at the expiry of the period of such three months. (7) The provision of section 91 shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the Settlement Commission.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 8D--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Upon settlement of the case by the Settlement Commission under section 8C,- (a) the demand involved in the case shall be deemed to have been fully satisfied and the pending case or cases shall not be proceeded with any further; or (b) no proceedings by way of review or revision shall be taken in respect of such case; or (c) the proceedings as referred to in clause (a) of Explanation to section 8B shall not be further proceeded with.] Inserted by the West Bengal act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 9--> State(s): West Bengal All persons appointed under this Act to exercise any power or to perform any function thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) .
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 10--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every dealer, who is liable to pay tax immediately before the appointed day under any provision, other than section 15, of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (W.B. Act XLIX of 1994) , and who would have continued to be so liable under the said Act on such appointed day had this Act not come into force, shall, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax under this Act on all his sales, other than those referred to in section 14, effected on and from such appointed day. (2) Every dealer to whom the provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply and whose gross turnover of sales calculated from the commencement of the year ending on the day immediately before the appointed day, exceeds the taxable quantum, as applicable to him under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, on the last day of such year shall, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax under this Act on all his sales, other than those referred to in section 14, effected on and from such appointed day. (3) Every dealer to whom the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) do not apply, shall, in addition to his liability to pay tax, if any, under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax under this Act,- (a) on all his sales, other than those referred to in section 14, of goods which have been imported by him from any place outside West Bengal with effect from the day on which he effects first sale of such goods; or (b) on all his sales, other than those referred to in section 14, of goods effected on or after the date immediately following the date on which his turnover of sales calculated from the commencement of any year exceeds, at any time within such year, such taxable quantum as may be prescribed, and 2 different taxable quantum may be prescribed for different goods or for different classes of dealers ] Provided that the taxable quantum as may be prescribed under this clause shall not exceed five lakh rupees. (4) Every dealer who has been registered under sub-section (2) of section 24 for his application under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of that section, on any date prior to the date on which his turnover of sales exceeds the taxable quantum referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) , he shall be liable to pay tax on all his sales from the date of such registration. (5) Every dealer who incurs liability to pay tax under sub-section (3) of section 27C, shall, notwithstanding that his turnover of sales does not exceed the taxable quantum referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) , also be liable, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, to pay tax on sales by him of goods from the date of transfer of business. (6) Every dealer who incurs liability to pay tax under sub-section (2) or subsection (3) or sub-section (4) of section 14, shall, notwithstanding that his turnover of sales does not exceed the taxable quantum referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) , also be liable, in addition to the tax payable by him under section 14, to pay tax on sales of goods effected by him under this section on and from the day he incurs liability to pay tax under that section. (7) Any dealer who is liable to pay tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , shall, notwithstanding that his turnover of sales under the Act does not exceed taxable quantum referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) , also be liable to pay tax under this Act on all sales of goods effected by him on and from the date on which he becomes liable to pay tax under that Act. (8) Every dealer who has become liable to pay tax under this section, shall continue to be so liable until the expiry of three consecutive years commencing on and from the appointed day and such further period after the date of such expiry as may be prescribed, during each of which,- (a) he has not effected any sale of goods imported by him from outside into West Bengal; or (b) his turnover of sales has failed to exceed the taxable quantum referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3) , and on expiry of such three years or such further period, his liability to pay such tax shall cease: Provided that where a dealer has become liable to pay tax under sub-section (6) or sub-section (7) and has not separately incurred liability to pay tax under sub-section (3) , he shall continue to be so liable until his liability ceases under section 14 or under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, as the case may be, (9) The provisions of sub-section (3) , or sub-section (4) , or sub-section (5) , or sub-section (6) , or sub-section (7) , as the case may be, shall apply to every dealer whose liability to pay tax ceases under sub-section (8) as if such dealer has not ever become liable to pay tax under this section. (10) The Commissioner shall, after making such enquiry as he may think necessary and after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, fix the date on and from which such dealer has become liable to pay tax under this section.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words " different taxable quantum may be prescribed for different goods or for different classes of dealers" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 11--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every dealer who, 3 [as a shipper of jute], has been liable immediately before the appointed day to pay tax under section 12 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (W.B. Act XLIX of 1994) and who would have continued to be so liable on such appointed day under that Act had this Act not come into force, shall, in addition to his liability to pay tax, if any, under any other provisions of this Act and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) , be liable to pay tax on all his purchases of raw jute in West Bengal with effect from the appointed day. (2) Every dealer, being 4 [a shipper of jute], to whom the provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, shall, in addition to his liability to pay tax, if any, under any other provisions of this Act and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) , be liable to pay tax on all his purchases of raw jute in West Bengal from the date of first purchase effected on or after the appointed day. (3) The dealer referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) , as the case may be, 5 [shall be liable to pay tax on such part of his turnover of purchases of raw jute in West Bengal, as referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (54) of section 2 which remains] after deducting there from such purchases which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) or in the course of import of goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act. (4) Every dealer who incurs liability to pay tax under this section, shall continue to be so liable until the expiry of three consecutive years commencing on or after the appointed day and such further period after the date of such expiry as may be prescribed, during each of which he has not effected any purchase of raw jute in West Bengal. (5) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to every dealer whose liability to pay tax ceases under sub-section (4) as if such dealer had not ever become liable to pay tax under this section.] Word 'Incident' perhaps not happily chosen, which may rather read 'Incidence' instead. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance act, 2006 vide Notification no. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following:" an occupier of a jute mill or a shipper of jute" Substituted by the West Bengal Finance act, 2006 vide Notification no. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following:" an occupier of a jute mill or a shipper of jute" Substituted by the West Bengal Finance act, 2006 vide Notification no. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following: " shall be liable to pay tax on all his purchases of raw jute in West Bengal ".
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 12--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) Every registered dealer, other than those enjoying composition under sub-section (3) , sub-section (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16, or sub-section (4) of section 18, shall, in addition to the tax payable under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax on that part of his turnover of purchases which represents- (a) purchases of goods which are not meant for the purposes specified in clause (a) to clause (i) , of sub-section (4) of section 22; or (b) purchases of goods specified in the negative list appended to section 22 where no input tax credit or input tax rebate is allowed. (2) Every registered dealer enjoying composition under subsection (3) , sub-section (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16, or subsection (4) of section 18, shall, in addition to the tax payable under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax on his turnover of purchases.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following :"Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005[Every dealer liable to pay tax under section 10 or section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 27C, and registered under section 24 shall, in addition to the tax payable under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay on all his purchases in West Bengal from any person, whether a dealer or not, after deducting therefrom-(a) purchases of goods, sales of which are declared tax-free under section 21; (b) purchases which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 or in the course of import of goods into, or export of the goods out of the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act; (c) purchases of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been made from a registered dealer in West Bengal; (d) purchases of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been made from a dealer in West Bengal who has applied for registration within thirty days of his incurring liability to pay tax under sub-section (2) of section 23 and who has issued a tax invoice: Provided that where the application for registration of the dealer has been rejected., no deduction shall be allowed on such purchases, from the date of order of rejection of the application; (e) such other purchases as may be prescribed. (2) The burden of proving that any purchase effected by a dealer is not liable to tax under sub-section (1) shall lie on such dealer.]"
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 13--> State(s): West Bengal 1 Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 14--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, any transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the execution of a works contract in West Bengal shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such transfer is made. (2) Every dealer, who is liable on the day immediately before the appointed day to pay tax under section 15 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (W.B. Act XLIX of 1994) , and who would have continued to be so liable under the said Act on such appointed day had this Act not come into force, shall, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax on all transfers of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) , from such appointed day, at the rate specified in section 18. (3) Every dealer to whom the provisions of sub-section (2) do not apply and whose contractual transfer price calculated from the commencement of the year ending on the day immediately before the appointed day exceeds the amount prescribed under section 15 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (W.B. Act XLIX of 1994) , on the last day of such year shall, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, be liable to pay tax on all transfers of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) , from such appointed day, at the rate specified in section 18. (4) Every dealer to whom the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) do not apply, shall, if his contractual transfer price calculated from the commencement of any year, exceeds five lakh rupees at any time within such year, be liable, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, to pay tax on all transfers of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) at the rate specified in section 18 on and from the day immediately following the day on which such contractual transfer price first exceeds five lakh rupees. (5) Every dealer who has been registered under sub-section (2) of section 24 for his application under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of that section, on any date prior to the date on which his contractual transfer price exceeds five lakh rupees, shall be liable to pay tax on all transfers of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) at the rate specified in section 18 on and from the date of such registration. (6) Every dealer who incurs liability to pay tax under sub-section (3) of section 27C, shall, notwithstanding that his contractual transfer price does not exceed five lakh rupees, also be liable, in addition to the tax, if any, payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, to pay tax on transfer by him of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) at the rate specified in section 18 on and from the date of transfer of business. (7) Every dealer who incurs liability to pay tax under section 10 or section 11, he shall, notwithstanding that his contractual transfer price does not exceed five lakh rupees, also be liable, in addition to the tax payable by him under any other provisions of this Act, to pay tax on transfer by him of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract referred to in sub-section (1) at the rate specified in section 18 on and from the day he incurs liability to pay tax under that section. (8) Every dealer who has become liable to pay tax under this section, shall continue to be so liable until the expiry of three consecutive years commencing on or after the appointed day, during each of which his contractual transfer price does not exceed five lakh rupees and such further period after the date of such expiry as may be prescribed, and on the expiry of such three years or further period, his liability to pay such tax shall cease: Provided that where a dealer has become liable to pay tax under sub-section (7) and has not incurred liability to pay tax under sub-section (4) , he shall continue to be so liable until his liability ceases under section 10 or section 11. (9) The provisions of sub-section (4) , or sub-section (5) , or sub-section (6) , as the case may be, shall apply to every dealer whose liability to pay tax ceases under sub-section (8) as if such dealer has not ever become liable to pay tax under these sections. (10) The Commissioner, after making such enquiry as he may think necessary and after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, shall fix the date on and from which such dealer shall become liable to pay tax under this section.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 15--> State(s): West Bengal Every casual dealer shall be liable to pay tax- (a) on all his sales in West Bengal of goods brought by him from any place outside West Bengal either by way of purchase from a person, or procured by him otherwise, and 1 [(b) on his every purchase of goods in West Bengal, after deducting therefrom- (i) purchases of goods, sales of which are declared tax-free under section 21; (ii) purchases which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , or in the course of import of goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act; (iii) purchases of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been made from a registered dealer in West Bengal: Provided that the burden of proving that any purchase effected by a casual dealer is not liable to tax shall be on such casual dealer.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 16--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) , the tax payable by a dealer, who is liable to pay tax under section 10, or subsection (3) of section 24, or sub-section (3) of section 27C on his turnover of sales, shall be levied on such part of his turnover of sales as remains after deducting therefrom- (a) sales of goods declared tax-free under section 21; (b) sales of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner not to have taken place within West Bengal, or to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, or in the course of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act; 2 [(ba) sales of goods which are zero-rated as specified in Schedule AA.] (c) such other sales on such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.] (2) The tax payable by a dealer on the turnover of sales as referred to in sub-section (1) , shall be levied- (a) at the rate of one per centum of such part of his turnover of safes as represents sales of any goods specified in Schedule B; 3 [(b) at the rate of four per centum of such part of his turnover of sales as represents sales of- (i) such capital goods, as the State Government may, by notification, specify; and (ii) any goods specified in Schedule C] 4 [(ba) at the rate of twelve decimal five zero per centum of such part of his turnover of sales as represents sales of any goods specified in Schedule CA;] (c) at such rate as may be fixed by the State Government under section 19, on such part of his turnover of sales as represents sales of any goods specified in Schedule D. Explanation.-For the purpose of this sub-section, it is hereby declared that the export of the goods out of the territory of India shall be zero rated i.e. the tax paid under this Act shall be refunded or adjusted, as the case may be, against the output tax payable, if any, by a dealer. 5 [(2A) When taxable goods are sold together with containers or packing materials, then notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) , the rate of tax applicable to such containers or packing materials, as the case may be, shall be the same as that applicable to the goods contained, or packed, and the sale price of the containers or packing materials, whether shown separately or not, shall be included in the sale price of the goods. (2B) Where the sale of any goods, which is exempt from tax, is packed in any container or in any packing material, then notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) , the sale of such container or packing material shall also be exempt from tax.] 6 [(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) , any registered dealer having liability to pay tax under this Act, may, at his option,- (a) if his gross sales in the year ending on the day preceding the appointed day does not exceed fifty lakh rupees; or (b) if his turnover of sales in the preceding year commencing on or after the appointed day 7 [does not exceed fifty lakh rupees or] (c) 8 [ if his turnover of sales during the period from the commencement of the year in which he gets himself registered to the date of his registration, does not exceed fifty lakh rupees] pay tax at such compounded rate not exceeding one per centum of the total turnover of sales of such dealer in the year for which such option is required to be exercised, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, for each tax period of the year in lieu of tax payable under sub-section (2) , on all his sales: Provided that the registered dealer having liability to pay tax under this Act as stated in this sub-section shall not include- (a) an importer; or (b) a manufacturer; or (c) a dealer engaged in execution of works contract; or 9 ["(ca) a dealer who has purchased tea sold under the auspices of any tea auction centre in West Bengal duly authorised by the Indian Tea Board; or";] (d) a dealer who transfers goods otherwise than by way of sale within or outside the State; or (e) a dealer who sells goods within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) ; or (f) a dealer who sells goods in the course of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956: Provided further that such dealer shall not be entitled to issue tax invoice referred to in clause (48) of section 2 of the Act: Provided also that a registered dealer who, in addition to the purchase of goods in the course of his business in a year, has also received goods from the supplier within or outside West Bengal, on branch transfer or on consignment basis, for which no price has been paid, shall not be entitled to opt for payment of tax under such compounded rate: Provided also that if during the period of enjoyment of payment of tax at compounded rate, turnover of sales of a dealer exceeds fifty lakh rupees, he shall become ineligible to pay tax under this sub-section from the commencement of the month immediately following the month during which his turnover of sales exceeded such sum.] 10 [(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) , a registered dealer being a club having liability to pay tax under the Act, selling goods in West Bengal to its members or others, may, at its option, pay tax, in lieu of tax payable under sub-section (2) , for each tax period of a year, at such compounded rate not exceeding eight per centum as the State Government may, by notification, specify, on the turnover of sales of such goods on which tax is payable, subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed: Provided that such dealer shall not be entitled to issue tax invoice referred to in clause (48) of section 2 of the Act. (3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) , a registered dealer having liability to pay tax under the Act, who makes sale by way of transferring the right to use any goods as mentioned in sub-clause (c) of clause (39) of section 2, may, at his option, pay tax, in lieu of tax payable under sub-section (2) , for each tax period of a year, at such compounded rate not exceeding two per centum as the State Government may, by notification, specify, on the turnover of sales of such goods on which tax is payable, subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed: Provided that such dealer shall not be entitled to issue tax invoice referred to in clause (48) of section 2 of the Act.] 11 [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) and sub-section (2A) , any registered dealer, who imports into or manufactures such goods in West Bengal as may be notified by the State Government, may, at his option, pay, in lieu of the tax payable by him on sale price of such goods under this section, 12 [tax at such rate on the maximum retail price of such goods as may be specified in that notification, and different rates may be fixed for different items of such goods:] Provided that where a dealer has purchased any goods,- (a) from an importer or a manufacturer upon payment of tax on the maximum retail price of such goods; or (b) from another registered dealer where tax on the maximum retail price of such goods was paid in West Bengal in an earlier occasion, the purchasing dealer, irrespective of whether he is registered or not, while making resale of such goods in West Bengal, shall, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Act, be entitled to recover from the buyer the amount of tax paid by him at the time of purchase of such goods under such conditions and restrictions, and in such manner, as may be prescribed.] 13 [(5) Any registered dealer, who intends to opt for payment under sub-section (3) of this section, shall exercise his 14 [option for a year, or a part of the year in which he gets himself registered], by making an application to the Commissioner in such manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006. Substituted for " (b) at the rate of four per centum of such part of his turnover of sales as represents sales of any goods specified in Schedule C;"] by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "does not exceed fifty lakh rupees" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following :"tax at full rate on the maximum retail price of such goods in the manner as may be prescribed:" Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "option for a year" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 16A--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The tax payable by a casual dealer under clause (a) of section 15 shall be levied on such part of his sale price which remains after deducting therefrom- (a) sales of goods declared tax-free under section 21; (b) sales of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , or in the course of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act. (2) The tax payable by a casual dealer as referred to in sub-section (1) , shall be levied at the rate of tax applicable to a sale of such goods under subsection (2) of section 16.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 17--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) The tax payable by a dealer, who is liable to pay tax on his turnover of purchases under section 12, shall be levied- (a) in the case of a dealer liable to pay tax under section 11, at the rate of two per centum on such part of the turnover of purchases of raw jute as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 11; and (b) in the case of a dealer liable to pay tax under section 12, at the rate of tax as applicable to a sale of such goods under sub-section (2) of section 16, on his taxable turnover of purchases. (2) The expression "taxable turnover of purchases" as stated in clause (b) of sub-section (1) , shall mean, in the case of a registered dealer, that part of his turnover of purchases, which remains after deducting therefrom- (a) purchases of goods, sales of which are declared tax-free under section 21; (b) purchases of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have taken place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the  Central Sales Tax Act, 1956(74 of 1956) or in the course of import of goods into, or export of the goods out of the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of that Act; (c) purchases of goods which are shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner to have been made from a registered dealer in West Bengal; (d) such other purchases as may be prescribed. (3) The burden of proof shall lie on the dealer who claims any purchase not liable to be taxed under sub-section (1) .] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following :" Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [The tax payable by a dealer, who is liable to pay tax on his turnover of purchases under section 11 or section 12, shall be levied-(a) at the rate of two per centum of such part of the turnover of purchases of raw jute under section 11 as defined in sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) of clause (54) of section 2; or (b) at the rate of tax as applicable to a sale of such goods under subsection (2) of section 16 on such part of the turnover of purchases as represents purchases under section 12 as defined in sub-clause (c) of clause (54) of section 2: Provided that in calculating the tax payable under the clause (a) by a dealer, who is the occupier of a jute mill, on his turnover of purchases of raw jute during the period, the purchase price in respect of any quantity of raw jute sold and despatched by him during such period subsequent to his purchase thereof to any place within West Bengal shall be deducted from such turnover of purchases.]"
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 17A--> State(s): West Bengal The tax payable by a casual dealer shall be levied on his purchases, as referred to in clause (b) of section 15, at the rate of tax as applicable to a sale of such goods under sub-section (2) of section 16.] Substituted by the west Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following :"Levy of tax on purchases by casual dealers at contractual transfer price" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 18--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to the provision of sub-section (2) , the tax payable by a dealer, who is liable to pay tax under section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 24 or sub-section (3) of section 27C for transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract, shall be levied on his taxable contractual transfer price- (a) at the rate of four per centum, where goods represents those specified in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) ; and 2 ["(aa) at the rate of four per centum, where goods represents those involved in printing materials, and"] (b) at the rate of twelve decimal five zero per centum, where goods represents other than those 3 ["specified in clause (a) or clause (aa) "] (2) The expression "taxable contractual transfer price" as stated in subsection (1) , shall mean, in the case of a dealer who is liable to pay tax on transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of a works contract under section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 24 or sub-section (3) of section 27C, that part of his contractual transfer price during any period which remains after deducting therefrom- (a) contractual transfer of goods, sales of which are declared tax-free under section 21; (b) charges towards labour, service and other like charges as may be prescribed; (c) all amounts paid to the sub-contractors for execution of the works contract, whether wholly or in part; and (d) such other contractual transfers as may be prescribed: Provided that no deduction under clause (c) shall be made unless the dealer claiming deduction, produces proof to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that- (a) the sub-contractor is a registered dealer liable to pay tax under this Act; and (b) such amount of deduction is included in his return referred to in section 32; and (c) tax under sub-section (1) , in respect of such amount of deduction has been paid by him. (3) Where in respect of contractual transfer price referred to in clause (10) of section 2, the works contractor does not maintain proper accounts, or the accounts maintained by him are not found by the assessing authority to be worthy of credence, and the amount actually incurred towards charges for labour and other services, or profit relating to supply of labour and services, or the taxable contractual transfer price for applying proper rate of tax, are not ascertainable, such charges for labour and services, or such profit, or such taxable contractual transfer price shall, for the purpose of deductions, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this section, be determined on the basis of such percentage of the value of the works contract as may be prescribed and different percentages may be prescribed for different types of works contract. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this section, any registered dealer, who is liable to pay tax under section 14 or sub-section (3) of section 24 or sub-section (3) of section 27C, for transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract, and who is not engaged in- (a) making sale as referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (g) of section 2 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) ; or (b) making sale in the course of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (c) transferring goods otherwise than by way of sale for execution of works contract outside the State, may, at his option, pay tax at such compounded rate not less than two per centum and not exceeding five per centum of the aggregate of the amount received or receivable by such dealer and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, for each month of the year in lieu of the amount of tax payable by him under sub-section (1) : Provided that such dealer shall not be entitled to issue tax invoice referred to in clause (48) of section 2 of the Act.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "specified in clause (a) " by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 19--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government may, by notification, fix the rate of tax, with prospective or retrospective effect, not exceeding thirty per centum of the turnover of sales of goods specified in Schedule D, and different rates may be fixed for different items of such goods.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 20--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government, after giving by notification not less than fourteen days' notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, with prospective or retrospective effect, add to, amend, or alter 1 [any Schedule to this Act.]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 21--> State(s): West Bengal No tax shall be payable under this Act on sale of goods specified in column (2) of Schedule A, subject to the conditions and exceptions, if any, set out in the corresponding entry in column (3) thereof.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 21A--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16 or section 16A, sale of goods between persons, whether dealer or not, or organisations as specified in column (2) of Schedule AA, shall be zero-rated as defined in clause (59) of section 2. (2) Where any goods are sold in the course of export within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , such sales shall be zero-rated as defined in clause (59) of section 2.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 22--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every registered dealer other than those specified elsewhere in the Act, shall be entitled to claim an input tax credit or input tax rebate, as defined in clause (19) of section 2, and in such manner, and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed. (2) The input tax creditor input tax rebate, as referred to in sub-section (1) , shall be allowed to 2 [the registered dealer who has purchased taxable goods (hereinafter referred to as the "purchasing dealer") during a tax period for use by him in West Bengal] subject to the provisions as laid down in sub-section (3) to sub-section (20) . (3) Where a registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, without entering into a transaction of sale, issues to another dealer tax invoice with the intention to defraud the Government revenue, the Commissioner may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit and after giving the dealers a reasonable opportunity of being heard, deny the benefit of input tax credit or input tax rebate to such dealers issuing or accepting such tax invoice, either prospectively or retrospectively, for the full tax period from such date as he may deem fit and proper. (4) 3 [Subject to the other provisions of this section, the input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be allowed] to the extent of the amount of tax paid or payable by the purchasing dealer on his purchase of taxable goods, other than such taxable goods as specified in the negative list appended to this section, made in the State from a dealer when such goods are purchased for- (a) sale or resale by him in West Bengal; or (b) sale in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) ; or (c) use as containers or materials for packing of taxable goods intended for sale, in the State or in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or 4 [(ca) use as containers or materials for packing of goods intended for sale in the course of export out of India within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956(74 of 1956) ; or] (d) use as raw materials and consumable stores required for the purpose of manufacture of taxable goods intended for sale in the State or in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (e) use as containers or packing materials for use in the packing of goods so manufactured as referred to in clause (d) above; or (f) use in the execution of works contract; or (g) use as capital goods required, for the purpose of manufacture or resale of taxable goods or for execution of works contract, as the case may be, and purchases of such goods are capitalised in the books of account of such manufacturer, works contractor or reseller, as the case may be; or (h) use as raw materials, capital goods and consumable stores required for the purpose of manufacture of any goods to be sold in the course of export under section 5 of the Central Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , and containers or packing materials for use in the packing of goods so manufactured; or (i) making zero-rated sales other than those referred to in clause (h) above: Provided that if purchases are used partially for the purposes specified in this sub-section, the input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be allowed to the extent they are used for the purpose's specified in this sub-section. (5) The input tax creditor input tax rebate shall not be claimed by the purchasing dealer until he receives- (a) original tax invoice as referred to in sub-section (1) of section 64 issued in the prescribed manner evidencing the amount of tax, from the registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, from whom he has purchased the goods: Provided that if the original tax invoice issued to a registered dealer is lost from his custody, the purchasing dealer shall, on making an application to the Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed, be entitled to claim input tax credit or input tax rebate on the strength of the order, if any, issued by the Commissioner under this sub-section; and (b) original invoice, cash memo or bill, as referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section64, as the case may be, issued in the prescribed manner, from the unregistered dealer from whom he has purchased the goods. (6) If the input tax credit or input tax rebate available to a registered dealer for a year exceeds the output tax for that year, the excess input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be carried forward to the next year, in the manner as may be prescribed. (7) Where the taxable goods purchased are- (a) dispatched outside the State otherwise than by way of sale; or (b) used as raw materials, consumable stores in manufacture of taxable goods, or in the packing of goods so manufactured, and the goods so manufactured are dispatched outside the State otherwise than by way of sale, the registered dealer, shall be entitled to input tax credit or input tax rebate of the amount of input tax paid or payable under clause (18) of section 2 calculated at the applicable rate which exceeds the amount calculated at the rate of four per centum: Provided that no input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be allowed to such dealer unless the amount of input tax calculated at the applicable rate exceeds the amount calculated at the rate of four per centum: Provided further that where a registered dealer has already enjoyed input tax credit or input tax rebate at a rate which is more than the rate he is eligible under this sub-section, his input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be reversed to the extent to which he is not eligible. (8) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Act, when a dealer enjoying deferment of payment of tax under clause (a) , or tax holiday under clause (b) , or remission of payment of tax under clause (c) , of sub-section (1) of section 118, as the case may be, purchases within West Bengal, taxable goods which are used as raw materials and consumable stores in the manufacture of taxable goods or in the packing of goods so manufactured, or which are used as capital goods required for the purpose of manufacture of taxable goods, such dealer shall not been titled to input tax rebate during the period of such enjoyment which shall be accumulated and carried forward until the expiry of such period of deferment, or tax holiday, or remission, as the case may be: Provided that such dealer shall be entitled to such accumulated input tax credit or input tax rebate after the expiry of such period of deferment, tax holiday or remission, as the case may be, in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed: Provided further that where in certain circumstances the output tax on sale of such goods in West Bengal by such dealer is not deferred, exempted, remitted, as the case may be, such dealer shall be entitled to input tax credit or input tax rebate in respect of purchases of such taxable goods within West Bengal: Provided also that where the goods manufactured by using such goods have been exported out of the territory of India, such dealer shall be entitled to refund of input tax creditor input tax rebate in respect of such purchases of taxable goods within West Bengal. 5 [(8A) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, a dealer as referred to in sub-section (8) , in lieu of allowing his input tax credit or input tax rebate to be accumulated and carried forward until the expiry of his period of deferment, or tax holiday, or remission, as the case may be, may, at his option, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, be entitled to refund of seventy-five per centum of the accumulated input tax credit or input tax rebate in respect of any quarter of a year in such manner as may be prescribed.] (9) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained elsewhere in this Act, a registered dealer as referred to in sub-section (1) , shall be entitled to input tax credit or input tax rebate on taxable goods, other than capital goods, lying in stock of such dealer on the date on which he became liable to pay tax under this Act irrespective of the fact that such dealer has not paid input tax under this Act, in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed, when such goods are purchased for- (a) sale or resale by him in West Bengal; or (b) sale in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) ; or (c) use as containers or materials for packing of taxable goods intended for sale, in West Bengal or in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (d) use as raw materials and consumable stores required for the purpose of manufacture of taxable goods intended for sale in West Bengal or in the course of inter-State trade and commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (e) use as containers or packing materials for use in the packing of goods so manufactured as referred to in clause (d) above; or (f) use in the execution of works contract; or (g) use as raw materials and consumable stores required for the purpose of manufacture of any goods to be sold in the course of export under section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , and containers or packing materials for use in the packing of goods so manufactured; or (h) making zero-rated sales other than those referred to in clause (g) above: Provided further that the burden of proof that such goods are meant for the purposes mentioned in clause (a) to clause (h) , shall lie on such dealer. (10) The methods used by a registered dealer in a year to determine the extent to which the goods are sold, used, consumed or supplied, or intended to be sold, used, consumed or supplied, shall be fair, reasonable and uniform throughout the year: Provided that the Commissioner may, after giving a registered dealer an opportunity of being heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the method adopted by such dealer and redetermine the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate. (11) Every registered dealer availing of the input tax credit or input tax rebate shall maintain such registers and books of account, and such accounts as referred to in section 63,in such manner, as may be prescribed. (12) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this section, no input tax credit or input tax rebate shall be allowed for purchases- (a) made from a registered dealer who has been allowed to pay tax at a compounded rate under sub-section(3) 6 [, or sub-section (3A) , or sub-section (3B) , of section 16, or sub-section (4) of section 18]; or (b) made in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (c) made in the course of import from outside the country within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956; or (d) made for use in business as defined in sub-clause (a) of clause (5) of section 2, but are subsequently used for any other purposes; or (e) of such goods and under such circumstances, as are specified in the negative list appended to this section, (13) Where- (a) a registered dealer- (i) purchases goods for the purposes specified in sub-section (4) and such goods are used fully orpartly for purposes other than those specified in that sub-section; or (ii) purchases goods and such goods are used fully or partly, for such purposes for which enjoyment of input tax credit or input tax rebate is not permissible; or (iii) purchases goods and avails input tax credit or input tax rebate on such purchases on which he is not entitled to enjoy input tax credit or input tax rebate, or (b) a registered dealer has enjoyed input tax credit or input tax rebate, in respect of goods other than the capital goods lying in stock on the appointed day, or under sub-section (9) , but such goods were, prior to such enjoyment or after, has been so damaged or destroyed that such goods are unsaleable, the input tax credit or input tax rebate, if availed of, for such goods, shall be reversed to that extent to which he is not eligible in the tax period during which such use has taken place, in such manner as may be prescribed. (14) Where a registered dealer has purchased any taxable goods from a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, and if the application for registration of the selling dealer is rejected subsequently, the purchasing registered dealer shall be entitled to input tax credit or input tax rebate against such purchases made till the date of order of rejection of such application. (15) Where a transferee, lessee, or licensee is a dealer deemed to be registered under section 27B or where a transferee, lessee, or licensee is a dealer who has incurred liability to pay tax under section 27C and is registered under section 24, as the case may be, such transferee, lessee, or licensee shall, after making adjustments byway of reverse credit, if any, arising out of such transfer, be entitled to the input tax credit or input tax rebate, lying unutilised in the account of transferor, lessor, or licensor, as the case may be, subject to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that such input tax credit or input tax rebate has not earlier been availed of by such transferor, lessor, or licensor. (16) Where any purchaser being a registered dealer to whom a credit note or a debit note has been issued under section 44, as a consequence of which the input tax credit or input tax rebate availed of by him in any period in respect of which the purchase of goods relates, becomes either short or excess, such registered dealer shall compensate such short or excess by adjusting the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate allowed to him in respect of the tax period in which the credit note or debit note, as the case may be, has been issued subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. (17) The 7 [net tax credit for a tax period or a part thereof shall be determined] in the following manner, namely:- Net tax credit = A + B - C Where- "A" represents the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate, for the tax period, which the dealer is entitled to under sub-section (1) subject to other provisions of this section and including input tax credit or input tax rebate availed in short of the eligible amount as referred to in sub-section (16) during the preceding tax periods not exceeding twelve English calendar months; "B" represents outstanding input tax credit or input tax rebate brought forward as determined from the previous tax period; "C" represents reverse tax credit as determined under the second proviso to sub-section (7) or sub-section (13) 8 [or sub-section (15) ] and includes the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate availed in excess of the eligible amount as referred to in sub-section (16) . (18) The State Government may, by notification specify any class of dealers that shall not be entitled to input tax credit or input tax rebate whether in full or in part. (19) Where a registered dealer transfers any goods to an auctioneer or a broker or any other agent, such auctioneer or broker or any other agent shall not be entitled to get any input tax credit or input tax rebate. (20) The burden of proof on the admissibility of the amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate, shall lie on the registered dealer. NEGATIVE LIST [See sub-section (4) of section 22] List of goods not eligible for input tax credit or input tax rebate Serial No. Description of goods Exceptions (1) (2) (3) 1. Air-conditioning units, air-coolers, fans and air circulators. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such goods. 2. All automobiles including commercial vehicles, and two and three wheelers, and spare parts for repair and maintenance thereof. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such automobiles or spare parts. 3. Crude oil. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in crude oil or of manufacturing any goods taxable under the Act using crude oil as a raw material. 4. Food, beverages and tobacco products. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such goods. 5. Building materials, namely, bricks, sand, cement, stone-chips, iron and steel as referred to in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , marble, tiles, doors, windows, sanitary fittings, bathroom fittings, drain pipes and all other materials used in construction, reconstruction or repair of a civil structure or part thereof. When the registered dealer is a works contractor, or when the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such goods. 6. Office equipments. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such goods. 7. Furniture, fixture including electrical fixtures and fittings. When the registered dealer is in the business of dealing in such goods. 8. Taxable goods which are used as capital goods, raw materials, consumable stores required in the manufacture of goods specified in Schedule A or used in the packing of goods so manufactured and not sold in the course of export. 9. Goods purchased and accounted for in business but utilised for the purpose of providing facility to the employees including any residential accommodation. 10. Goods used for personal consumption or received as gifts. 11. Taxable goods purchased for use in business other than that as defined in sub-clause (a) of clause (5) of section 2.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following :"the dealer who has purchased taxable goods (hereinafter referred to as the "purchasing dealer") during the tax period". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following : "The input tax creditor input tax rebate shall be allowed". Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following : "of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 vide Notification No. 947-L dated 30.07.2006 for the following : "net tax credit shall be determined". or proviso to sub-section (15) ,
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 23--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No dealer who has become liable to pay tax under section 10, or section 11, or section 14, or sub-section (3) of section 27C, shall carry on business as a dealer unless he gets himself registered: Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall be deemed not to have been contravened, if the dealer having applied, within the prescribed time as specified in sub-section (2) , for such registration, is engaged in such business, and where such application has not been disposed of. 1 [Provided further that where a dealer has become liable to pay tax under the provisions of section 10 and deals in only such goods as specified in Schedule A, such dealer may, notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, carry on business without getting himself registered] (2) A dealer referred to in sub-section (1) shall, 2 [ within ninety days ] from the date from which he has become liable to pay tax under section 10, or section 11, or section 14, or sub-section (3) of section 27C, make an application for registration to the Commissioner as provided in sub-section (1) of section 24. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where a dealer has become liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) of section 10, or sub-section (1) of section 11, or sub-section (2) of section 14 and is registered under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , on the day immediately preceding the appointed day, he shall be deemed to have been registered under the Act: Provided that no such dealer shall be deemed to have been registered under the Act, if he has applied for cancellation of his certificate of registration under any of the provisions of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, and such application is pending before the appropriate authority on the appointed day; Provided further that where a registration number has been allotted under the Act to a dealer referred to in the first proviso anytime before the appointed day, such registration number shall be deemed to have been cancelled on the appointed day as if no such number had ever been allotted to such dealer. (4) If a dealer who is required by sub-section (1) to get himself registered, fails, without any reasonable cause, to make an application for registration within the time allowed under sub-section (2) , the Commissioner may, by an order in writing, after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, impose upon such dealer by way of penalty a sum not less than five hundred rupees and not exceeding one thousand rupees for each month of default, in such manner as may be prescribed. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words " within thirty days" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 24--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every dealer- (a) who is required by section 23 to be registered, shall, or (b) who is not required by section 23 to be registered but intends to be registered at any time, may, make an application for registration in the prescribed manner to the prescribed authority, and such application shall be accompanied by a declaration in the prescribed form duly filled up and signed by the dealer making the application. (1A) A dealer who is deemed to have been registered under sub-section (3) of section 23 shall, 1 [within sixty days from the appointed day, submit such information, to such authority and in such manner, as may be prescribed. (2) If such prescribed authority is satisfied that the application for registration referred to in sub-section (1) is in order, he shall register the applicant and grant him a certificate of registration in such form, within such period, in such manner, and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed. (2A) If the prescribed authority is satisfied that the information provided by the dealer as referred to in sub-section (1A) is in order, he shall, in such manner as may be prescribed and 2 [within thirty days from the date of furnishing such information, issue a certificate of registration under the Act to such dealer in the prescribed form which shall be effective from the appointed day: Provided that where a dealer fails to submit such information within the time referred to in sub-section (1A) without showing any reasonable cause, his registration number, if any, allotted under the Act, or his certificate of registration granted under clause (f) of section 119, shall be deemed to have been cancelled on the expiry of such time and the dealer shall, for all purposes of the Act, be deemed not to have been registered. (3) Any dealer who has been registered under sub-section (2) shall, on an application made under clause (b) of sub-section (1) , be liable to pay tax on all sales of goods or on execution of works contract effected by him from the date from which his certificate of registration is granted. Substituted for the words "within sixty days" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "within thirty days" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 25--> State(s): West Bengal (1) For carrying out the purposes of section 73, section 80, section 81, every transporter, carrier or transporting agent operating his transporting business in West Bengal for transporting any consignment of goods into, or outside, or within, West Bengal shall apply and obtain from the Commissioner a certificate of enrolment in such manner, and within such time, as may be prescribed. (2) If a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, who is required by subsection (1) to get himself enrolled, fails, without any reasonable cause, to make an application for enrolment within the prescribed time, the Commissioner may, by an order in writing and after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent an opportunity of being heard, impose upon such transporter, carrier or transporting agent a penalty of a sum not exceeding one thousand rupees for each month of default, in the manner as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 26--> State(s): West Bengal The Commissioner may, by an order in writing, for good and sufficient reason to be recorded therein, demand from any dealer, casual dealer or any other person including transporter, carrier or transporting agent, a security in such circumstances and in such manner as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27--> State(s): West Bengal The prescribed authority may from time to time amend any certificate of registration in accordance with the information furnished under sections 27A, 27B, 27C or otherwise received, after due notice to the dealer, and such amendment may be made with retrospective effect in such circumstances, and subject to such restrictions and conditions, as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27A--> State(s): West Bengal If any registered dealer- (a) sells or otherwise disposes of his business or any part of his business or effects or comes to know of any changes in the ownership of his business, or discontinues his business or changes his place of business or opens a new place of his business; or (b) discontinues or changes his factory or warehouse or opens a new factory or warehouse; or (c) changes the name or nature of his business or effects any change in the class or classes of goods in which he carries on his business and which is or are specified in his certificate of registration; or (d) in the case of a company, effects any change in the constitution of its board of directors; or (e) accepts digital signature certificate issued under the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) , or (f) opens a new bank account or closes an existing bank account relating to the business, he shall, within the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner, inform the prescribed authority accordingly and if any such dealer dies, his legal representative shall, in the like manner, inform the said authority.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27B--> State(s): West Bengal Where the ownership of the business of a registered dealer is transferred absolutely by sale, gift, bequest, inheritance or otherwise, or transferred by way of lease, and the transferee or the lessee carries on such business, either in its old name or in some other name, the transferee or the lessee shall, for all the purposes of the Act (except for the liabilities under this Act already discharged by such dealer) , be deemed to be and to have always been registered (in the case of a lease for so long as the lease subsists) as if the certificate of registration of such dealer had initially been granted to the transferee or the lessee, and the transferee or the lessee shall, on application to the Commissioner, be entitled to have the certificate of registration amended accordingly.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27C--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where the ownership of a part, division or unit of the business of a registered dealer is transferred by sale, gift, bequest, inheritance or otherwise, or transferred by way of a lease or licence, and if the transferee, lessee or licensee, as the case may be, carries on such business as a part of his existing business or a new business in some other name, he shall, for the purposes of this Act (except for the liabilities under this Act already discharged by the transferor or lessor or licensor, as the case may be) be deemed to be a dealer in default in the matter of payment of any tax, penalty or interest payable by or due from the transferor or lessor or licensor, as the case may be, in respect of all the periods immediately preceding the date of such transfer in relation to such part, division or unit. (2) If the transferee, lessee or licensee is a registered dealer and carries on the business referred to in sub-section (1) , he shall, by an application under section 27, get his certificate of registration duly amended. (3) If the transferee, lessee or licensee is not a dealer registered under this Act and if he carries on business from such part, division or unit, he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, section 11, or section 14, be liable to pay tax under this Act, and be liable for registration under section 24, from the date of such transfer. (4) Where the transferee, lessee or licensee is deemed to be a dealer in default under sub-section (1) for any amount of tax, penalty or interest payable by, or due from, the transferor or lessor or licensor, as the case may be such amount of tax, penalty or interest shall be recoverable from such transferee, lessee or licensee under section 55.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27D--> State(s): West Bengal Every registered dealer shall send a declaration to such authority, within such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed, stating the names of the manager and all officers of other designations who are responsible for ensuring compliance with any requirement made of such dealer under this Act, and in the event of any change of such manager or other officers, the dealer shall send a revised declaration in the like manner to the said authority within such time as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 27E--> State(s): West Bengal Where a dealer fails to furnish the information as referred to in section 27A, section 27B, section 27C, or section 27D within such time as may be prescribed, the Commissioner may, after giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing, impose upon such dealer by way of penalty a sum not exceeding five thousand rupees in such manner as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 28--> State(s): West Bengal The Commissioner may amend any certificate of enrolment granted under sub-section (2) of section 25, in accordance with the information furnished by a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, as the case may be, or otherwise received, after due notice to such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, as the case may be, and such amendment may be made with retrospective effect in such circumstances and in such manner, and subject to such restrictions and conditions, as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 28A--> State(s): West Bengal (1) A certificate of enrolment granted to a transporter, carrier or transporting agent under sub-section (2) of section 25, shall be cancelled by the Commissioner where he, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, is satisfied that the business of transporting goods of such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, as the case may be, has discontinued his business or has ceased to exist, and such cancellation shall take effect from the date of such order. (2) The cancellation of certificate of enrolment may be made on an application of the dealer or suo motu on the satisfaction of the appropriate authority.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 29--> State(s): West Bengal (1) A certificate of registration granted to a dealer under sub-section (2) of section 24, shall be cancelled by the appropriate authority where such authority, after giving a reasonable opportunity to such dealer of being heard,is satisfied that- (a) the dealer has ceased to carry on business or has ceased to exist at his place of business; or (b) the dealer has ceased to be liable to pay tax under sub-section (8) of section10, section 11, 1 [sub-section(8) of section 14 or]. 2 [(c) the dealer has obtained the certificate of registration on the basis of documents or representation, which have subsequently been found false and incorrect by such appropriate authority (2) The cancellation of registration may be made on an application of the dealer or suo motu on the satisfaction of the appropriate authority. (3) The cancellation of registration shall take effect from the date of order for such cancellation. Substituted for the words "sub-section (8) of section 14" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated08.08.2005 Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 a registered dealer who does not manufacture goods in West Bengal for sale, may apply in the prescribed manner, to the prescribed authority, for cancellation of his registration under this Act, if, during the year in which such application is made and during the year immediately preceding such year, he has dealt exclusively in tax-free goods specified in Schedule A. (2) If the prescribed authority is satisfied that the application made under sub-section (1) is in order, he shall cancel the registration. (3) A registered dealer whose registration has been cancelled under subsection (2) , shall continue to be liable to pay tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (9) of section 10 in the event of making any sale of goods taxable under this Act subsequent to such cancellation of registration, but during the period of such liability to pay tax, he shall, within thirty days, from the date of incurring such liability, apply for registration under section 24 and such application shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of that section.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30A--> State(s): West Bengal If, in the opinion of the State Government, there is appreciable evasion of tax in respect of any goods, the State Government may, by notification, specify such goods, and thereupon every person dealing in transporting, carrying, shipping, or clearing, forwarding or warehousing, whether as owner or lessee or occupier of a warehouse, shall furnish a statement or declaration in such form, within such time, in such manner, and for such period and to such authority, as may be specified in the notification.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30B--> State(s): West Bengal If, in the opinion of the State Government, it is necessary to obtain information relating to transfer of goods otherwise than by way of sale in West Bengal, it may, by notification, call upon dealers or such class or classes of dealers as may be specified in the notification to furnish such information relating to such goods in such manner, at such intervals, for such period and to such authority, as may be specified in the notification.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30C--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where- (a) a dealer has failed to furnish information as required under section 30B, or (b) upon verification of the information in the statement furnished under section 30B by a dealer relating to transfer of goods otherwise than by way of sale in West Bengal, it comes to the knowledge of the Commissioner that- (i) any of the particulars furnished in such statement is not correct or complete; or (ii) the goods transferred by such dealer or otherwise than by way of sale in West Bengal have not been accounted for by the dealer's head office, or branch office, or agent, as the case may be; or (iii) the agent of such dealer is not traceable or is not in existence at the address furnished in such statement; or (iv) the agent of the dealer to whom the transfer of goods has been made otherwise than by way of sale denies to have any knowledge of the goods claimed to have been transferred to him by the dealer; or (v) the goods have not been transported by the transporter named in such statement under any consignment note or railway receipt referred to in the said statement, the Commissioner may, in such manner as may be prescribed, impose on such dealer, by way of penalty, a sum, not less than fifteen per centum but not exceeding twenty-five per centum of the value of the goods so claimed to have been transferred by him. (2) If any penalty is imposed under sub-section (1) for concealment of any sale with an intent to evade payment of tax thereon in respect of any period, such sale shall be excluded in determining the turnover of sales in respect of such period for the purpose of imposition of penalty, if any, under sub-section (1) of section 96.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30D--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any dealer to whom a notice has been issued proposing imposition of penalty under subsection (1) of section 30C, may, before the date fixed in such notice for hearing, at his option, compound the penalty proposed to be imposed, as mentioned in such notice, and the Commissioner may, at his discretion, accept from such dealer, by way of composition of penalty proposed to be imposed under sub-section (1) of that section, an amount equal to ten per centum of the value of goods claimed by the dealer to have been transferred by him otherwise than by way of sale in West Bengal in the statement furnished by him under section 30B. (2) On payment in full of the amount referred to in sub-section (1) , the proceedings commenced against the dealer under sub-section (1) of section 30C shall not be proceeded with further.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30E--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every registered dealer shall, in the manner as may be prescribed, submit before the prescribed authority such statements, accounts or declarations within such time as may be prescribed and shall verify that such statements, accounts or declarations are true to the best of his knowledge and belief.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 30F--> State(s): West Bengal A casual dealer liable to pay tax under section 15, shall in the prescribed manner, submit a statement in writing giving his permanent residential address and particulars of such sale or purchase along with receipted copy of challan as proof of payment of tax for such sale or purchase to the Commissioner.]
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 31--> State(s): West Bengal Any amount- (a) of net tax or any other tax payable or due, for a tax period or payable according to a return referred to in sub-section (1) of section 32, or (b) of the interest payable under section 33 or section 34 or section 34A, or (c) of tax payable after assessment under section 45, or section 46, or section 48, or (d) of penalty imposed under any provisions of this Act, or (e) other than those referred to in clause (a) , clause (b) , clause (c) , or clause (d) , payable under this Act, shall be paid into an appropriate Government Treasury, in such manner, at such interval, and within such time, as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 31A--> State(s): West Bengal Any amount of reverse credit as referred to in 2 [clause (36B) of section 2 arising in a tax period shall be adjusted within the said tax period in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "in clause (36B) " by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 32--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every dealer liable to pay tax under the Act or every other dealer, if so required by the Commissioner by a notice served in the prescribed manner, shall furnish such returns by such dates and to such authority, as may be prescribed. (2) Every dealer required by sub-section (1) to furnish a return shall, before furnishing such return, pay the full amount of the net tax and interest, if any, payable according to such return, in the manner as provided in section 31 and shall furnish along with such return, a receipt from the appropriate Government Treasury referred to in that section showing the payment of such amount: Provided that where a dealer required by sub-section (1) to furnish return for any return period is unable to make payment of the full amount of the net tax or interest payable according to such return, such dealer shall furnish the return without making payment of the full amount of the net tax or interest payable according to such return along with an application adducing reasons to the Commissioner for extension of time for making payment of the unpaid amount of net tax or interest payable up to the extended date of payment: Provided further that the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied on the reasons adduced by the dealer in the application referred to in the first proviso, extend, by an order in writing, the time for making payment of such unpaid amount of the net tax and interest, if any, payable thereon on such terms and conditions as he may deem fit and proper. (3) If any dealer who has furnished a return under sub-section (1) , discovers any omission or error in any return furnished by him, he may, at any time before the date prescribed for furnishing of the next return by him, furnish a revised return; and if the revised return shows a greater amount of net tax or interest to be payable than what was shown in the original return, it shall be accompanied by a receipt showing payment of the extra amount or the amount of net tax and interest, if any; payable thereon in the manner as provided in section 31. (4) Where a deduction of an amount is made under sub-section (1) of section 40 from the payment of any sum to a dealer for execution of a works contract, and such amount is deposited under sub-section (2) of that section, the deduction of such amount shall be deemed to be a payment of tax by such dealer on the date of such deduction, and he shall furnish along with his return required under sub-section (1) of this section, in respect of such amount a copy of the certificate of deduction referred to in sub-section (3) of section 40, duly certified by such dealer, as a proof of such payment of tax: Provided that where a dealer does not receive a certificate of deduction under sub-section (3) of section 40 on or before the prescribed date of furnishing of return for a return period, he shall furnish the return stating the fact in writing, and shall undertake to furnish the copy of such certificate of deduction within fifteen days from issue of such certificate to him under sub-section (3) of section 40, (5) A dealer liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) , as the case may be, of section 10 but not yet registered, shall furnish return in respect of the return period starting on or from such appointed day and pay tax in accordance with the provisions of this Act.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 33--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where a dealer required to furnish return under sub-section (1) of section 32, furnishes the return in respect of any return period by the prescribed date or thereafter but fails to make full payment of net tax payable, under sub-section (2) of section 32, in respect of any tax period within such return period by the prescribed date, he shall pay a simple interest at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period commencing on the date immediately following the prescribed date for payment of net tax and up to the date prior to the date of payment of such net tax or, up to the date of commencement of proceeding under section 55 or, up to the date prior to the date of provisional assessment under section 45 or assessment under section 46 or section 47 or section 48, as the case may be, whichever is earlier, in respect of such return period upon so much of the amount of net tax payable by him according to such return as remains unpaid: Provided that where such dealer admits in writing that the amount of net tax payable in respect of any such tax period within the return period is an amount which is either more or less than what has been originally shown as payable in the return and where the Commissioner is satisfied on the point of such admission, the interest shall be payable upon so much of the amount of net tax payable for such tax period according to such admission as. remains unpaid. (2) Where a dealer required to furnish return under sub-section (1) of section 32, fails to furnish such return by the prescribed date or thereafter in respect of any return period before the provisional assessment under 2 [ section 45 or the assessment under section 46 ]or section 48, as the case may be, and on such provisional or other assessments full amount of net tax payable for such period is found not to have been paid by him by the prescribed date, he shall pay a simple interest at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period commencing on the date immediately following the prescribed date of payment of such net tax in respect of each tax period and 3 [ upto the date prior to the date ] of provisional assessment under section 45 or assessment under section 46 or section 48, as the case may be, in respect of such return period upon so much of the amount of net tax payable by him according to such assessment as remains unpaid: Provided that where a provisional assessment under section 45 or an assessment under section 46 or section 48 is made for more than one return period and such assessment does not show separately the net tax payable for the tax periods within such return periods in respect of which interest is payable under this sub-section, the Commissioner shall apportion the net tax payable for the tax periods within such return periods on the basis of such assessment. (3) 4 [ Where a dealer required to adjust any amount of reverse credit by way of deducting input tax credit or input tax rebate] as referred to in section 31A in respect of a particular tax period, fails to do so, he shall pay a simple interest upon such amount at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period commencing on the date immediately following the prescribed date for payment of net tax for such tax period and up to the date prior to the date of payment of such net tax or, up to the date of commencement of proceeding under section 55 or, up to the date prior to the date of provisional assessment under section 45 or assessment under section 46 or section 47, as the case may be, whichever is earlier.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words " section 45 of the assessment under section 46" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020 -L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted for the words "up to the date prior to the date " by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08 .2005 Substituted for the words "Where a dealer required to reverse any amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 34--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where a dealer fails to make payment of any 1 [tax due after provisional or other assessments] by the date specified in the notice issued under section 45 or section 46 2 [or section 48] for payment thereof, he shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) , pay a simple interest at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period of default, calculated from the day next following the date specified in such notice up to the day of full payment of such tax or up to the day preceding the day of commencement of proceedings under section 55, whichever is earlier upon so much of the 3 [ the amount tax due from him ] according to such notice as remains unpaid. (2) Where as a result of an order under section 84, section 85, section 86, section 87 or section 88 the 4 [ the amount of tax due is modified ] the interest payable under sub-section (1) shall be determined or redetermined on the basis of such modified amount and the excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded. 5 [(3) Where as a result of an order under section 84, section 85, section 86, section 87 or section 88 the amount of tax due is modified as stated in sub-section (2) , the interest shall be payable at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period of default, calculated from the day next following the date specified in the notice originally issued under section 45 or section 46 or section 48 for payment thereof up to the day of full payment of such tax due or up to the day preceding the day of commencement of proceedings under section 55, whichever is earlier, upon so much of the amount of modified tax due as remains unpaid] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "amount of tax payable by him" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the amount of tax payable is modified" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 34A--> State(s): West Bengal Where a registered dealer fails to make payment of tax as referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 118 in the prescribed manner and by the prescribed date he shall pay a simple interest at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period commencing on the date immediately following the prescribed date for payment of tax and ending on the date prior to the date of payment of such tax or up to the date of commencement of proceedings under section 55, whichever is earlier, upon so much of the amount of tax payable by him according to such return as remains unpaid.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 35--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in section 33 or section 34 1 [or section 34A], no interest shall be payable in such cases or under such circumstances and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be prescribed. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 36--> State(s): West Bengal The Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, pay a simple interest at the rate of twelve per centum per annum for the period of delay in making refund to certain class of persons referred to in section 61, or to a dealer of the amount of tax paid in excess which arises out of an order passed under section 84, section 85, section 86, section 87 or section 88, 1 [from the first day of the month next following the date of such order up to the date on which the refund is made in the manner referred to in section 62, upon the amount of tax refundable to him according to such order. Substituted for the words "from the first day of the month next following the date of such order" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 37--> State(s): West Bengal In calculating the interest payable under section 33, section 34, section 34A or section 36, the amount of net tax or any other tax payable or due in respect of which such interest is to be calculated shall be rounded off to the nearest multiple of one hundred rupees; if such part is fifty rupees or more, it shall be increased to one hundred rupees and if such part is less than fifty rupees, it shall be ignored.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 38--> State(s): West Bengal The amount of 1[net tax or any other tax, or penalty] payable or refundable for any period under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee, then if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise, it shall be ignored.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 39--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No dealer who is not liable to pay tax under this Act shall collect, in respect of any sale of goods by him, any amount of tax under this Act and no dealer who is liable to pay tax under this Act, shall make any such collection except in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 1 [Omitted]. (2) If any dealer contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) , he shall, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, deposit the amount collected in such contravention into 2 [an appropriate Government Treasury] within thirty days from the date of such collection and intimate the Commissioner of such deposit along with a receipt from such Treasury or Bank showing payment of such amount. (3) The Commissioner shall on application made by the buyer in respect of sales of goods to him referred to in sub-section (1) and on such terms and conditions as he may deem fit and proper refund to such buyer the tax or the excess tax, as the case may be, collected from such buyers and deposited by the dealer in the manner referred to in sub-section (2) : Provided that no application from any buyer shall be entertained unless the same is made within twelve months from the date on which the tax or excess tax, as the case may be, is paid and the application is supported by relevant cash memo or bill issued by the dealer. (4) If a dealer is in default in depositing in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) , the amount collected in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) , the Commissioner may, after giving such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing, direct the dealer that he shall pay by way of penalty a sum not less than the amount of tax so collected but not exceeding twice the amount of tax so collected by him in contravention of the provision of sub-section (1) . Proviso to sub-section (1) of section 39 omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act,2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 40--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 or any rules made there under or any terms of a contract to the contrary, any person responsible for paying any sum to any dealer for execution of a works contract referred to in section 14, wholly or partly in pursuance of a contract between such dealer and- (a) Government, (b) a local authority, (c) a corporation or a body established by or under any law for the time being in force, (d) a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , including a Government undertaking, (e) a co-operative society registered or deemed to be registered under the West Bengal Co-operative Societies Act, 1983 (West Ben. Act XLV of 1983) , (f) an educational institution, or (g) a promoter, shall, at the time of payment of such sum in cash or by issue of a cheque or draft or any other mode of payment, deduct an amount towards tax equal to two per centum of such sum being paid in respect of such works contract: Provided that no deduction under this sub-section shall be made,- (i) where the payment is made as advance prior to the commencement of the execution of such works contract; or (ii) where no transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) is involved in the execution of such works contract; or (iii) where the dealer produces a certificate from the Commissioner 1[under sub-section (2) of section 99] that he has no liability to pay tax under section 14 or that he has paid tax payable by, or due from, him under that section: Provided further that no deduction under this sub-section shall be made in respect of that part of payment to a dealer which represents his contractual transfer price of the goods as referred to in clause (a) of [sub-section (2) of section 18], where such dealer declares in writing to that effect claiming exemption from tax. Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, "promoter" means a person who constructs, reconstructs, converts, renovates or extends or causes to be constructed, reconstructed, converted, renovated or extended, a building (including a flat or apartment or a block of flats or apartments or a resort) on a plot of land for the purposes of transfer of such building by sale or otherwise to any person or to a company, firm, co-operative society or any association of persons, and includes- (i) his assignee, if any, (ii) the person who develops or reclaims the land, the person who constructs, reconstructs, converts, renovates or extends, and the person who transfers, such building, if such persons are different, (iii) a society registered under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Ben. Act XXVI of 1961) , (iv) any firm, board or other association of persons established by or under any law for the time being in force, but excluding those referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of this sub-section. (2) Where deduction of an amount is made under sub-section (1) ,- (a) the person making such deduction shall deposit the amount so deducted into 1[an appropriate Government Treasury] within such time, in such manner and in such form or challan as may be prescribed; or (b) in the case of a person who adopts "public works system of accounting" and makes such deduction, he shall transfer the amount so deducted to the appropriate head of account through account statement in the manner prescribed, which is required to be sent periodically to the Accountant General, West Bengal, and such transfer shall be deemed to be a deposit of the amount so deducted by the person making such deduction on the basis of such statement. (3) After the deposit of the amount under sub-section (2) , the person who makes the deduction and deposit, shall, within fifteen days from the date of such deposit, issue to the dealer a certificate in the prescribed form for each deduction separately and send a copy of receipted challan or a copy of the account statement referred to in sub-section (2) , as the case may be, to the Commissioner along with the relevant certificate of deduction and such document as may be prescribed. (4) On receipt of a certificate of deduction referred to in sub-section (3) , the deposit of an amount of a dealer referred to in sub-section (2) , shall be adjusted by the Commissioner towards tax liability of the dealer under section 18, and shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of the person deducting such amount to the dealer to the extent of the amount deducted and deposited. (5) Where any person, while paying any sum to a dealer, contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) , sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) , he shall be personally liable for such contravention, and the Commissioner may, after giving him an opportunity of being heard, by order in writing and in such manner as may be prescribed, impose on such person a penalty, not exceeding twice the amount required to be deducted and deposited by him into 2[the appropriate Government Treasury]. (6) Where the dealer from whose account any amount has been deducted under sub-section (1) and deposited under sub-section (2) proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that he is not liable to pay tax under section 14 and such amount was not wholly or partly payable by him under this Act, the Commissioner shall refund or adjust the amount refundable to the dealer in such manner as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 41--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every return, furnished under sub-section (1) of section 32, shall be scrutinised by the Commissioner to ascertain the correctness of calculation of input tax credit or input tax rebate and net tax, including application of proper rate of tax, payable according to such return, and the payment of interest payable under sub-section (1) of section 33, if any, (2) If any mistake is detected upon the scrutiny made under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, serve upon the dealer who has filed such return, a notice requiring him to rectify the mistake or to pay the amount of net tax payable in deficit along with the interest payable under sub-section (1) of section 33, if any, within the date specified in such notice, (3) The notice referred to in sub-section (2) shall not be issued to any dealer after the expiry of four months from the day on which a return has been furnished, under sub-section (1) of section 32. (4) If upon scrutiny made under sub-section (1) , a dealer is found to have paid net tax, or interest, in excess of the amount payable as per such return, the Commissioner shall inform the same to the dealer within one month from the date of completion of such scrutiny.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 42--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where the Commissioner, for reasons to be recorded in writing, has reason to believe that a dealer has furnished incorrect statement of his turnover of purchases or turnover of sales or contractual transfer price or incorrect particulars of his purchases or sales or contractual transfer price or has claimed excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate in any return furnished under sub-section (1) of section 32, he may verify the statement and particulars furnished in such return with reference to the accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic records, maintained or kept by such dealer. (2) If upon verification of return made under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner is not satisfied that the return furnished by the dealer is correct and complete, he shall proceed to make assessment of the dealer as referred to in section 46 or section 48, as the case may be. (3) No verification shall be made under sub-section (1) after the assessment of the dealer is initiated under section 46 or section 48.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 43--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 and section 49 and subject to such conditions, restrictions and in such manner, as may be prescribed, the Commissioner shall, from among registered dealers, select on a random basis, or upon information or otherwise, such percentage, or such class or classes of dealers, as may be prescribed, for audit of the accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic records, maintained or kept by such dealer for any year or part thereof, not being a period which has ended five years previous to the day of selection. (2) After a selection made under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner shall, with due notice to the dealer so selected, proceed to audit the accounts, registers and documents, including those in the form of electronic records, maintained or kept by the dealer to verify the correctness of returns furnished and the admissibility of various claims including the input tax credit or input tax rebate or refund, for the year or part thereof referred to in sub-section (1) . (3) The Commissioner shall, after considering all the evidence produced in course of the proceedings or collected by him, or to the best of his judgment where the dealer has failed to comply with the notice issued under sub-section (1) prepare a report stating his observation therein regarding the correctness of returns, admissibility of various claims of the dealer for the period for which such audit is made. (4) Any audit under this section shall be completed within six months from the date on which the selection is made by the Commissioner: Provided that where the Commissioner is satisfied that audit in respect of such dealer cannot be completed within six months from the date of selection, he may, upon giving the dealer an opportunity of being heard and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the period for another six months: Provided further that the order of such extension shall be made within six months from the date of selection for audit and such order shall be immediately communicated to the dealer.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 44--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where a tax invoice has been issued and the amount shown as tax charged in the tax invoice exceeds the tax chargeable under this Act in respect of that sale, the registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, making the sale, shall provide the purchaser with a credit note and the purchaser shall provide such dealer making the sale, with a debit note containing such requisite particulars as may be prescribed. (2) Where the tax invoice has been issued and the tax chargeable under this Act in respect of the sale exceeds the amount of tax charged in the tax invoice, the registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, making the sale, shall provide the purchaser with a debit note and the purchaser shall provide such dealer making the sale, with a credit note containing such requisite particulars as may be prescribed. (3) In case of goods returned or rejected by the purchaser, a credit note shall be issued by the dealer making the sale to the purchaser, and a debit note will be issued by the purchaser to the dealer making the sale, containing such requisite particulars as may be prescribed: Provided that where the goods sold or purchased in a year are returned or rejected in a subsequent year, within a period of six months from the date of sale or purchase, the credit note issued by the seller or the debit note issued by the purchaser shall be adjusted with the turnover of sales or turnover of purchases, as the case may be, in the year in which such goods are returned or rejected.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 44A--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every statement and document, furnished under section 30F shall be scrutinised by the Commissioner to ascertain the correctness of calculation of tax payable, including application of proper rate of tax, according to such statement submitted in writing. (2) If any mistake is detected upon the scrutiny made under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, serve upon the casual dealer who has filed such statement, a notice in such form as may be prescribed, requiring him to pay the amount of tax in deficit, if any, within the date specified in such notice. (3) If upon scrutiny made under sub-section (1) , a casual dealer is found to have paid tax in excess of the amount payable as per such statement, the Commissioner shall inform the same to the casual dealer within one month from the date of completion of such scrutiny. (4) Where the Commissioner, for reasons to be recorded in writing, has reason to believe that a casual dealer has furnished incorrect statement of his sale or purchase in the statement furnished under section 30F, he may verify such statement. (5) If upon verification of the statement referred to in sub-section (4) , the Commissioner is not satisfied that the statement furnished by such casual dealer is correct and complete, he shall proceed to make assessment of the casual dealer as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 48].
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 45--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where a dealer required to furnish return for a period under sub-section (1) of section 32,- (a) fails to furnish such return; or (b) furnishes such return but fails to make an application to the Commissioner for extension of date of payment of the unpaid amount of net tax and interest, if any, as referred to in the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32; or (c) furnishes such return but fails to make payment of net tax or interest thereon in accordance with the terms and conditions and within such time as may be specified by the Commissioner as referred to in the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32; or (d) furnishes such return but fails to make payment of the unpaid amount of net tax or interest and where the Commissioner has rejected his application for extension of date of payment as referred to in the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 32, the Commissioner or any other person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist him, may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 46, proceed to assess the dealer provisionally for that period: Provided that no provisional assessment under this section in respect of a return period shall be made following the expiry of six months from, the prescribed date for furnishing such return or the extended date for making payment of net tax, as the case may be: Provided further that in computing the time-limit as specified in the first proviso for making any provisional assessment under this section, the period during which the Commissioner is restrained from commencing or continuing any proceedings from such provisional assessment by an order of a tribunal or any court, shall be excluded. (2) The Commissioner or other authority as referred to in sub-section (1) , shall assess the dealer on the basis of past returns, or past records, and where no such returns or records are available, on the basis of information received by the Commissioner and where the dealer fails to pay the net tax for any tax period within the date extended by the Commissioner, shall impose a penalty not exceeding twice the amount of tax so assessed and direct the dealer by a notice to pay the amount of tax assessed, interest determined and penalty imposed in such manner and within such date as may be prescribed. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this section, if the dealer produces documentary evidence for furnishing return and receipted copy of challan showing full payment of net tax and interest, if any, on or before the date fixed under sub-section (2) for such purpose, the said authority shall close the proceeding initiated under this section. (4) If the dealer furnishes receipted challans showing full payment of net tax and interest payable according to such demand notice and fifty per centum of penalty demanded in such notice served under sub-section (2) , on or before the date of payment mentioned in such notice, the provisional assessment shall stand revoked to the extent of demand of net tax, interest and balance fifty per centum of penalty. (5) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the Commissioner from making assessment under section 46 and any net tax or interest paid, and penalty paid in excess of the fifty per centum of the amount of penalty imposed against provisional assessment or assessments, as the case may be, shall be adjusted against net tax and interest payable on assessment made under that section.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 46--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where- (a) no return has been furnished by a registered dealer for any return period of a year; or (aa) return has been furnished by a registered dealer without paying net tax or interest for any of the tax period within the prescribed date, or within such date, as may be extended by the Commissioner; or (b) a registered dealer fails to make payment of the amount of net tax or interest, in deficit within the date specified in a notice issued under sub-section (2) of section 41; or (c) upon verification of return under sub-section (1) of section 42, or upon any enquiry, or upon report received under section 43, or otherwise, the Commissioner is not satisfied that the return furnished by a registered dealer is correct and complete; or (d) upon search or seizure of accounts, registers or documents, or of goods of a registered dealer, the Commissioner has reasons to believe that the registered dealer has not accounted for any turnover of sales or turnover of purchases in the return furnished by such dealer or in the accounts, registers or documents referred to in section 63; or (e) a refund has been made to a registered dealer under clause (a) of section 61; or (f) a registered dealer brings to the notice of the Commissioner, in writing, within six months from the end of any year that due to error in fact or in law, an amount of net tax or interest has been paid by him in excess of what was actually payable by him for any return period of that year and the Commissioner is satisfied on the grounds adduced by such registered dealer; or (g) a registered dealer other than a dealer enjoying deferment, exemption or remission of tax under clause (a) , or clause (b) , or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 118, as the case may be, brings to the notice of the Commissioner, in writing, within three months from the end of the following year that he wants refund of the excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate which has accumulated during that year and which has remained unadjusted at the end of the said following year; or (h) a registered dealer has closed his business; or (i) the Commissioner deems it fit and proper for any other reason, the Commissioner shall, after giving a notice to such dealer, proceed in such manner as may be prescribed to assess to the best of his judgment the amount of net tax payable by such dealer in respect of such year or in respect of any return period of such year, as he may deem fit and proper: Provided that where the assessment is initiated upon receipt of a report under section 43, the Commissioner shall arrive at an independent decision on the discrepancies, anomalies or evasion or any other matter recorded in such report: Provided further that no assessment shall be made under this section for the period for which an assessment made under sub-section (2) of section 45 has not been revoked under sub-section (3) of such section, and action has been taken under section 55, or appeal is pending under section 84 or application for revision is pending under section 87 in respect of such assessment: Provided also that if on appeal or revision the provisional assessment order passed under section 45 is either annulled or set aside with a direction to make fresh assessment, no further action shall be taken under section 45 and assessment for that period shall be made afresh under this section and such assessment shall be completed within two years from the date of order made in appeal or revision. (2) While making an assessment under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner may, if he is satisfied- (a) that the dealer has defaulted in furnishing any return as required under section 32 without any reasonable cause; or (b) the dealer has furnished such return but has failed to pay the full amount of net tax for any tax period within the prescribed date or within such date as extended by the Commissioner, direct that the dealer shall pay by way of penalty, in addition to the amount of tax so assessed, a sum not exceeding fifty per centum of the amount so assessed. (3) The Commissioner shall- (a) in making the assessment under sub-section (1) and imposing the penalty under sub-section (2) , give the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard; and (b) after making such assessment or imposing such penalty, issue to the dealer a notice directing him to pay the net tax payable, interest determined and penalty imposed upon such assessment in such manner as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 47--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where the Commissioner does not proceed to assess any registered dealer under sub-section (1) of section 46for any year or any return period of such year and where the provisional assessment made against such dealer in respect of such year or return period has-been revoked under sub-section (3) of section 45, the Commissioner shall accept the returns furnished by the dealer for such year or any return period of such year as correct and complete and assessment in respect of such year or such period shall be deemed to have been made by him. (2) Upon making of an assessment under sub-section (1) , the Commissioner shall inform the dealer who is assessed under that sub-section in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. (3) Where an assessment is deemed to have been made under sub-section (1) in respect of a registered dealer relating to any year or part of a year and where it appears to the Commissioner on information or otherwise that in a return furnished by such registered dealer under section 32 in respect of any period of such year or part of a year,- (a) certain sale price or part thereof, contractual transfer price or part thereof, has not been disclosed in such return, or has escaped levy of tax thereon at the appropriate rate, erroneously or otherwise, or (b) the deductions from the turnover of sales were claimed under subsection (1) of section 16 in such return, erroneously or otherwise, in excess of what is admissible under sub-section (1) of that section, or the deductions so claimed in such return are not supported by evidence referred to in sub-section (1) of that section, or (c) excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate has been enjoyed by the dealer for that period, and no reverse credit for such excess amount has been made by such dealer, which has resulted in reduction of the amount of net tax payable by such registered dealer or the State Government has suffered loss of revenue on any of the grounds referred to in clause (a) , or clause (b) , or clause (c) , of this subsection on account of such registered dealer in respect of such year or part of such year, the Commissioner shall, within a period of four years from the date of assessment deemed to have been made in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) , after giving such registered dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, reopen such assessment by an order in writing in the prescribed manner for making a fresh assessment of tax under sub-section (1) of section 46: Provided that the fresh assessment under sub-section (1) of section 46 for such year shall be made, notwithstanding the provisions of section 49, on any date within two years from the date of passing the order in writing for reopening the assessment in respect of such year, which is deemed to have been made in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of this section. (4) Where a registered dealer brings to the notice of the Commissioner by making an application to him within six months from the date of assessment deemed to have been made in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) in respect of any year that due to his error in fact or in law, an amount of net tax or interest has been paid by him in excess of what was payable in respect of any return period falling within such year; and the Commissioner may, if he is prima facie satisfied about such error in fact or in law, within one year from the date of receipt of such application, reopen such assessment, by an order in writing, for making a fresh assessment of tax for such year under sub-section (1) of section 46.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 48--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If upon information which has come into his possession, the Commissioner is satisfied that any dealer, who has been liable to pay tax under this Act in respect of any period but has failed to get himself registered or has not been registered, the Commissioner shall proceed in such manner as may be prescribed to assess to the best of his judgement the amount of net tax payable by the dealer in respect of such period and, in making such assessment, shall give the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such assessment, the Commissioner shall issue to the dealer a notice in the prescribed form directing him to pay the amount of net tax found to be payable upon such assessment in such manner as may be prescribed. (2) Where- (a) the Commissioner upon verification as referred to in sub-section (5) of section 44A is not satisfied that the statement and documents submitted under section 30F by a casual dealer provide correct and complete information, or (b) the casual dealer has failed to submit the statement and documents referred to in section 30F within the time specified therein, the Commissioner shall proceed in such manner as may be prescribed to assess to the best of his judgement, the amount of tax due from such casual dealer in respect of purchases or sales made by him and in making such assessment, shall give the casual dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such assessment, the Commissioner shall issue to the casual dealer a notice in the prescribed form directing him to pay the amount of tax found to be due upon such assessment in such manner as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 49--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No assessment under section 46 or section 47 shall be made after the 30th day of June next following the expiry of two years from the end of the year in respect of which or part of which the assessment is made. (2) (a) No assessment under sub-section (1) of section 48 shall be made after the 30th day of June next following the expiry of six years from the end of the year in respect of which or part of which the assessment is made. (b) No assessment under sub-section (2) of section 48 shall be made after the 30th day of June next following the expiry of six years from the end of the year during which sales or purchases as referred to in clause (a) and clause (b) of section 15 were made for which the assessment is required to be made. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , or sub-section (2) , when a fresh assessment is required to be made in pursuance of an order under section 84, section 85, section 86 or section 87, or in pursuance of any order of the Tribunal or any court, such fresh assessment may be made at any time within two years from the date of such order. (4) in computing the time limited by sub-section (1) , sub-section (2) , or subsection (3) , for making any assessment under section 46, or section 47, or section 48, the period during which the Commissioner is restrained from commencing or continuing any proceedings from such assessment by an order of an authority under the Act, or a Tribunal or any court shall be excluded.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 50--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that a dealer is liable to pay interest 1 [under section 33, section 34 or section 34A,] he shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, determine the amount of interest payable by such dealer. (2) If on such determination, any additional amount of interest is found to be payable by the dealer or any excess amount of interest is found to be refundable to the dealer, the Commissioner shall issue a notice, in the prescribed manner, to such dealer directing him to pay such additional amount or informing him of the excess amount paid, as the case may be. (3) No determination of interest under sub-section (1) in respect of interest payable under section 33 shall be made after the date of 2 [assessment under section 46 or section 48, as the case may be,] in respect of the period for which interest is determined. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 51--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where there is an apparent mistake in the determination of interest under sub-section (1) of section 50, the Commissioner may, on his own motion or upon application made by a dealer, 1 [within twenty-four months] from the date of such determination of interest, rectify the amount of interest payable by such dealer or refundable to such dealer and issue a fresh notice for payment of interest in the manner prescribed under that section. (2) Where on rectification of the amount of interest under sub-section (1) , any excess amount is found refundable to a dealer, the Commissioner shall, in the manner referred to in section 62, refund such excess amount of interest to such dealer. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 52--> State(s): West Bengal Any assessment of tax or determination of interest made under this Act shall be without prejudice to any prosecution instituted for an offence under this Act.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 53--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where a dealer is a Hindu Undivided Family, firm or other association of persons, and such family, firm or association is partitioned, disrupted or dissolved, as the case may be,- (a) the net tax, penalty or interest payable under this Act by such family, firm or association of persons for the period up to the date of such partition, disruption or dissolution shall be assessed, imposed or determined as if no such partition, disruption or dissolution had taken place and all the provisions of this Act, shall apply accordingly; and (b) every person who was, at the time of such partition, disruption or dissolution, a member of the Hindu Undivided Family, partner of a firm or member of an association of persons, and the legal representative of any such person, who is deceased, shall, notwithstanding such partition, disruption or dissolution, be jointly and severally liable for the payment, of the net tax, penalty or interest payable under this Act by such family, firm or association of persons for the period up to the date of such partition, disruption or dissolution, whether assessment of such tax, imposition of such penalty or determination of such interest is made prior to, or after, such partition, disruption or dissolution. (2) Where a dealer carrying on a business as the sole proprietor dies and the business is partitioned, disrupted or discontinued upon his death, the executor or administrator of, or the legal heir to, the estate of such deceased dealer shall pay net tax or any other tax, penalty or interest payable by, or due from, such deceased dealer out of such estate; and such executor, administrator or legal heir shall, notwithstanding the provisions of clause (11) of section 2, be deemed to be a dealer under this Act for the purposes of assessment of tax, determination of interest, and imposition of penalty and payment, recovery and refund of tax, penalty or interest, and all the provisions of this Act relating to appeal, revision or review in respect of the tax assessed, or penalty imposed or interest determined, shall apply accordingly.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 54--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) Where during the period commencing on the date of service of a notice of demand under sub-section (2) of section 45, or clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 46, or section 48, or sub-section (2) of section 50, or sub-section (1) of section 51 or any other provisions of the Act and ending on the date of service of notice by the authority competent to issue such notice, under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 55, as the case may be, any dealer without having made full payment of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty payable or due, as the case may be, under this Act, specified in such notice of demand as aforesaid, creates a charge on, or transfers or delivers possession (by way of sale, mortgage, gift, exchange or any other mode of transfer of right, title or interest) of, any of his immovable properties in favour of other person, such charge, transfer or delivery of possession shall be void as against any claim in respect of the amount of net tax or the other tax, interest, or penalty payable or due from such dealer: Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a dealer unless- (a) the amount or the aggregate of the amounts specified in the notice as aforesaid, payable or due from him, for payment of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty exceeds one lakh rupees; or (b) the value of the immovable property on which a charge is created, or which is transferred, or the possession of which is delivered, by him exceeds five lakh rupees.] (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I) , no charge or transfer or delivery of possession of immovable property shall be void if it is made bona fide and for adequate consideration. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 55--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) Any amount of net tax or any other tax, interest or penalty due, under this Act from a dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or lessee or occupier of warehouse, owner of any goods, or any other person, which remains unpaid after the date specified in a notice of demand issued in this behalf under this Act or the rules made thereunder, directing payment of such amount of net tax or other tax, interest, or penalty, shall be recoverable- (a) as an arrear of land revenue as if it were payable to the Collector, or (b) by the Tax Recovery Officer in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of this section, section 56, section 57, section 58, or section 59 and the rules regulating the procedure for recovery of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty as may be prescribed, where the State Government directs by general or special order so to do in respect of such class or classes of dealers having their places of business in such area or areas as may be specified in such order.] 2 [(2) Where any amount of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty is recoverable in accordance with the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1) , the Commissioner may send to the Tax Recovery Officer a certificate under his signature specifying the amount of such net tax or other tax, interest, or penalty due from the dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or lessee or occupier of warehouse, owner of any goods, or any other person (hereinafter referred to as the certificate-debtor) , and the Tax Recovery Officer shall, on receipt of such certificate, proceed to recover from the certificate-debtor the amount specified in the certificate by one or more of the following modes in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed: (a) attachment and sale of the movable property of the certificate-debtor; (b) attachment and sale of the immovable property of the certificate-debtor; (c) arrest of the certificate-debtor and his detention in prison; (d) appointing a receiver for the management of the movable and immovable properties of the certificate-debtor.] 3 [(3) The Commissioner may send a certificate under sub-section (2) , notwithstanding that proceeding for recovery of such net tax or other tax, interest, or penalty have been initiated or are continuing by any other mode.] 4 [(4) For the purposes of this section, section 56, section 57, section 58 or section 59 and the rules as may be prescribed for the purpose, the State Government may, by notification, appoint such number of Tax Recovery Officers as it may deem fit, and specify in the notification the area or areas over which they shall exercise jurisdiction.] (5) Where a certificate has been sent to a Tax Recovery Officer, he shall cause to be served upon the certificate-debtor, in such manner and form as may be prescribed, a notice and a copy of the said certificate. (6) On the service of notice of any certificate under sub-section (5) upon a certificate-debtor,- (a) any private transfer or delivery of any of his immovable property situated in the area in which the certificate is sent, or of any interest in any such property, shall be void against any claim enforceable in execution of the certificate; and (b) the amount due from time to time in respect of the certificate shall be a charge upon the immovable property of the certificate-debtor, wherever situated, to which every other charge created subsequently to the service of the said notice shall be postponed. (7) The certificate-debtor may, within thirty days from the service of the notice required under sub-section (5) , or where the notice has not been duly served, then, within thirty days from the execution of any process for enforcing the certificate, present to the Tax Recovery Officer to whom the certificate is sent, or present to the Tax Recovery Officer who is executing the certificate, a petition, in such form as may be prescribed, signed and verified in such manner as specified in those rules, denying his liability in whole or in part. (8) The Tax Recovery Officer to whom the original certificate is sent shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 58, hear the petition, take evidence, if necessary, and determine whether the certificate-debtor is liable for the whole or any part of the amount for which certificate was signed. (9) Where any proceedings for the recovery of any 5 [net tax or other tax, interest or penalty] remaining unpaid have been commenced under this section and the 6 [net tax or other tax, interest or penalty] is subsequently modified, enhanced or reduced in consequence of any assessment made, or order passed on appeal, revision or review, under this Act, the Commissioner may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, inform in this behalf the certificate-debtor and the Collector or the Tax Recovery Officer, as the case may be, by whom or under whose order the recovery is being made or to be made, and thereupon such proceedings may be continued as if the 7 [net tax or other tax, interest or penalty] as so modified, enhanced or reduced has been substituted for the 8 [net tax or other tax, interest or penalty] which was to be recovered under sub-section (1) . (10) Where a Tax Recovery Officer causes to be served upon a certificate-debtor a notice referred to in sub-section (5) and such certificate-debtor fails to pay the amount specified in such notice within fifteen days from the date of service of such notice, the certificate-debtor shall pay a simple interest at the rate of one per centum for each British calendar month of default from the date immediately following the end of the period of time specified in such notice up to the date preceding the date of full payment of the amount specified in such notice upon so much of the amount as remains unpaid. (11) The interest payable under sub-section (10) shall be recoverable in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 56--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The Commissioner may forward the certificate referred to in sub-section (2) of section 55 in respect of a certificate-debtor to- (a) the Tax Recovery Officer within whose jurisdiction such certificate-debtor carries, or carried, on his business or within whose jurisdiction the principal place of business is situated or within whose jurisdiction the goods are seized under section 76; or (b) the Tax Recovery Officer1 [within whose jurisdiction such certificate-debtor] resides or any movable or immovable property of such certificate-debtor is available or situated. (2) Where such certificate-debtor has property within the jurisdiction of more than one Tax Recovery Officer, and the Tax Recovery Officer to whom a certificate is sent by the Commissioner- (a) is not able to recover the entire amount by the sale of the property, movable or immovable, within his jurisdiction, or (b) is of the opinion that for the purpose of expediting or securing the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount under this section, it is necessary so to do, he may send the certificate, or, where only a part of the amount is to be recovered, a copy of the certificate certified in the prescribed manner and specifying the amount to be recovered, to a Tax Recovery Officer within whose jurisdiction such certificate-debtor resides or has property, and thereupon that Tax Recovery Officer shall also proceed to recover such amount as if the certificate of the copy thereof had been the certificate sent to him by the Commissioner. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 57--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding that a certificate has been forwarded to a Tax Recovery Officer, the Commissioner shall have the power to withdraw or cancel such certificate or to correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in such certificate. (2) The Commissioner shall intimate to the Tax Recovery Officer any order withdrawing or cancelling a certificate or any correction made by him under sub-section (1) of this section.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 58--> State(s): West Bengal (1) When the Commissioner forwards a certificate to a Tax Recovery Officer under sub-section (2) of section 55, it shall not be open to the certificate-debtor to dispute before the Tax Recovery Officer the propriety or correctness of 1 [the assessment of net tax or any other tax, determination of interest or imposition of penalty], under this Act and no objection to such certificate on any such ground shall be entertained by the Tax Recovery Officer. (2) It is hereby declared that where 2 [any amount of net tax or other tax, penalty or interest] is recoverable in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 55, the provisions of section 9 and section 10 of the Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913 (Ben. Act III of 1913) , shall not apply to any proceedings for the recovery of 3 [any amount of net tax or other tax, penalty or interest]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 59--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in section 55, where any 1 [amount of net tax or other tax, penalty or interest] due from a certificate-debtor cannot be recovered by the Tax Recovery Officer by any one of the modes referred to in that section and where the Tax Recovery Officer has information that such certificate-debtor owns any property outside West Bengal, the 2 [amount of net tax or other tax, penalty or interest] remaining unpaid shall be deemed to be an arrear of land revenue as if it were payable to the Collector, and the Tax Recovery Officer shall apply to the Collector of the district in West Bengal in which such certificate-debtor carries on his business, has his principal place of business or his goods have been seized, as the case may be, for the recovery of the said amount in accordance with the provisions of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 (1 of 1890) . Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 60--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [(1) Notwithstanding the forwarding of a certificate under section 55 for recovery of any amount of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty, the Commissioner may, at any time or from time to time, by notice in the prescribed form, require any person from whom money is due or may become due to a dealer or any person who holds or may subsequently hold money for, or on account of, such dealer, to deposit into an appropriate Government Treasury under the appropriate head of account, either forthwith upon the money becoming due or being held or at or within the time specified in the notice (not being before the money becomes due or is held) , so much of the money as is sufficient to pay the amount due from such dealer in respect of the arrears of such net tax or other tax, interest, or penalty or the whole of the money when such money is equal to or less than that amount.] (2) A notice under this section may be issued to any person who holds or may subsequently hold any money for, or on account of, the dealer jointly with any other person, and for the purposes of this section, the shares of the joint-holders in such account shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to be equal. (3) A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the dealer at his last address known to the Commissioner and, in the case of a joint account, to all the joint-holders at their last addresses known to the Commissioner. (4) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every person to whom a notice is issued under this section shall be bound to comply with such notice, and in particular, where any such notice is issued to a post office, banking company or insurer, it shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made before payment is made, notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary. (5) Any claim respecting any money, which is due or to become due or is being held or may subsequently be held and in relation to which a notice under this section has been issued, arising after the date of such notice, shall be void as against any demand contained in such notice. (6) Where a person to whom a notice under this section is sent proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the dealer or that he does not hold any money for, or on account of, the dealer or that the money demanded or any part thereof is not likely to be due to the dealer or be held for, or on account of, the dealer, then, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to require such person to deposit any such sum or part thereof, as the case may be. (7) The Commissioner may, at any time or from time to time, amend or revoke any notice issued under this section or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance of such notice. (8) 2 [The appropriate Government Treasury] shall grant a receipt for any amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under this section, and the person so paying the amount shall be fully discharged from his liability to the dealer to the extent of the amount so paid. (9) Any person discharging any liability to the dealer after receipt of a notice under this section shall be personally liable to the Commissioner to the extent of his own liability to the dealer so discharged or to the extent of the liability of such dealer for any amount due under this Act, whichever is less. (10) If the person to whom a notice under this section is sent fails to make payment in pursuance thereof, he shall be deemed to be a dealer in default in respect of the amount specified in the notice, and further proceedings may be taken against him for the recovery of the amount as if it were an arrear due from him, and the notice shall have the same effect as attachment of a debt. (11) The Commissioner may apply to the court in whose custody there is money belonging to the dealer for payment to him of the entire amount of such money or, if it is more than the 3 [net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty] due, an amount sufficient to discharge the liability of the 4 [net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty]: Provided that any dues exempt from attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , shall be exempt from any payment required to be made under this section. 5 [Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "dealer" shall include a casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or lessee or occupier of warehouse, owner of any goods, or any other person, for whom or on whose account money is demanded for payment of net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty under this section.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 60A--> State(s): West Bengal When a dealer furnishes a return under section 32 indicating therein, or otherwise admits in writing, his liability to pay any net tax or any other tax, interest, or penalty in respect of a certain period, notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, such amount of net tax or other tax, interest or penalty shall be deemed to have been quantified on the date of filing such return or making such admission, as the case may be, and all the provisions of section 55, section 56, section 57, section 58, section 59, section 60, shall be applicable mutatis mutandis on such quantified net tax or other tax, interest or penalty.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 61--> State(s): West Bengal Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the Commissioner shall, in the prescribed manner, refund- (a) to a registered dealer, who owns an industrial unit in the 1 [...] Software Technology Park, or who owns an Export Oriented Unit within. the meaning of the Export and Import Policy as formulated under section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992) , situated anywhere in West Bengal 2 [a Special Economic Zone] or Software Technology Park, the amount of tax realised or realisable from him by another registered dealer in respect of the purchases in West Bengal- (i) of goods for use directly in the manufacture of goods by him in such unit for sale by him in the course of export within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , (ii) [Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005], (iii) of goods, being the containers or other packing material for packing of the goods manufactured in such unit; 3 [(aa) to a registered dealer, who is not liable to pay tax under section 14 and whose nature of business is such that for any year, the input tax credit exceeds the output tax payable for such year under this Act by such dealer, the excess amount of net tax credit over output tax for such year, where - (i) the rates of tax on principal inputs are higher than the rates of tax of the goods on which output tax is payable by the dealer, or (ii) the payments for transactions of sales are received through bank and sales of goods are made - (A) to various departments of the Central or the State Government, or (B) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce within the meaning of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956(74 of 1956.) , or] (C) in the course of export out of India within the meaning of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (b) to the Consulates, the amount of tax realised or realisable from them by a registered dealer in respect of taxable goods purchased by them in West Bengal for their personal or official use; or (c) to the specialised agencies of the United Nations Organisation, the amount of tax realised or realisable from them by a registered dealer in respect of purchases of taxable goods by them in West Bengal for their official use. Certain words omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 62--> State(s): West Bengal Subject to other provision of this Act, the Commissioner shall, in the manner and within the time, as may be prescribed, refund to a dealer any amount of tax, penalty or interest paid by such dealer in excess of the amount due from him under this Act and also excess of 1 [net tax credit] over output tax payable under this Act. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 63--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every dealer required to furnish return, under sub-section (1) of section 32, shall maintain and keep a true and up-to-date account of the quantity and value of the goods purchased or manufactured or sold by him or used in execution of works contract or held by him in stock and shall maintain and keep such registers or accounts, in such form as may be prescribed, in addition to the books of accounts that a dealer maintains or keeps for the purposes of his business: Provided that- (a) a registered dealer, or a dealer who has applied for registration within thirty days from the date of his incurring liability to pay tax under subsection (2) of section 23, other than those required to pay tax at compounded rate under sub-section (3) of section 16 or sub-section (4) of section 18 or any other dealer as may be prescribed, shall maintain a true and up-to-date account of his input tax, input tax credit and output tax; (b) in case of any other dealer, such dealer shall maintain a true and up-to-date account of his output tax only. (2) Every dealer referred to in sub-section (1) shall keep at his principal place of business all accounts, registers, documents including those in electronic form and digital signature certificate granted under sub-section (4) of section 35 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, which may be required by the Commissioner for the purpose of inspection under sub-section (2) of section 66, and shall not keep or remove elsewhere such accounts, registers, documents and certificate except in accordance with the requirement of law or except for any purpose for which just cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 64--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to the first proviso to sub-section (3) of section 16, and first proviso to sub-section (4) of section 18, if a registered dealer, or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, 2 [sells any goods], he shall issue in the prescribed manner, to the purchaser a serially numbered tax invoice as referred to in clause (48) of section 2, signed and dated by him or his regular employee, showing such particulars as may be prescribed, and he shall also keep a counterfoil or duplicate of such tax invoice, duly signed and dated: Provided that where the registration certificate of a registered dealer has been cancelled by the appropriate authority from a particular date, or where the application for registration of a dealer as referred to above is rejected from a particular date, any tax invoice issued by such dealer shall be treated as an invoice instead of a tax invoice from that date. 3 [Provided further that a registered dealer or a dealer who has made an application under sub-section (1) of section 24 within thirty days from the date of incurring liability to pay tax under the Act, may, at his option, issue in the prescribed manner a serially numbered invoice or bill or cash memorandum, signed and dated by him or his regular employee, showing such particulars as may be prescribed, in respect of sales of goods by him to any dealer, not being a dealer registered under the Act, or to a casual dealer or to the Government or to any person, and such registered dealer shall keep the counterfoil or duplicate of such invoice or bill or cash memorandum, duly signed and dated by him or his regular employee] (2) If a dealer to whom sub-section (1) does not apply and who has become liable to pay tax under any provision of this Act, sells any goods to any person, he shall issue in the prescribed manner, to the purchaser a serially numbered invoice or cash memorandum or bill, signed and dated by him or his regular employee, showing such particulars as may be prescribed, and he shall also keep a counterfoil or duplicate of such, invoice, cash memorandum or bill, duly signed and dated. (3) If a dealer to whom sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) does not apply, sells any goods exceeding one hundred rupees in value in any one transaction to any person, he shall issue to the purchaser a serially numbered invoice or cash memorandum or bill, signed and dated by him or his regular employee, showing such particulars as may be prescribed, and he shall also keep a counterfoil or duplicate of such invoice, cash memorandum or bill, duly signed and dated: Provided that if the State Government is of the opinion that the requirement under this section shall cause hardship to a certain class or classes of dealers included in sub-section (3) , and that such requirement should, subject to fulfilment by any class or classes of dealers of certain conditions and restrictions to be imposed to ensure that there is no evasion of tax, be dispensed with, it may prescribe by rules such class or classes of dealers, and such conditions and restrictions subject to which the requirement of this section in respect of such class or classes of dealers shall be dispensed with. (4) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Act, if the Commissioner, on an application made in the prescribed manner, by a registered dealer and after making such enquiries as he may consider necessary, is satisfied that a dealer is not in a position to furnish a tax invoice referred to in subsection (1) of section 64 on account of the loss of such tax invoice for reasons beyond his control, the Commissioner may, by an order in writing, exempt such dealer from furnishing such tax invoice, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and to such further conditions, if any, as may be specified by the Commissioner in the order. (b) Any order passed by the Commissioner under clause (a) shall be final.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "sells any goods to any person" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 65--> State(s): West Bengal If a registered dealer or any other dealer contravenes the provisions of section 64, the Commissioner may, after giving such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing, direct that he shall pay, in the manner as may be prescribed, by way of penalty, a sum equal to double the amount of tax or five thousand rupees, whichever is greater, which could have been levied under this Act in respect of the sates referred to in that section where- (a) no tax invoice or invoice or cash memorandum or bill, as the case may be, as referred to in section 64, has at all been issued, or (b) tax invoice or invoice or cash memorandum or bill, as the case may be, has been issued not in accordance with the provisions of section 64: Provided that if such registered dealer or dealer proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that he deals exclusively in goods specified in Schedule A, sales of which are declared tax-free under section 21, the Commissioner may exempt such registered dealer or dealer from payment of penalty or impose such lesser amount of penalty as he deems fit and proper.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 66--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The Commissioner, a Special Commissioner an Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, require any dealer, casual dealer or any other person- (a) to produce before him any accounts, registers or documents, whether in the form of electronic record or not, or (b) to produce before him digital signature certificate granted under subsection (4) of section 35 of the Information Technology Act, 2000, or (c) to furnish any information relating to- (i) stock of goods held by such dealer, casual dealer or person, or (ii) purchases or sales of goods made by such dealer, casual dealer or person, or (iii) purchases and uses of goods in execution of works contract by such dealer, casual dealer or person, or (iv) receipts or deliveries of goods made by such dealer, casual dealer or person, or (v) any receipts or payments, including loans, made by such dealer, casual dealer or person, or (vi) any other matter, (d) to explain to him any account, register or document, including those in the form of electronic record, produced by such dealer, casual dealer or person, as may be deemed necessary for the purposes of this Act. (2) All accounts, registers, documents, whether in the form of electronic record or not, referred to in sub-section (1) , and all goods kept in any place of business of any dealer, casual dealer or any other person, shall, at all reasonable time, be open to inspection by the Commissioner, Special Commissioner, Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner. (3) Any dealer, casual dealer or any other person, who is found to be in possession or control of such account, register or documents, whether maintained in the form of electronic record or not, shall provide, the Commissioner, a Special Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, the necessary facility to inspect such accounts, registers or other documents. 1 [(4) The Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner or any other person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 may require any authority under the State Government or the Central Government or any local authority or a statutory body or a trust or any other body corporate to furnish information and to produce documents for the purpose of levy of any tax or collection of any tax imposed by the State or for carrying out any other purposes of the Act] Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 66A--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The Commissioner, a Special Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, may require, by notice, any bank, post office, railway, Controller and certifying authority as defined in the Information Technology Act, 2000, website holder, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse, shipper, transporter, carrier, or transporting agent to furnish to him any information or statement useful for, or relevant to, any proceedings under this Act or to produce before him any accounts, registers, documents, including those in the form of electronic records, or other records in the possession of such bank, post office, railway, Controller or certifying authority, website holder, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse, shipper, transporter, carrier, or transporting agent for examination for the purposes of this Act.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 67--> State(s): West Bengal If the Commissioner, a Special Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, has reason to suspect, upon information or otherwise, that any dealer, casual dealer/or any other person, is evading any tax, or is attempting to evade payment of any tax, or has failed to deposit any tax, as the case may be, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize such accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, or any computer or electronic media of such dealer or casual dealer or person, as may be necessary, 1 [and shall grant to such dealer or casual dealer or person, a receipt for such accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, or any computer or electronic media ] seized by him and shall retain all or any of them only for such period as may be necessary for examination thereof or for prosecution or for any other purpose of this Act: Provided that- (a) the Commissioner or the Special Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner shall not retain any of the 2 [accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, seized by him under this section] for a period exceeding one year from the date of the seizure unless he records in writing the reasons therefor, and (b) any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner shall not retain any of the 3 [accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, seized by him under this section] for a period exceeding one year from the date of the seizure unless he states the reason in writing therefor and obtains sanction of the Commissioner in writing in respect thereof. Substituted for the words "and shall grant to such dealer or casual dealer or person, a receipt for such accounts, registers or documents" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, seized by him under this section by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic record, seized by him under this section" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 68--> State(s): West Bengal (1) For the purposes of section 66 or section 67, the Commissioner, a Special Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner, or any person appointed under subsection (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, may enter and search- (a) any place of business of any dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse or any other person, or (b) any other place, where the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner or the person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, has, upon information received or otherwise, reason to believe that, such dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse, or person keeps or is, for the time being, keeping any accounts, registers or documents, whether in the form of electronic record or not, or any stock of goods, for the purpose of business. (2) The Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner or the person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, may, before, or after, or while, entering or searching any place, referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) ,- (a) break open any door or window of a house, room or warehouse where, or (b) break open any almirah, cabinet, safe, locker, drawer, box or receptacle in which, or (c) open any electronic media in which, the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner or the person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, has reason to believe, such or any other dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse, or person, keeps or is, for the time being, keeping any account, register or document, whether in the form of electronic record or not, or any stock of goods, for the purpose of his business.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 69--> State(s): West Bengal The Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner or the person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, seal any house, room, warehouse, almirah, cabinet, safe, locker, drawer, box, or receptacle in which, he has reason to believe, a dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent, owner or occupier or lessee of a warehouse, or any other person, keeps or is, for the time being, keeping any account, register or document, whether in the form of electronic record or not, or any stock of goods, for the purpose of business.]
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 70--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every transporter, carrier or transporting agent, to whom the provisions of section 25 apply, shall maintain, in the prescribed form, proper account of taxable goods transported by him into, or outside, or within, West Bengal on account of any person, being a consignee or consignor, as the case may be, and shall, on demand by the Commissioner, furnish such information to the Commissioner as may be required by the Commissioner in relation to transport of such goods by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent. (2) The accounts referred to in sub-section (1) , and goods referred to in that sub-section and stored in a godown or warehouse in West Bengal, shall be open to inspection by the Commissioner at all reasonable time.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 71--> State(s): West Bengal Where any transporter, carrier or transporting agent fails to maintain proper account in the prescribed form, or fails to furnish information to the Commissioner, as required by sub-section (1) of section 70, or the Commissioner has reason to believe that the account referred to in sub-section (1) of section 70 is relevant for the purpose of carrying out any investigation or holding any inquiry into any case of alleged or suspected evasion of tax as well as malpractices connected therewith, the Commissioner may- (a) enter and search any place of transporting business or any other place where such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, for the time being, keeps any accounts, registers or documents, including those in the form of electronic records, in relation to transport of goods; and (b) for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize such accounts, registers or documents.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 72--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where any transporter, carrier or transporting agent has- (a) received any consignment of taxable goods from a dealer, casual dealer, or any other person in West Bengal for transport of such consignment to any place outside, or within West Bengal, or (b) transported into West Bengal any consignment of taxable goods on account of a dealer, casual dealer, or any other person, and the Commissioner has information that such dealer, casual dealer, or person is not in existence at the address given in the way bill, tax invoice, invoice, cash memo, bill, or consignment note or any document of like nature in respect of any consignment of goods referred to in clause (a) , or clause (b) , the Commissioner may direct such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, by an order in writing, that- (i) the consignment of goods referred to in clause (a) shall not be transported outside, or within, West Bengal, or (ii) the consignment of taxable goods referred to in clause (b) shall not be delivered, till the matter is investigated into by the Commissioner or till a period of fifteen days [excluding Sunday or a public holiday declared under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) ] expires from the date of communication of such direction to the transporter, carrier or transporting agent, whichever is earlier. (2) Where the Commissioner after causing an enquiry about the existence of such dealer, casual dealer, person, is satisfied that such dealer, casual dealer, person- (a) is in existence at the address given in the way bill, tax invoice, invoice, cash memo, bill, consignment note or any document of like nature, he shall, forthwith withdraw, by an order in writing, his direction issued under sub-section (1) to such transporter, carrier or transporting agent; or (b) is not in existence at the address given in the way bill, tax invoice, invoice, cash memo, bill, consignment note or any document of like nature, the transport of the consignment of taxable goods by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, to any place into, or within, or outside, West Bengal, shall be deemed to be in contravention of the provisions of section 73 or section 81, as the case may be, and the Commissioner shall, after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, seize such consignment of goods under section 76.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 73--> State(s): West Bengal (1) To ensure that there is no evasion of tax, no person shall transport from any railway station, steamer station, airport, port, post office or any checkpost set up under section 83 or from any other place any consignment of goods except in accordance with such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed. (2) Subject to the restrictions and conditions prescribed under sub-section (1) , any consignment of goods may be transported by any person after he furnishes in the prescribed manner such particulars in such form obtainable from such authority or in such other form as may be prescribed. (3) Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to- (a) duly accredited diplomatic personnel attached to foreign consulates or other diplomatic offices, (b) organisations and specialised agencies of the United Nations, (c) Khadi and Village Industries Commission, (d) Embarkation Headquarters, Shipping Section, Customs Group, Ministry of Defence, Government of India, Kolkata, or (e) such other persons, organisations or institutions as may be prescribed.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 74--> State(s): West Bengal For the purpose of verifying whether any consignment of goods are being or have been transported in contravention of the provisions of section 73 or section 81, 2 [the Commissioner, The special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner, or as the case may be any of such persons appointed under sub-section(1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner as may be prescribed to exercise the power under this section] may, subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed,- (a) intercept, detain and search at any place referred to in sub-section (1) of section 73, 3 [any goods vehicle or any load carried by a person,] or (b) search at any warehouse or at any other place in which, according to his information, such goods so transported in contravention of the provisions of section 73 have been stored, or (c) intercept, detain and search at any check post or at any other place referred to in sub-section (2) of section 81, 4 [any goods vehicle or any load carried by a person]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 75--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If any registered dealer has not disclosed any warehouse in his application for registration made under sub-section (1) of section 24, or has not furnished 1 [information under clause (b) of section 27A] regarding change of his warehouse or opening of a new warehouse for amendment of his certificate of registration under section 27 and if any stock of goods is found in such warehouse after search made 2 [under section 74 by the Commissioner, the special commissioner, the additional commissioner, or as the case may be, any of such persons appointed under sub-section(1) of section 6 to assist the commissioner as may be prescribed to the exercise the power under this section], it shall be presumed that such dealer has transported such goods in contravention of section 73 and stored those goods in such warehouse, un-less such dealer- 3 [(a) explains to the satisfaction of 4 [ such authority], the reasons for not, disclosing the warehouse or furnishing the information under clause (b) of section 27A,] 5 [(b) produces on demand by 6 [ such authority] and explains to his satisfaction that the stock register or any account of stock showing entry of such goods therein and purchase bill, tax invoice, invoice or cash memo, challan or any document of like nature within twenty-four hours or within such time as may be granted to him upon an application made in writing by such dealer.] (2) Where the dealer prays for time under clause (b) of sub-section (1) , the authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall allow a time to produce before him the document referred to in that clause, and shall meanwhile seal such warehouse up to the time allowed by him. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "under section 74 by the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 76--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where, upon interception or search referred to in clause (a) , or clause (c) , of section 74, 1 [the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner, or as the case may be, any of such persons appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, as may be prescribed to exercise the power under this section, has reason to believe] that any goods are being transported in contravention of the provisions of section 73, or section 81, he shall first detain the vehicle carrying such goods for a period not exceeding forty-eight hours and, if the person bringing, importing or receiving or carrying such goods fails to furnish such particulars in such form, or such document, as may be prescribed under section 73, or section 81, shall thereafter seize such goods together with any container or other materials for the packing of such goods: Provided that in computing the period of detention not exceeding forty-eight hours, Sunday or a public holiday declared under the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) , shall be excluded. 2 [Provided further that 3 [the authority referred to in this sub-section] may, at the option of the transporter, carrier or transporting agent from whom the goods are seized, in writing, give custody of such seized goods to him in the manner prescribed, and allow him to transport such seized goods up to the warehouse, of such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, in West Bengal as declared by him, on the express conditions that such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, shall keep such seized goods in the said warehouse and that he shall not deliver such seized goods to any person including the consignee or owner of such seized goods so transported by him before the proceedings, if any, initiated against the consignee or owner of such seized goods under section 77 is concluded: Provided also that 4 [such authority ]may take physical possession of such seized goods from the custody of such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, even before the conclusion of the proceedings under section 77 where such transporter, carrier or transporting agent, communicates, in writing, to such authority his difficulty in keeping such seized goods in his custody after the expiry of sixty days from the date of storing of such seized goods in his warehouse.] (2) Where, upon search of any warehouse or any other place referred to in clause (b) of section 74 5 [the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner, or as the case may be, any of such persons appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, as may be prescribed to exercise the power under this section, has reason to believe] that any goods transported in contravention of the provisions of section 73, have been stored in such warehouse or other place, he shall seize such goods together with container or any other materials for the packing of such goods or in case such goods are not seized, he may seal such warehouse: Provided that 6 [the authority referred to in this sub-section] may, at the option, in writing, of the person from whom the seizure of goods is made under this sub-section, give custody of such seized goods to such person on the express condition that he shall keep such seized goods in the warehouse, or at any other place, referred to in clause (b) of section 74, where the seizure has-been made, and that he shall not dispose of such seized goods in any manner before the proceedings, if any, initiated in respect of such seized goods under section 77 is concluded: Provided further that 7 [such authority ] may take physical possession of such seized goods from the custody of such person even before the conclusion of the proceedings under section 77 where such person communicates, in writing, to the Commissioner his difficulty in keeping such seized goods in his custody after the expiry of sixty days from the date of giving of custody of such goods to him. 8 [(3) If the dealer fails to produce 9 [before the authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 75 ], the documents referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 75 and fails to satisfy him that the goods found in such warehouse have-not been transported in contravention of section 73, 10 [such authority shall], for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize the goods and grant a receipt specifying the items of goods so seized.] 11 [...] Substituted for the words "the Commissioner has reason to believe" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the Commissioner has reason to believe" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the Commissioner" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "before the Commissioner by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No.2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "the Commissioner shall by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No.2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Sub-section (4) omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 77--> State(s): West Bengal 2 [(1) If any goods are seized under section 76, the Commissioner may, by an order in writing, impose upon the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person from whom such goods are seized to the owner of such goods, where particulars of the owner of such goods are available, or where there is no claimant for such goods at the time of such seizure, any person who subsequently establishes his claim of ownership or possession of such goods, after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person or ownership or possession of such goods, after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person or owner, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, a penalty of a sum not exceeding fifty per centum of the value of such goods as may be determined by him in accordance with the rule made under this Act: Provided that the sum of penalty that may be imposed under this sub-section shall not exceed- (a) fifteen per centum of the value of goods if the rate of tax leviable under sub-section (2) of section 16 in respect of such goods does not exceed four per centum; (b) thirty per centum of the value of goods if the rate of tax leviable under sub-section (2) of section 16 in respect of such goods exceeds four per centum but does not exceed twelve decimal five zero per centum; (c) fifty per centum of the value of goods if the rate of tax leviable under sub-section (2) of section 16 in respect of such goods exceeds twelve decimal five per centum.] 3 [(2) A penalty imposed under sub-section (1) shall be paid by the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person or the owner of goods, as the case may be, into an appropriate Government Treasury, by such date as may be specified by the Commissioner in a notice to be issued for this purpose, and the date so specified shall not be earlier than fifteen days from the date of the notice: Provided that the Commissioner may, upon application made by that transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person or the owner of goods, as the case may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the date of payment of the penalty for such period as he may think fit.] (3) The goods seized under section 76 shall be released in the prescribed manner on payment of the penalty imposed under sub-section (1) . (4) If the penalty is not paid by the date specified in the notice issued under sub-section (2) , the Commissioner may, in such manner and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, sell the goods so seized under section 76 in open auction and remit the sale proceeds thereof to a Government Treasury. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) ,- (a) the person to whom the Commissioner has, under sub-section (4) of section 3, delegated his power for revision under section 86, pending disposal of an application for revision against an order for imposition of penalty referred to in sub-section (1) , or (b) the Commissioner, where there is no 4 [application for revision under section 86], may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct release of the goods seized under section 76 on such terms and conditions as he may deem fit. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4) , the Commissioner may, subject to such rules as may be made under this Act, where the goods seized under section 76 are- (a) of perishable nature, or (b) required to be used by a specified date, sell such goods in open auction after the expiry of such period as he may consider fit and proper, if he is of opinion that such goods may become unusable or unsaleable on detention, or destroy such goods if the said goods become unusable before the sale in open auction actually takes place. (7) The proceeds of sale of the goods referred to in sub-section (4) or subsection (6) shall be* applied in the prescribed manner for payment in the following order of priority: (a) first, for incidental charges, if any, relating to auction sale of such goods; (b) secondly, for expenses, if any, for storage of such goods; (c) thirdly, for penalty imposed under sub-section (1) ; and the balance of the proceeds of sale, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the goods or, if his particulars are not available, to the persons from whom such goods, were seized under section 76, upon application within one year from the date of sale or within such further period as may be allowed by the Commissioner for cause shown to his satisfaction. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 78--> State(s): West Bengal Where- (a) a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, referred to in second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 76, at his option, takes custody of any goods seized under sub-section (1) of that section and thereafter contravenes the provisions of the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 76 by delivering such seized goods to any person including the consignee or owner of such seized goods, or (b) a person, referred to in first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 76, at his option, takes custody of any goods seized under sub-section (2) of that section and thereafter contravenes the provisions of the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 76 by disposing of such seized goods, without prior permission, in writing, of the Commissioner, the Commissioner shall, after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose upon him a penalty, in the prescribed manner, not exceeding twenty-five per centum of the market value of such seized goods in West Bengal.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 79--> State(s): West Bengal Where the goods are, or have been, transported by a dealer, casual dealer, transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person in contravention of restrictions or conditions prescribed under section 73 and such goods are not available for seizure under subsection (1) of section 76, the Commissioner shall, after giving such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose a penalty of a sum not exceeding twenty-five per centum of the market value of such goods in such manner as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 80--> State(s): West Bengal (1) When a goods vehicle, transporting any goods, other than goods specified in Schedule A as tax-free, enters into West Bengal, and such vehicle transporting such goods is bound for any place outside West Bengal, 1 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person transporting such goods, shall have to make,] in the prescribed manner, a declaration on the body of the consignment note or on a document of like nature that the goods being so transported in his vehicle shall not be unloaded, delivered or sold in West Bengal and he shall also specify in such declaration the name of the last check post through which the vehicle transporting such goods shall move outside West Bengal: 2 [Provided that if there is any possibility of transhipment in West Bengal of the goods so carried by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person, he shall also declare the same on the body of the consignment note or on the document of like nature while making the declaration and shall, thereafter, note therein the particulars of the new vehicle when such transhipment is actually made even when, after leaving the first check post, any transhipment of such goods is made by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person, under any compelling circumstances:] 3 [Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply where the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person transporting such goods proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner or such other authority as may be prescribed, that the transport of such goods in such vehicle is in the course of export within the meaning of sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , to such country as the State Government may by notification specify.] (2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) , the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration together with such other documents as may be prescribed, shall be 4 [produced before the Commissioner or such other authority as may be prescribed] at the first check post that 5 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] reaches after entry of the vehicle into West Bengal or, where such vehicle is intercepted before it reaches the first check post, before such other authority as may be prescribed, at the place where the vehicle is intercepted. (3) A consignment note or document of like nature containing the declaration produced in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) shall, in the manner prescribed, be countersigned by the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) , as the case may be, and such consignment note and other documents, duly countersigned, shall be 6 [returned to the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person]. 7 [Provided that the Commissioner, or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) , may, before countersigning the consignment note or a document of like nature containing the declaration produced, demand from such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person, by an order in writing, a reasonable amount of security, if he is satisfied that the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person, has failed to produce before the Commissioner or such authority, at the last check post, as specified in sub-section (4) , any consignment note or a document of like nature containing the declaration made by him in respect of any goods transported in a goods vehicle by him on any previous occasion: Provided further that the security furnished shall be released to such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person, if the Commissioner or the authority demanding the security under the first proviso is satisfied that the goods vehicle carrying the goods, for which the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration had been countersigned on furnishing of security has exited from West Bengal: Provided also that if the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person, fails to produce before the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) , the evidence of exit from West Bengal of the Vehicle carrying the goods, referred to in the second proviso, within a reasonable time from such exit, the security shall be adjusted against the penalty which may be imposed upon the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or the person, under sub-section (6) or under section 79.] (4) 8 [The transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] carry with him the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration duly countersigned under sub-section (3) while transporting the goods through West Bengal and produce such consignment note or document of like nature before 9 [the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) ,] at the last check post that he reaches before the exit of the vehicle with such goods from West Bengal, and the 10 [the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) ,] shall, in the prescribed manner, endorse such consignment note or document of like nature evidencing exit from West Bengal of the vehicle transporting the same goods as are specified in such consignment note and return the same 11 [return the same to the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person:] Provided that after leaving the first check post where any transhipment of goods is made 12 [by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] under any compelling circumstances and if the fact of such transhipment was not declared by him at the first check post as required under the first proviso to sub-section(1) , he shall adduce reasons for doing so before 13 [the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) ,] at the last check post along with supporting evidence wherever necessary, and if 14 [the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) ,] is satisfied with the reasons adduced or evidence produced by such transporter, he shall endorse the countersigned consignment note or document of like nature containing the declaration as required under that sub-section and 15 [return the same to the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person]allowing movement of the vehicle carrying such goods outside West Bengal. (5) The Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, intercept at any place, other than those referred to in sub-section (2) and sub-section (4) , within West Bengal any goods vehicle and require 16 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] to produce before him the declaration and other documents referred to in sub-section (2) and search such goods vehicle for verification of the goods with the declaration and other documents produced, if any, by 17 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person]. (6) Where after the search of the vehicle made under sub-section (5) , the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that 18 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] has contravened the provisions of this section, he may, after giving the 19 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] a reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose, by an order to be passed in the prescribed manner, such penalty, not exceeding twenty-five per centum of 20 [the market value of the goods] so transported, as may be determined by him in accordance with the rules made under this Act. (7) Any penalty imposed under sub-section (6) shall be paid 21 [by the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person] into a Government Treasury or the Reserve Bank of India by such date as may be specified by the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) in a notice to be issued for this purpose, and the date so specified shall not be earlier than fifteen days from the date of service of the notice: Provided that the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in subsection (2) may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the date of such payment. (8) Until the penalty imposed under sub-section (6) is paid and a receipt showing payment of such penalty is furnished and the declaration referred to in sub-section (2) is produced, the goods so transported shall be detained by the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) who imposed such penalty. (9) If the penalty is paid by the date specified in the notice referred to in subsection (7) and 22 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person] furnishes the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration in accordance with the provisions of this section, the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) who imposes the penalty shall countersign the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration and the documents in accordance with the provisions of this section and allow the vehicle to resume its journey. (10) If the penalty is not paid by the date specified in the notice referred to in sub-section (7) , the goods shall be seized by the Commissioner or the other authority referred to in sub-section (2) under whose order such goods are detained. 23 [Provided that where the goods are not available for detention and the penalty imposed under sub-section (6) is not paid, realisation of such penalty shall be made under section 55.] (11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (8) and sub-section (10) , 24 [the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) ,] pending final disposal of an application for revision under section 86 against an order of imposition of penalty under this section, may direct transport of the goods through West Bengal on such terms and conditions as he may consider fit and proper. (12) Subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, the Commissioner may sell the goods seized under sub-section (10) in open auction or otherwise, and remit the proceeds of sale thereof to a Government Treasury. (13) The proceeds of sale of the goods referred to in sub-section (12) shall be applied in the prescribed manner for payment in the following order of priority:- (a) firstly, the incidental charges, if any, relating to sale in auction or otherwise; (b) secondly, the expenses, if any, for storage of such goods seized under sub-section (10) ; (c) thirdly, the penalty imposed under sub-section (6) ; and the balance of such proceeds of sale, if any, shall be paid in the prescribed manner to the owner of such goods seized under sub-section (10) . 25 [(14) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10) and subsection (12) , if such transporter, carrier or transporting agent of person fails to produce the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration countersigned under sub-section (3) or sub-section (9) before the Commissioner or the authority referred to in sub-section (2) , as required under subsection(4) within such time as may be specified in the consignment note or the document of like nature containing the declaration, it shall be presumed that the goods so transported have been sold in West Bengal by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person, and he shall be deemed to be a dealer under this Act.] (15) The provisions of this Act shall, for the purposes of levy, collection and assessment of tax, determination of interest, payment and recovery of tax and interest, appeal, review or revision, apply 26 [to transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person] to be deemed to be a dealer under sub-section(14) . (16) If the State Government is, at any time, of the opinion that it would be in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification, exempt from such date, for such period, and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified therein, any class or classes of goods from the operation of the provisions of this section. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 81--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where 1 [a transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] carries from any place in West Bengal 2 [in a goods vehicle, any consignment of goods, or any load is carried by a person] and such vehicle is bound for any place outside West Bengal, he shall, in addition to a document of title to the goods, carry with him, in respect of such goods,- 3 ["(a) where carriage is caused by a sale of such goods, two copies of tax invoice or bill or cash memorandum issued by the seller of such goods and such other documents as may be prescribed, or] (b) where carriage is caused otherwise than by a sale of such goods, two copies of the forwarding note, delivery challan or document of like nature, by whatever name called, issued by the owner or consignor of such goods, 4 [and such other documents as may be prescribed] Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply where 5 [the transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] carrying such goods proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that consequent upon a sale of such goods in the course of export within the meaning of sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , his goods vehicle carrying such goods is bound for such country as the State Government may, by notification specify. (2) 6 [The transporter, carrier or transporting agent or any other person] while carrying the goods referred to in sub-section (1) , shall stop the vehicle at the check post or at any place when so required by the Commissioner, and produce the documents referred to in sub-section (1) along with the document of title to such goods before the Commissioner, and 7 [the Commissioner shall, wherever necessary after verification,] countersign the documents referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) , as the case may be, of sub-section (1) . 8 [(2a) Where it appears to the Commissioner that- (a) due to failure of any dealer, casual dealer or any other person, no way bill in the prescribed form or such document as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) , could be produced by such transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person before him, or (b) the way bill in the prescribed form or such document, as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) , produced is fake, false or incorrect in respect of description, quantity, weight and value of the goods transported, or (c) the consignor of the goods, does not exist at the address declared in the waybill in the prescribed form or such document as mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1) , (d) the consignor of the goods does not exist at the address declared in the documents as mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (1) , he shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, seize such goods under section 76 at any check post, or at any place, referred to in sub-section (2) .] (3) If the State Government is, at any time, of the opinion that it would be in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification, exempt from such date, for such period, and subject to such conditions, as may be specified therein, 1 [any class or classes of transporter, carrier or transporting agent or person] carrying any class or classes of goods referred to in sub-section (1) from carrying the documents referred to in that sub-section. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005 Substituted for (a) where carriage is caused by sales of such goods,-(i) the tax invoice or invoice or bill or cash memorandum issued by the seller of such goods, and a way bill in the prescribed form and obtainable from such authority in such manner, as may be prescribed; or (ii) two copies of the tax invoice or invoice or bill or cash memorandum issued by the seller of such goods, and such document, containing description, quantity or weight and value of the goods and such other particular as may be prescribed, or]; Substituted for the words, letter and brackets [and a way bill and such other documents as referred to in clause (a) above;] by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 82--> State(s): West Bengal Nothing in section 80 or section 81 shall apply to transport of any goods where such goods are transported by or on behalf of- (a) the King of Nepal or Bhutan, the Royal Family of Nepal or Bhutan, or the Government of Nepal or Bhutan; (b) Government or a local authority; (c) a diplomatic or consular office, any organisation or specialised agency of the United Nations; (d) Indian Red Cross Society or a Charitable Institution for charitable purposes recognised by Government. 1 [(e) An official on transfer as personal effects; (f) Such other person or organisation, and in such circumstances, as may be prescribed.] Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 83--> State(s): West Bengal If the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do with a view to preventing evasion of tax 1 [in respect of sale or purchase of goods of execution of works contract in West Bengal,] it may, by notification, set up check posts or barriers for carrying out the purposes of 2 [section 73], section 80 or section 81 at such places within West Bengal as may be specified in such notification. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 84--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Any casual dealer or dealer may, in the prescribed manner, appeal to the prescribed authority against a provisional assessment or any other assessment, within forty-five days or such further period as may be allowed by the said authority for cause shown to his satisfaction from the receipt of a notice of demand in respect thereof: Provided that no appeal shall be entertained by the said authority unless he is satisfied that the amount of tax, penalty or interest, as the case may be, as the appellant may admit to be due from him has been paid: Provided further that where the payment of tax due from a registered dealer stands deferred under section 116, an appeal shall, notwithstanding that the tax admitted to be due from him has not been paid, be entertained. (2) Subject to such rules of procedure as may be prescribed, the appellate authority, in disposing of any appeal under sub-section (1) , may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,- (a) confirm, reduce, enhance or annul the provisional assessment or any other assessment, or (b) when such authority is satisfied that it is not practicable or desirable to act in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) , set aside the provisional assessment or any other assessment and direct the assessing authority to make fresh assessment after such further inquiry as may be directed: Provided that any appeal, which is entertained under sub-section (1) , shall, if not disposed of before the 31st December next following the expiry of two years from the date of its presentation, be deemed to have been disposed of in accordance with law and all the claims of the applicant shall be deemed to have been allowed in full: Provided further that the appropriate appellate authority may, before expiry of the period mentioned in the first proviso, obtain from the Commissioner an extension of time mentioned in that proviso and where the Commissioner, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extends the time, such appeal may be disposed of during the period of one year immediately following the period mentioned in the first proviso. 2 [Provided also that in computing the period mentioned in the first proviso for disposal of any appeal, the period during which the appropriate appellate authority is restrained from disposing of or continuing any proceedings for such appeal by an order of an authority under the Act or a tribunal or any court, shall be excluded] (3) While acting in accordance with the provisions of clause (b) of subsection (2) , the appellate authority may set aside any part of a provisional assessment or any other assessment and, if he does so, the assessing authority shall make a fresh assessment in respect of such part or parts only, and the remaining part or parts of the previous assessment shall remain unaltered and valid. (4) Pending disposal of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2) , the appellate authority may, on application, as his discretion and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, stay realisation of the amount of tax, interest or penalty in dispute wholly or in part. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, section 85, section 86 or section 87, (a) the expression "provisional assessment" means- (i) provisional assessment for tax and imposition of penalty under section 45, (ii) determination of interest under section 50, or (iii) rectification of mistake in determination of interest under section 51; (b) the expression "any other assessment" means- (i) assessment of tax and imposition of penalty under section 46 and section 48, (ii) determination of interest under section 50, or (iii) rectification of mistake in determination of interest under section 51. (c) "notice of demand" means any notice served in accordance with the provisions of this Act for realisation of the tax, interest or penalty referred to in clause (a) and clause (b) ]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 85--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to such rules as may be made and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Commissioner may, on his own motion, revise a 2 [ a provisional assessment under section 45, or any other assessment under section 46] , or section 48, or deemed to have been made under sub-section (1) of section 47 or order passed by a person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist him. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Act, where an assessment in respect of the dealer for any period is taken up under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 46, the Commissioner may, of his own motion, revise the orders of assessments under section 45, or section 46, or section 47 or section 48 for the previous five years also.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "a provisional assessment under section 46" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No . 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 86--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Commissioner or the prescribed authority may, upon application, revise any order other than an order referred to in section 87 and an order of provisional assessment or any other assessment against which an appeal lies under section 84, passed by a person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist him: Provided that 2 [any application for revision filed] against the observations made in the audit report as referred to in sub-section (3) of section 43, shall, if not disposed of before the expiry of ninety days from the date of its presentation, be deemed to have been disposed of in accordance with law and all the claims of the applicant shall be deemed to have allowed in full: Provided further that the appropriate revisional authority may, before the expiry of the period mentioned in the first proviso, obtained from the Commissioner an extension of time mentioned in that proviso and where the Commissioner, for reasons to be recorded in writing extend the time, such revision may be disposed of during the period of three months immediately following the period of ninety days as referred to in the first proviso. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression "any order" also includes the following,- (a) an order of seizure of accounts of a dealer or casual dealer or any other person, made under section 67; (b) an order of sealing any house, room, warehouse, almirah, cabinet, safe, locker, drawer, box, or any receptacle, made under section 69; (c) an order of seizure of account of a transporter, carrier or transporting agent made under section 71; (d) an order of seizure of goods of any person, made under section 76.] 3 [Provided also that in computing the period mentioned in the first proviso for disposal of any appeal, the period during which the appropriate appellate authority is restrained from disposing of or continuing any proceedings for such appeal by an order of an authority under the Act or a tribunal or any court, shall be excluded] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "any revision filed" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 87--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Appellate and Revisional Board may, upon application, revise a final appellate or revisional order from an order of provisional assessment or any other assessment: Provided that where an applicant fails to appear in person or through an authorised agent on the date and at the time and place fixed for hearing on 2 [ the application for revision preferred by him ], the Appellate and Revisional Board may, in its discretion, dismiss such application for such default of the applicant: Provided further that the Appellate and Revisional Board may, upon application filed by an applicant within forty-five days from the date of order of dismissal of an application for revision for default passed by it under the first proviso or within such further time as it may allow for cause shown to its satisfaction, restore the application for revision so dismissed. (2) Where during the pendency of an application for revision preferred by a casual dealer or dealer under sub-section (1) before the Appellate and Revisional Board, the Commissioner, having discovered- (a) any error or omission, whether in fact or law, in the final appellate or revisional order referred to in sub-section (1) , or (b) any concealment, by a casual dealer of his sales or purchases or, by a dealer of his turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or incorrect statement of particulars of his sales or purchases or contractual transfer price by such dealer or claim for deduction of any part of turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or claim for lower rate of tax payable under this Act, (c) any claim by a dealer of excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate, or (d) any non-reversal by a dealer of input tax credit or input tax rebate to the extent of his disentitlement, is of the opinion that the amount of tax assessed is liable to be enhanced from what has been made in the order of a provisional assessment or any other assessment or in the final appellate or revisional order in the matter of the amount of tax so assessed, as the case may be, he may, subject to such rules as may be made, file, at any time before the application for revision is finally heard by the Appellate and Revisional Board, a memorandum bringing to its notice the error or omission referred to in clause (a) or the concealment by, the casual dealer of his sales or purchases or, the dealer of his turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or incorrect statement by him of the particulars referred to in clause (b) or claim by a dealer of any excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate referred to in clause (c) or any non-reversal by a dealer of input tax credit or input tax rebate referred to in clause (d) . (3) The Appellate and Revisional Board shall, while proceeding to revise under sub-section (1) any final appellate or revisional order from order of a provisional assessment or any other assessment, entertain the memorandum filed under sub-section (2) as an application by the Commissioner for revision and pass such revisional order as it deems fit. (4) Where the Commissioner, after revision made by the Appellate and Revisional Board under sub-section (1) , discovers any concealment by, a casual dealer of his sales or purchases or a dealer of his turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or incorrect statement by a dealer of particulars or sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or claim for deduction of any part of turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or claim for lower rate of tax or any claim by a dealer of excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate or any non-reversal of input tax credit or input tax rebate to the extent of his disentitlement, he may, subject to such rules as may be made, make, within four years from the date of order of the Appellate and Revisional Board, an application to the Appellate and Revisional Board, and the Appellate and Revisional Board, may thereupon, after giving the Commissioner and the casual dealer or the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, review its order passed under sub-section (1) and pass such order as it deems fit.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "the application for revision preferred to him" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 88--> State(s): West Bengal Subject to such rules as may be made, 1 [any provisional assessment or any other assessment] made or order passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder by any person appointed under subsection (1) of section 3, section 4, 2 [section 5 or sub-section (1) of section 6] may be reviewed by the person passing it upon application or on his own motion, and, subject to the rules as aforesaid, the Appellate and Revisional Board may, in the like manner and for reasons to be recorded in writing, review any order passed by it, either on its own motion or upon an application: Provided that if the Commissioner considers it necessary to modify any order passed either by any of his predecessors-in-office, or by any person in the rank of Special Commissioner or Additional Commissioner when such person ceases to hold the rank of the Special Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner, the Commissioner may review any such order. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 88A--> State(s): West Bengal Where any assessing authority is aggrieved by any order being- (a) a final appellate order passed under section 84 by an Assistant Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner or an Additional Commissioner, or (b) a final order passed under section 85 or section 86 or section 88 by an Assistant Commissioner, a Deputy Commissioner or an Additional Commissioner revising or reviewing a final appellate order passed under section 84 in respect of a provisional assessment or any other assessment, such assessing authority may make an application, without any fees, for revision under section 87 of such order to the Appellate and Revisional Board. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 88B--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If the Commissioner considers that any order passed by a Special Commissioner or an Additional Commissioner or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, he may, after giving the dealer or casual dealer or person likely to be affected an opportunity of being heard and after making or causing to be made such inquiry, if any, as he deems necessary, pass such order as the circumstances of the case justify, including an order enhancing or modifying any assessment, or cancelling or setting aside any assessment and directing a fresh assessment or revising or cancelling or setting aside any other order made under this Act by any such authority and directing a fresh order to be passed under this Act. (2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) after the expiry of four years from the date of the order sought to be revised: Provided that in computing the period mentioned under this sub-section, the period during which any proceedings under this section is stayed by an order of an authority under this Act or a tribunal or any court, shall be excluded
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 89--> State(s): West Bengal An appeal, review or revision in respect of any order passed in the matter of tax recoverable under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 55, section 56, section 57 or section 59 shall lie 1 [in the manner, and to the authority, as may be prescribed]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 90--> State(s): West Bengal Before any order under section 84, section 85, section 86, section 87 or section 88, which is likely to affect any person adversely, is passed, such person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 91--> State(s): West Bengal The Appellate and Revisional Board, the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner, or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely,- (a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath or affirmation; (b) compelling the production of documents; and (c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses, and any proceeding under this Act before the Appellate and Revisional Board, the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, the Additional Commissioner, or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) .
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 92--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Within sixty days from the date of passing by the Appellate and Revisional Board of any order under section 87 affecting any 1 [liability of any casual dealer or any dealer] to pay tax, penalty or interest under this Act, 2 [such casual dealer or dealer] by application in writing accompanied by a fee of one hundred rupees, or the Commissioner, by application in writing, may require the Appellate and Revisional Board to refer to the Tribunal any question of law arising out of such order. (2) If, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Appellate and Revisional Board refuses to make such reference, the applicant may, within ninety days of such refusal, either- (a) withdraw his application and if he does so, the fee, if any paid, shall be refunded; or (b) apply to the Tribunal against such refusal. (3) If upon the receipt of an application under clause (b) of sub-section (2) the Tribunal is not satisfied with the correctness of the decision of the Appellate and Revisional Board, it may require the Appellate and Revisional Board to state the case and refer it, and, on the receipt of such requisition, the Appellate and Revisional Board shall state and refer the case to the Tribunal accordingly. (4) if the Tribunal is not satisfied that the statements in a case referred to it under this section are sufficient to enable it to determine the question of law raised thereby, it may refer the case back to the Appellate and Revisional Board to make such addition thereto or alterations therein as it may direct in this behalf. (5) The Tribunal upon the hearing of any such case shall decide the question of law raised thereby, and shall deliver its judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded, and shall send to the Appellate and Revisional Board a copy of such judgment under the seal, and the signature of the Registrar of the Tribunal, and the Appellate and Revisional Board shall dispose of the case accordingly. (6) Where a reference is made to the Tribunal under this section, the costs (including fees) shall be in the discretion of the Tribunal. (7) The payment of the amount, if any, of tax, penalty or interest due in accordance with the order of the Appellate and Revisional Board in respect of which an application has been made under sub-section (1) , shall not be stayed pending the disposal of such application or any reference made in consequence thereof, but if such amount is reduced as the result of such reference, the amount of tax, penalty or interest paid in excess shall be refunded in accordance with the provisions of 3 [section 62]. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 93--> State(s): West Bengal Whoever- (a) fails to reverse input tax credit or input tax rebate as required by section 22;or (b) carries on business as a dealer without furnishing the security demanded under section 26; or (c) 1 [neglects or refuses or furnishes incorrect information as required by section 27A; or furnishes such information which is found to be incorrect (d) neglects or refuses to furnish information as required by section 38B or furnishes such information which is found to be furnishes incorrect; or] (e) fails to pay full amount of net tax or any other tax payable for any tax period or in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 32; or (f) fails to make payment of interest payable under section 33 or section 34 or section 34A; or (g) fails to comply with the provisions of section 63; or (h) 2 [neglects or refuses to furnish information as required by section 66A or furnishes such information which is found to be incorrect; or]; or (i) contravenes the provisions of section 73; or (j) fails to make full payment of penalty imposed under section 79; or (k) fails to comply with any requirement under section 81; shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both and, a court having jurisdiction may, in addition to any fine as aforesaid, order confiscation of any goods seized under section 76 for the offence of contravention of section73.] (2) Whoever carries on business as a dealer in contravention of sub-section (1) of section 24 shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both, and when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding one hundred rupees during the period of the continuance of the offence. 3 [(3) Whoever, being a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, operates in contravention of section 25 his transport business in West Bengal of transporting any consignment or taxable goods into, or outside, or within, West Bengal without obtaining a certificate of enrolment or contravenes the provisions of the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 76, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both, and when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding one hundred rupees during the period of continuance of the offence.] 4 [(3A) Whoever, being a transporter, carrier or transporting agent, fails or neglects to comply with- (a) the provisions of. section 70, or (b) the direction of the Commissioner under sub-section (1) of section 72, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both, and when the offence is a continuing, one, with a daily fine not exceeding one hundred rupees during the period of continuance of the offence. (3B) 5 [Whoever contravenes the express conditions referred to in the provisions] of the first proviso to sub-section (2) of section 76, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or with both, and when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding one hundred rupees during the period of continuance of the offence.] 6 [(4) Whoever- (a) issues or produces a fake or fabricated tax invoice referred to in clause (48) of section 2; (b) fails to submit before the prescribed authority statements, accounts or declarations under section 30E, within prescribed time; (c) furnishes a false return referred to in section 32; or (d) fails without reasonable cause to furnish a return under section 32; (e) refuses to comply with any requirement under section 66; shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years and with fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both, and when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine, not exceeding fifty rupees, during the period of the continuance of the offence.] (5) Whoever has in his possession any prescribed form preferred to in subsection (2) of section 73 or sub-section (1) of section 81], not obtained by him or by his principal or agent in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any rules made there under, shall be deemed to have committed the offence of criminal breach of trust under section 405 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , and every such person who commit such criminal breach of trust, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both. (6) Whoever wilfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat any tax imposed under this Act, shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by any law for the time being in force, be liable also for the offence of dishonest misappropriation of property under section 403 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of1860) , and shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both. (7) Whoever knowingly produces incorrect accounts, registers, documents or electronic record or knowingly furnishes incorrect information or suppresses material information shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both. (8) Whoever obstructs any officer making inspection or search or seizure or taking other action under section 66, section 67, section 68, section 69, section 70,section 71, 7 [section 72, section 74 or section 76, section 80 or section 81], shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description which shall not be less than three months but which may extend to two years or with fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees or with both. (9) [Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.] (10) Whoever abets any of the offences mentioned in sub-section (2) , subsection (3) , 8 [sub-section(3A) ] sub-section (5) , sub-section (6) , sub-section (7) , shall, if the act of offence is committed in consequence of the abatement, be punishable with the same punishment as provided for the offence. (11) Any offence punishable under sub-section (1) , sub-section (2) , subsection (3) , 9 [sub-section(4) , or sub-section (10) ,] shall be cognizable and bailable while that punishable 10 [under sub-section (3A) , sub-section (5) ] subsection (6) ,sub-section (7) , sub-section (8) , or sub-section (9) , shall be cognizable and non-bailable. (12) In any prosecution for an offence under this Act which requires a culpable mental state on the part of accused, the court shall presume the existence of such culpable mental state until the contrary is proved. Explanation I.-In this sub-section, "culpable mental state" includes intention, motive, knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or reason to believe, a fact. Explanation II.-If any of the offences under sub-section (2) , 11 [or clause (d) of sub-section (4) ] continues, such offence shall be deemed to be a continuing offence. (13) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act or the rules made hereunder except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner, and no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate shall try such offence. 12 [(14) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere, in the Act, no prosecution for any offence enumerated hereinbefore shall be instituted in respect of the same factor which a penalty has been imposed under any other provisions of the Act and subsequently paid by the dealer and no such penalty shall be imposed vice versa.] Substituted for the CLAUSES (c) "neglects or refuses or furnishes incorrect information as required by section 27A; or" and (d) neglects or refuses or furnishes incorrect information as required by section 30B; or by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No.2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted for the clause (h) neglects or refuses or furnishes incorrect information as required by section 65A by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "Whoever contravenes the provisions" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-Ldated 08.08.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Added by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 94--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where an offence referred in section 93 has been committed by a dealer, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the dealer for the conduct of, the business of the dealer, as well as the dealer shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided under section 93, if he proves that such offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , where an offence under section 93 has been committed by a dealer and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer, as the case may be, of the dealer, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 95--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any person alleged to have committed an offence 1 [under clause (b) , clause (c) , clause (d) , clause (e) , clause (f) or clause (h) or clause (i) of sub-section (1) , sub-section (2) , sub-section (3) , sub-section (3A) , clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (4) ,] sub-section (5) , sub-section (6) , sub-section (7) , sub-section (9) , or sub-section (10) , of section 93, or under any rules made under this Act, may, either before or after the commencement of any proceedings against him in respect of such offence, at his option, compound such offence, and the Commissioner may, at his discretion, accept from such person, by way of composition of such offence, such sum not exceeding five lakh rupees as may be determined by the Commissioner. (2) On payment in full of the sum determined by the Commissioner under sub-section (1) ,- (a) no proceedings shall be commenced against such person as aforesaid; and (b) if any proceedings have already been commenced against such person as aforesaid, such proceedings shall not be further proceeded with. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 96--> State(s): West Bengal 2 [(1) Where- (a) dealer or casual dealer has concealed any sales or purchases or contractual transfer price, as the case may be, or any particulars thereof, or (b) a dealer, required to furnish return under sub-section (1) of section 32 has furnished incorrect statement of his turnover of sales or purchases or of contractual transfer price or incorrect particulars of such sales or purchases or contractual transfer price in the return furnished by him under sub-section (2) of that section or otherwise, or (c) any registered dealer has claimed excess amount of input tax credit or input tax rebate but has not reversed the same to the extent of his disentitlement, with intent to reduce the amount of net tax or any other tax payable by him, the Commissioner, may, by way of a separate proceeding independent of any assessment, appeal, revision or review and after giving in the prescribed manner, such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing direct that he shall, in addition to any tax levied or penalty imposed under this Act, pay, by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding twice the amount of tax which would have been avoided by him if such concealed sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or particulars thereof or incorrect statement of turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or incorrect particulars of such sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or claim of excess input tax credit or input tax rebate were not detected and taken into account or if turnover of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or particulars of sales or purchases or contractual transfer price or input tax credit or input tax rebate furnished in returns or shown in his books of account were accepted as correct, as the case may be, in making an assessment or passing any order upon appeal, revision or review under the Act. Explanation.-In this sub-section, the expression "tax levied" shall include the amount of tax determined a fresh by an order passed upon appeal, revision, review, or by any order of assessment consequent upon such appeal, revision, review, under this Act. (2) Any penalty imposed under sub-section (1) shall be paid by the dealer by such date as may be specified by the Commissioner in a notice issued for the purpose, and the date to be so specified shall not be less than fifteen days from the date of issue of such notice: Provided that the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the date of such payment or allow the dealer to pay the penalty imposed in such number of instalments as the Commissioner may determine.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 97--> State(s): West Bengal No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any Government servant for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 98--> State(s): West Bengal (1) All particulars contained in any statement made, return furnished or 1 [accounts, registers or documents including those in the form of electronic records produced in accordance with this Act,] or in any record of evidence given in the course of any proceedings under this Act, other than the proceedings before a criminal court, shall, save as provided in sub-section (3) , be treated as confidential, and notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , no court shall, save as aforesaid, be entitled to require any Government servant to produce before it any such statement, return, 2 [accounts, registers or documents including those in the form of electronic records,] or record or any part thereof, or to give evidence before it in respect thereof. (2) If, save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3) , any Government servant discloses any of the particulars referred to in sub-section (1) , he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, and shall also be liable to fine. (3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure of any of the particulars referred to in sub-section (1) - (a) for the purposes of any prosecution under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) , or this Act or any preliminary inquiry for ascertaining whether such prosecution lies, (b) in connection with any suit or proceeding in a civil court to which the State Government or any person appointed under this Act is a party and which relates to any matter arising out of any proceeding under this Act, (c) where it is necessary to make such disclosure for the purposes of this Act, (d) to an officer of Government for the purpose of enabling such Government to levy or realise any tax or duty imposed by it, (e) to an officer of Government for the audit of receipts and refunds of tax, penalty or interest under this Act, (f) in connection with an inquiry concerning allegations of corruption or official misconduct against any Government servant or for the purpose of taking disciplinary action against such Government servant, (g) in any inquiry into a charge of misconduct in connection with any proceeding under this Act against any legal practitioner, chartered accountant or other person entitled to appear 3 [on behalf of a dealer, casual dealer or any other person] before the taxing authorities under this Act, to the authority competent to take disciplinary action against such legal practitioner, chartered accountant or other person, (h) to any officer of the State Government to enable such officer to perform his executive functions relating to the affairs of the State, (i) to any person for purposes other than those referred to in clause (a) , clause (b) , clause (c) , clause (d) , clause (e) , clause (g) and clause (h) , if the State Government considers such disclosure necessary in the public interest. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 99--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no Government, local authority, educational institution, or corporation or body corporate established by or under a Central or State Act shall enter into 1 [any works contract with any dealer for execution by him of such works contract and shall make payment to such dealer for execution of such works contract, or shall] place order with, or make purchases of any goods from, any dealer or make any payment to such dealer for such purchases, unless the Commissioner certifies in the prescribed manner that such dealer- (a) has no liability to pay tax or has not defaulted in furnishing any return or returns together with the receipted challan or challans showing payment of all tax payable 2 [under this Act or the west bengal sales tax Act, 1994(west Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) ] or the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) , (b) has not defaulted in making payment of tax, otherwise payable by, or due from, him 3 [under this Act or the west bengal sales tax Act, 1994(west Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) ] or the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, or (c) has made satisfactory provision for securing the payment of tax by furnishing bank guarantee in favour of the Commissioner or otherwise, as the case may be: Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any payment where any amount is deductible from such payment under sub-section (1) of section 40. (2) The application for the certificate required under sub-section (1) shall be made by the dealer referred to in that sub-section to the Commissioner and shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. 4 [(3) Where the Commissioner, upon an application made by a dealer and after making such enquiry as he deems fit and proper, is satisfied and issues a certificate in the prescribed form to the effect that such dealer is not liable to pay tax under section 14 or that he has paid tax payable by, or due from, him under that section, payment may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) , be made to such dealer for execution by him of a works contract referred to in section 14 on production by him of such certificate of the Commissioner] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "under this Act" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted for the words "under this Act" by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 100--> State(s): West Bengal To ensure that there is no evasion of tax, every person intending to organise an exhibition-cum-sale of goods, shall obtain from the prescribed authority a permit in such form, and in such manner, as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 101--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Where any person contravenes the provision of section 100 by organising any exhibition-cum-sale without obtaining permit, the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner may, after giving such person an opportunity of being heard, impose upon him a penalty not exceeding fifty thousand rupees. (2) A penalty imposed under sub-section (1) , shall be paid by the person upon whom it is imposed by such date as may be specified by the authority referred to in sub-section (1) , in a notice to be issued for this purpose, and the date so specified shall not be earlier than fifteen days from the date of issue of such notice: Provided that the authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the date of payment of the penalty for such period, as he may think fit.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 102--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If any question arises, otherwise than in a proceeding before a Court or, Tribunal or before a notice initiating assessment proceeding under section 46, is served upon the registered dealer, whether- (a) any tax is at all payable in respect of any particular sale or purchase of goods, or if tax, is payable, the rate thereof; or (b) any goods shall be treated as Capital goods within the meaning of sub-section (6) of section 2 or not, the Commissioner may, upon application, in prescribed manner and with prescribed fees, determine such question by an order passed in writing after giving such dealer an opportunity of being heard. (2) If any question, referred to in sub-section (1) , arises from any order passed under any other provision of this Act, such question shall not be determined under this section.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 103--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 104--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 105--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 106--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 107--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 108--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [...]. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 109--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Save as provided in section 92, no assessment made and no order passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder by the Commissioner, the Special Commissioner, an Additional Commissioner, or any person appointed under sub-section (1) of section 6 to assist the Commissioner, and no order passed by the Appellate and Revisional Board under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be called into question in any civil court, and save as provided in section 84, section 85, section 86 or section 87, no appeal or application for revision or review shall lie against such assessment or order. (2) Save as provided in section 89, no order passed by Tax Recovery Officer under this Act or the rules in Schedule F and no order passed upon and appeal from or review or revision of, any order of the Tax Recovery Officer in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules in Schedule F shall be called into question in any civil court, and, save as provided in section 89, no appeal, review or revision shall lie against such order.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 110--> State(s): West Bengal Where the manner of payment of any tax, penalty, or interest, payable by a person, or any sum determined by the Commissioner in compounding any offence, under this Act, is not provided specifically elsewhere in this Act, such tax, penalty, interest or sum shall be paid into 1 [an appropriate Government Treasury] in the prescribed manner. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 111--> State(s): West Bengal If the Commissioner considers that for the purpose of better administration of this Act, it is necessary to collect statistics relating to any matter dealt with by or under this Act, he may, by notification, call upon dealers or such class or classes of dealers as may be specified in the notification, to furnish such information relating to any matter in respect of which it is necessary to collect statistics, in such form, containing such particulars, to such authorities, and at such intervals, as may be specified in the notification.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 112--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Fees payable upon a memorandum of appeal or application for review or revision, or upon any other miscellaneous application or petition, other than an application referred to in sub-section (1) of section 92, for relief shall be such as may be prescribed: Provided that any fee prescribed under this section shall not exceed one thousand rupees. (2) The fee as aforesaid shall be paid in court-fee stamp to be affixed to the memorandum of appeal, application for review or revision or other miscellaneous application or petition, as the case may be, referred to in sub-section (1) .
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 113--> State(s): West Bengal The State Government may, for the purpose of collection of information regarding existence of 1 [warehouse] of dealers, 2 [or transporter, carrier or transporting agent] where goods are stored by them and the nature, quantity or value of such goods stored in such 3 [warehouse] engage the services of any person, firm or company to perform such work on such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 114--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules, with prospective or retrospective effect, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters which under any provision of this Act are required to be prescribed, or to be provided for, by rules. (3) In making any rules under this section, the State Government may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees and, when the offence is a continuing one, with a daily fine not exceeding one hundred rupees during the continuance of such offence.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 115--> State(s): West Bengal Nothing in this Act shall be construed to impose, or authorise the imposition of, 1 [tax on the sale or purchase of goods or on the execution of works contract where such sale or purchase or execution of works contract] takes place- (a) outside West Bengal; (b) in the course of import of the goods into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India; (c) in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 116--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (2) of section 32, or sub-section (2) of section 45, or clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 46 but subject to sub-section (2) of this section and section 118, the Commissioner may, in the prescribed manner and subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed, permit the output tax payable under this Act by a registered dealer or a class or classes of dealers as may be prescribed, according to his returns referred to in sub-section (1) of section 32 or the tax payable by him according to a notice issued under subsection (2) of section 45, or clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 46,- (a) to be deferred in the prescribed manner and under such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed where such registered dealer is entitled to continue to enjoy such deferment under clause (a) of the sub-section (1) of section 118; or (b) to be exempt in the prescribed manner and under such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed where such registered dealer is entitled to continue to enjoy such exemption under clause (b) of the sub-section (1) of section 118; or (c) to be remitted in the prescribed manner and under such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed where such registered dealer is entitled to continue to enjoy such remission under clause (c) of the sub-section (1) of section 118. (2) Where the State Government considers it necessary so to do in the public interest, it may, after due consideration of certain factors as may be prescribed, relax the ceiling to such extent as may be prescribed.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 117--> State(s): West Bengal Where a dealer has contravened any of the provisions of section 116 or rules made thereunder or furnishes incorrect or fabricated statements or forged documents with the intention to deceive the Government, the Commissioner shall, after giving such dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose upon him a penalty, in the manner prescribed, a sum not exceeding one hundred per centum of such tax which would have been payable by such dealer had he not been granted such deferment.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 118--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,- (a) where a registered dealer has been enjoying, or has been entitled to enjoy, the benefit of deferment of tax under section 40, section 42 or section 43, as the case may be, of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , for a specified period or for a specified amount determined with respect to gross value of the fixed capital assets, immediately before the appointed day and who would have continued to be so eligible on such appointed day under that Act had this Act not come into force, may be allowed deferment of payment of 1 [output tax] payable by him under this Act by the Commissioner, for the balance un-expired period or the balance eligible amount, as the case may be, with respect to gross value of the fixed capital assets, whichever expires earlier; 2 [(b) where a registered dealer was enjoying benefit of tax holiday under section 39 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (W.B. Act, XLIX of 1994) , for a specified period, immediately before the appointed day and who would have continued to be so eligible on such appointed day under that Act had his act not come into force, may be allowed such tax holiday in a restricted manner by way of exemption from payment of ninety-five per centum of output tax payable by him under this Act by the Commissioner for the balance unexpired period or until the aggregate of the benefit of exemption from payment of tax enjoyed by such dealer under section 39 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, computed from first day of April, 2003, exceeds the limit of two hundred per centum of gross value of the fixed capital assets, whichever expires earlier, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;] 3 [(c) where a registered dealer was enjoying benefit of remission of tax under section 41 of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, for a specified period or a specified amount determined with respect to gross value of the fixed capital assets, immediately before the appointed day and who would have continued to be so eligible on such appointed under that Act had this Act not come into foerce, may be allowed remission of him under this Act by the Commissioner for the balance unexpired period, or balance eligible amount with respect to gross value of fixed capital assets, whichever expires earlier, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.] (2) For the purposes of clause (a) , clause (b) or clause (c) , a complete British Calendar month shall be considered, wherever a part of a month is involved. (3) For the purpose of clause (a) , clause (b) or clause (c) , the term "balance" means the period, or the eligible amount, remaining unexhausted on the appointed day. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 119--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act,- (a) all forms of waybill under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 or the rules made thereunder and continuing in force on the day immediately before the appointed day, shall, with effect from such appointed day, continue in force and shall be used mutatis mutandis for the purposes for which they were being used before such appointed day until the State Government directs, by notification, the discontinuance of the use of such forms till such time as the State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; (b) all rules, regulations, notifications or orders made or issued under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, and continuing in force on the day immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in force on or after such appointed day in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder until they are repealed or amended; (c) any waybill obtained or obtainable by a dealer from any prescribed authority or any declaration furnished or to be furnished by or to a dealer under any of the Acts so repealed or the rules made thereunder in respect of any sale of goods before the appointed day shall be valid where such waybill is obtained or such declaration is furnished on or after such appointed day; (d) any waybill endorsed or any order passed before the appointed day under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) , or the rules made thereunder for the transport of any consignment of goods specified in Schedule IV or notified goods into West Bengal or outside West Bengal and continuing to be valid on the day immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be valid on or after such appointed day for the purposes as aforesaid unless the periods of validity of such waybill or order otherwise expires; (e) any application for waybill for transport of goods into West Bengal, pending on the day immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed to have been made under this Act and shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 1 [(f) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act and the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, where a dealer registered under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, is in possession of a certificate of registration thereunder on the day immediately before the appointed day and who is deemed to have been registered under sub-section (3) of section 23 of this Act, such certificate of registration shall be deemed to have been granted under this Act and shall continue to have effect till new registration certificate is issued under this act, unless cancelled otherwise before such time as aforesaid, or within such time as the State Government prescribes by notification.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 120--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, dealers eligible for deferment of tax in accordance with 1 [clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 118] shall have an option to make payment within the financial year, of tax deferred during the preceding year, on the basis of a discount formula, in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 121--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Nothing in the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, shall apply in relation to the goods which are governed by the West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003, on and from the appointed day. 1 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall not - (a) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994; or (b) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against, or in respect of any contravention of any provision of the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994; or (c) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy, in respect of any such privilege, obligation or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such forfeiture may be made and penalty or punishment may be imposed, in respect of any transaction effected before the appointed day or in respect of any action relating to such transaction."] Inserted by The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 122--> State(s): West Bengal If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act the State Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed day.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section 123--> State(s): West Bengal The West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994, shall be amended in the manner specified in the Schedule E to this Act.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.1--> State(s): West Bengal [See section 21] Goods on sale of which no tax is payable Serial No. Description of goods Conditions and Exceptions (1) (2) (3) 1. Agricultural implements manually operated or animal driven. 2. Aids and implements used by handicapped persons. 1 [2A. Alluric Acid] 3. 2 [Aquatic feed, poultry feed and cattle feed including grass, hay, straw, husk of pulses, de-oiled cake, wheat bran and supplements, concentrates and additives of such feed ] 3 [3A Bangles made of any kind of materials except those made of gold, silver and platinum.] 4 [3B. Bed sheets, pillow covers, bed-spreads, bed-covers, towels, napkins, table cloth, duster, handkerchief, sataranchi and blankets] 4. Betel leaves. 5. 5 [Books, periodicals and journals excluding those specified elsewhere in this Schedule or any other Schedule, but including Braille books, maps, charts and globes] 6 [5A. Bread except pizza bread containing any type of fruit or vegetable.] 6. 7 [Charkha, Ambar Charkha,Gandhi Topi and handlooms and handloom fabrics, when they are manufactured or made in India] 7. Charcoal. 8. Coarse grains other than paddy, rice and wheat. 8 [8A. Coconut fibre.] 9 [8B. Conch shell and conch shell products] 9. Condoms and contraceptives. 10. Cotton and silk yarn in hank. 11. Curd, lussi, 10 [butter milk, separated milk and chhana] 11 [11A Duty Entitlement Pass Book(D.E.P.B) ] 12. Earthen pot but not including ceramic pot. 12 [12A. Elastic Fabric Tape] 13. Electrical energy. 14. 13 [Firewood excluding casurina and eucalyptus timber] 15. 14 ["Fishnet, fishnet fabrics and seeds of fish, prawn and shrimp ] 16. Fresh milk and pasteurised milk. 17. Fresh plants, saplings and fresh flowers. 18. Fresh vegetables and fruits. 19. Fresh garlic and ginger. 15 [20. Gur, jaggery and rub gur 20A. Goods, except kerosene oil, sold through Public Distribution System (PDS) . 20B. Garments, goods and made-ups, of khaddar or khadi as defined in the West Bengal Khadi and Village Industries Board Act, 1959 (West Ben. Act XIV of 1959) , manufactured in a khadi production unit approved or certified by the Khadi and Village Industries Commission established under the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956 (61 of 1956) 20C. 16 [Handicrafts including Jessore cheruni] 20D. Hosiery yarn] 21. Human blood and 17 [all its components] 18 [21A. Idols, toy and doll made of clay.] 19 [21B Incense sticks commonly known as agarbati, dhupkathi, dhupbati and hawan samagri including sombrani and lobhana] 22. Indigenous handmade musical instruments. 20 [22A indigenous handmade nuggets ,commonly known as bori 21 [22B Indigenous hand made soap 23. Kumkum, bindi, alta and sindur. 22 [23A. 23 [Lac and Shellac] 23B. Mat locally known as madurmade wholly or principally or Cyperus Corymbosus known locally as gola methi, madhurkathi, mutha, or Cyperus Malaccensis known locally as Chimati pati. 23C. Matsticks and reed obtainable from Cyperus Corymbosus known locally as gola methi, madur kathi, mutha, or Cyperus Malaccensis knwon locally as Chimati pati] 24. Meat, fish, prawn, and other aquatic products when not cured, or frozen; eggs and livestock and animal hair. 25. National flag. 24 [25A Newspaper] 25 [25B Oil Cake] 26. Organic manure. 26 [27. Paddy, rice, wheat, pulses, flour, atta, maida, 27 [suji, besan and sattu] 27A. Puffed rice, commonly known as Muri, flattened or beaten rice, commonly known as Chira, parched rice, commonly known as Khoi, parched paddy or rice coated with sugar or gur, commonly known as Murki.] 28 [27B Papad commonly known as papad] 28. Non-judicial stamp paper sold by Government Treasuries; postal items like envelope, postcard etc. sold by Government; rupee note, when sold to the Reserve Bank of India and cheques, loose or in book form but does not include first day cover, folder. 29. Rakhi. 30. Raw jute. 31. Raw wool. 32. Sago and Tapioca globules. 29 [32A. Salt. 32B. Salted cooked food made wholly or principally of flour, atta, suji or beson, that is to say, singara, nimki, kachuri, khasta kachuri, luchi, radhabaliavi, and dalpuri.] 33. Semen including frozen semen. 34. Silk worm laying, cocoon and raw silk. 35. Slate and slate pencils. 30 [35A. Sugar manufactured or made in India, misri and batasa] 31 [35B. Seeds of all varieties other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule or in any other Schedule] 32 [35C. Sponge-wood commonly known as sola or solapith] 36. 33 [Sweetmeat other than cake and pastry but including curd and khoa] 37. Tender green coconut commonly known as daab. 34 [37A. 35 [(i) Textile fabrics made wholly or partly of cotton, rayon, 36 [silk, artificial silk] or wool manufactured or made in India, other than those specified elsewhere in any other Schedule, (ii) Cotton textile fabrics , coated, covered, impregnated or laminated with plastics.] 37B. Tobacco, as referred to in the First Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, including cigarette, cigar, cheroot, smoking mixture for pipe and cigarette, bin, chewing tobacco, snuff and tobacco for hookah, that is to say, tobacco paste, ready for use in hookah, when all such items are manufactured or made in India.] 38. Toddy, Neera and Arak. 39. 37 [Unprocessed green leaves of tea.] 40. 38 [...] 41. Water other than -(i) aerated, mineral, distilled, medicinal, ionic battery, de-mineralised water, and (ii) water sold in sealed container.   Inserted vide notification no. 2039-FT dated 15.12.06 w.e.f. 1st day of August, 2006 Substituted for the words "Aquatic feed, poultry feed and cattle feed including grass, hay and straw but not including aquatic, poultry and cattle feed supplements, additives etc" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L Dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Substituted for the words "Books, periodicals and journals but not including exercise books, drawing books, graph books, account books, laboratory books, diaries, letter pads" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 for the following words "Charkha, Ambar Charkha; handlooms and handloom fabrics and Gandhi Topi" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "butter milk and separated milk" vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Substituted for the word "Firewood" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "Fishnet and fishnet fabrics" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "Glass bangles" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "Handicrafts " vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Substituted for the words " blood plasma" vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide notification no. 2039-FT dated 15.12.06 w.e.f. 1st day of August, 2006. The entry was earlieromitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 (refer FN.19) Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "suji and besan" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words " Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Sugar manufactured or made in India and khandasari]" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Substituted for the words "1 [Seeds of all varieties other than those specified elsewhere in any other Schedule.] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Sweetmeat other than cake and pastry but including curd.] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted vide notification no.1447-F.T dated 22.07.05 w.e.f. 1st day of April, 2005 for the wordsas under:"Textile fabrics made wholly or partly of cotton, rayon,artificial silk or wool manufactured or made in India, other than those specified elsewhere in any other Schedule." Substituted vide notification no. 2039-FT dated 15.12.06 w.e.f. (1) the 1st day of November, 2006 for the words "artificial silk" Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.2--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule AA [See sub-section (1) of section 21A] Sales of goods which shall be zero-rated Serial No. Sale of goods (1) (2) 1. Between dealers located in Special Economic Zone (SEZ) . 2. Between dealers whose units are referred to as Export Oriented Units (EOU) . 3. Between dealers referred to in serial No. 1 and serial No. 2 above. 4. By a dealer, to a dealer located in a Specail Economic Zone (SEZ) .] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.3--> State(s): West Bengal [See clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 16] List of goods taxable at 1% Serial No. Description of goods Conditions and Exceptions (1) (2) (3) 1. 1 [Bullion, that is to say, gold, silver and platinum in mass and uncoined, pure or alloy.] 2. 2 [Gold, silver and platinum ornaments, whether set with stone or other materials or not, including gold, silver and platinum filigree and other gold, silver and platinum articles.] 3. Precious stones including semi-precious stones and pearls - real, artificial or cultured. 4. 3 [...] 5. Tea sold under the auspices of any tea auction centre in West Bengal duly authorised by the Indian Tea Board. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.4--> State(s): West Bengal [See clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 16] List of goods taxable at 4% Part I Sl. No. Description of goods Conditions and Exceptions (1) (2) (3) 1. Agricultural implements not operated manually or not driven by animal and spare parts, accessories and components thereof. 2. Aluminium in all its forms, namely, aluminium ingots, slabs, bars, rods, wires, coils, sheets, plates, circles, sections, Channels, angels, joists, extrusions, including aiuminium scraps and aluminium foils. 3. All equipments for communications such as, Private Branch Exchange (P.B.X.) and Electronic Private Automatic Branch Exchange (E.P.A.B.X.) etc. and spare parts, components and accessories thereof. 1 [4. All intangible goods like copyright, patent and replenishment (REP) licence, other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule or any other Schedule 5. All kinds of bricks including brickbats, jhama, fly ash bricks, refractory bricks 2 [and asphaltic roofing earthen tiles,and refractory monolithic and fly ash] 3 [5A. All types of toys except those specified elsewhere in this Schedule or any other Schedule ,and excluding electronic toys"] 4 [5B. All kinds of rope] 5 [6. All types of yarn including jute yarn and jute twine but excluding cotton and silk yarn in hank and sewing thread.] 7. 6 [All utensils including pressure cookers and pans excepting utensils made of precious metals] 7 [7A. Aluminium conductor steel reinforced (ACSR) ] 8 [, all aluminium conductor (AAC) and all aluminium alloy conductor (AAAC) ] 8. Arecanut powder and betel nut. 8A. 9 [Articles made of rolled-gold and imitation gold and all types of imitation jewellery] 10 [8AA. Asphalt felt, roofing felt, water-proof felt, polymeric felt and plastic felt.] 11 [8B. Ashes] 9. Bamboo including split bamboo and cut bamboo. 12 [9A. Bagasse. 13 [9AA. Bakery shortening] 9B. Basic chromium sulphate, sodium bi-carbonate and Bleach liquid.] 10. Bearing including plummer blocks, housing for bearing, locket rings and covers, adopter withdrawal sleeves, lock nut, lock washers, clamps and rolling elements. 14 [10A. 15 [...] 11. Beedi leaves. 12. Beltings of all varieties and descriptions. 13. Bicycles, tricycles and cycle rickshaws, and spare parts, accessories and components 16 [ including tyres and tubes] thereof. 17 [13A. Biomass briquettes.] 18 [13B. Bio-fertilizers and micronutients,plant growth promoters and regulators] 14. Bitumen. 19 [14A. Boiler, furnace and parts thereof.] 20 [14B. Bleaching powder] 15. Bone meal. 16. 21 [Buckets made of iron and steel ,aluminium ,plastic or other materials ,except those made of precious metals. 17. Bulk drugs. 22 [17A. Candles] 23 [17B. Buttons 18. 24 [Capital goods as notified under item (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 16] 19. Cast iron castings other than those specified elsewhere in this schedule or in any other schedule. 25 [19A. Castor oil. 19B. Caustic soda, caustic potash and soda ash.] 20. Motor, operated electrically or otherwise and centrifugal and monobloc and submersible pumps and spare parts, components and accessories thereof. 21. 26 [...] 22. Chemical fertilizers including basic slag, pesticides, weedicides, insecticides, germicides, fungicides and herbicides, other than bleaching powder. 22A. 27 [Clay including fireclay ,fine china clay and ball clay] 22B. Coal tar. 22C. Coffee beans, cocoa pod, and chicory.] 23. Coir and coir products excluding coir mattresses. 23A 28 [...] 24. Cotton and cotton waste. 29 [24A. Combs excluding Jessore cheruni] 24B. Cups and glasses of paper and plastic] 25. Crucibles. 25A. 30 [Drugs and medicines 31 [and including isabgol],whether patent or proprietary, including vaccines ,disposable hypodermic syringes, hypodermic needles ,catguts ,sutures, surgical dressings ,medicated ointments produced under the licence issued under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act ,1940 (23 of 1940) ] 32 [25AA. Medical Diagnostic Kits.] 33 [25B. Dry fruits] 26. 34 [Edible oils other than coconut oil] 35 [26A. 36 [...] 27. 37 [Electrodes ,electrical insulators] 38 [27A. Embroidery or zari articles, that is to say, -  (i) Iml,  (ii) zari,  (iii) kasab,  (iv) salma,  (v) dabka,  (vi) chumki,  (vii) gota,  (viii) sitara,  (ix) naqsi,  (x) kora,  (xi) glass bead,  (xii) badla, and  (xiii) gizai.] 28. Exercise book, drawing book, graph book, account book and laboratory notebook. 29. Fibres of all types and fibre waste. 30. 39 [Feeding bottles and nipples] 40 [30A. Fried grams and roasted grams.] 41 [30B. Furnace oil] 31. 42 [Desi ghee] 43 [31A. 44 [Glass chimney] other than chimney for use in gas light and petromax light.] 32. Goods as specified in section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956) . 33. 45 [...] 46 [33A. Gypsum of all forms and descriptions.] 47 [but excluding gypsum board and plaster of Paris] 48 [33B Gums and Adhesives] 34. Hand pump parts and fittings. 35. Herb, bark, dry plant, dry root, commonly known as jari booti and dry flower. 49 [35A. Hollow polyester fibre.] 50 [35B. Honey] 36. Hose pipes of all varieties and descriptions including their end fittings. 37. Hosiery goods of all varieties and descriptions. 51 [37A. Hurricane lantern, kerosene lamp 52 [petromax] and accesories and components thereof.] 38. 53 [Husk of cereals and bran of cereals other than wheat bran] 39. Ice. 40. 54 [...] 41. Industrial cables (High voltage cables, XLPE cables, jelly filled cables, optical fibres) . 42. IT products as specified in Part-II of this Schedule. 55 [42A. Jute batching oil.] 43. 56 [Kerosene oil when sold through Public Distribution System (PDS) .] 57 [43A. Knitting wool.] 58 [43B. Kattha 43C. Khandsari] 59 [43D] 60 [...] 44. Leaf plates and cups. 61 [44A. Lignite. 44B. 62 [Lime, limestone and dolomite] 44C. 63 [Linear Alkyl benzene (L.A.B) , Sulphonate Acid, Alfa Olefin Sulphonate] 45. 64 [...] 46. 65 [...] 66 [46A. Maize starch, glucose, maize gluten, maize germ andoil. 46B. Mixed PVC stabiliser.] 47. Industrial inputs and packing materials as specified in Part-III of this Schedule. 48. 67 [Medical equipments ,devices and implants] 49. 68 [Napa slabs and Shahabad stones] 69 [49A. Naptha.] 50. Newars. 51. 70 [Non-ferrous metals and alloys of ferrous 71 [and non-ferrous metals, ferrous and non-ferrous metal castings] 72 [51A. Nuts ,bolts ,screws and fasteners] 52. Ores and minerals other than those specified else-where in this Schedule. 73 [52A. Oscilloscopes, spectrum analysers and other instruments and apparatus for measuring or checking electrical quantities, for measuring or detecting alpha, beta, gamma, X-ray, cosmic or other ionizing radiations] 53. 74 [Paper, coated paper, carbon paper, paperboard, paper used for computer printing and newsprint.] 75 [53A. Paraffin wax of all grade standards other than food grade standard including standard wax and slack wax.] 54. Pipes of all varieties including G.I. pipes, C.I. pipes, ductile pipes and 76 [PVC pipes,and fittings thereof] 77 [54A. Pizza-bread, bun or bread containing any type of fruit or vegetable. 54B. Plant and machinery, that is to say, -  (i) Machinery for tea industry;  (ii) Machinery for food and food processing industries including flour mill;  (iii) Machienry for sugar mill;  (iv) Machinery for beverages, tobacco and tobacco products industries;  (v) Machinery for jute, hemp, mesta textiles industries;  (vi) Machinery for textile industries including hosiery other than jute;  (vii) Machinery for engineering industries;  (viii) Machinery for paint industry;  (ix) Machinery for furniture and wood products industries;  (x) Machinery for paper and paper products and printing, publishing and allied industries;  (xi) Machinery for leather and fur product industries;  (xii) Rubber, plastic, petroleum and coal product industry machinery;  (xiii) Machinery for chemical and chemical products;  (xiv) Machinery for basic metal and alloys industries;  (xv) Machinery for non-metallic mineral product and industries;  (xvi) Machinery for construction works;  (xvii) Transport equipment and motor parts manufacturing machinery;  (xviii) Mining machinery;  (xix) Packaging machinery;  (xx) Foundry machinery;  (xxi) Agricultural machinery other than those mentioned elsewhere in any other Schedule;  (xxii) Waste treatment plant and pollution control equipment manufacturing machinery;  (xxiii) Machinery for printing industry;  (xxiv) Machinery for iron and steel industry;  (xxv) Machinery for refrigeration and cooling towers including air-conditioners;  (xxvi) Cooling towers;  (xxvii) Earth moving machinery;  (xxvii) All other machinery not specified in items (i) to (xxvii) ;  (xxix) Spare parts, accessories and components of the plant and machinery specified 78 [in items (i) to (xxviii) but excluding gearbox used as parts of motor vehicles.] 55. 79 [Chappals and sandals made exclusively of plastic; hawai chappals; and parts and components thereof] 80 [55A. Plastic granules 81 [plastic powder and master batches] 55B. Poppy seeds. 55C. Pre-used motor car.] 82 [55D Pre-recorded cassette, audio and video compact disc (ACD and VCD) and pre-recorded digital versatile disc (DVD) ] 56. Printed material including diary, calendar etc. 57. Printing ink excluding toner and cartridges. 58. 83 [Porridge and cottage cheese] 84 [58A. Processed meat, poultry and fish. 58B. 85 [Processed and preserved vegetables and fruits including fruit jams, 86 [jelly sauce], pickle ,fruit squash, fruit paste, fruit drink and fruit juice ,whether in a sealed container or not and 87 [wet dates , but excluding those not containing any fruit or vegetables extract] 59. Pulp of bamboo, wood and paper. 60. Rail coaches engines 88 [wagons and freight containers 89 [and parts thereof and rail coach fans] 61. Readymade garments other than hosiery goods but including necktie, bow and collar. 62. Refrigerant in any form. 63. Renewable energy devices and spare parts. 64. 90 [Residual liquefied hydrogen gas and other gases used as fuel other than liquefied petroleum gas (L.P.G.) .] 65. 91 [...] 66. 92 [...] 67. Rubber gloves. 93 [67A. Rusk that is hardened bread.] 68. Safety matches. 94 [68A. Scrap of old and condemned battery] 95 [68B. Scaffolding pipes] 69. 96 [ 97 [Spectacles including sunglasses] and parts and components thereof, contact lens and lens cleaner] 70. 98 [Sewing machine and its parts and accessories] 71. Ship liable to be registered under the Merchants Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958) , all types of tugs, floating docks, floating cranes, dredgers, barges 99 [and other water vessels including non-mechanised boats] 72. 100 [...] 73. 101 [Skimmed milk powder, dairy whitener and UHT milk] 102 [73A. Sodium Slicate.] 74. Solvent oils other than organic solvent oil. 103 [74A. Soya nuggets, commonly known as soya bori] 75. Spices of all varieties and forms including cumin seed, aniseed, turmeric 104 [dry chillies and hing (asafoetida) ] 75A. 105 [Sand and grit] 76. Sports goods excluding apparels and footwear. 106 [76A. Stainless steel sheets.] 77. Starch. 78. 107 [Sugar, other than those manufactured in India.] 79. Tallow. 80. 108 [Tamarind including tamarind seeds powder.] 109 [80A. Tea.] 110 [80B. Tarpaulin and canvas] 81. 111 [Textile fabrics of all varieties, other than those manufactured or made in India] 112 [81A Timber, that is to say, (i) log; (ii) plank, veneer and splint; (iii) rafter; (iv) sleeper; (v) beam; (vi) pillar; and (vii) sawn or sized timber 82. 113 [...] 83. Tools, that is to say, -  (a) Power Tools such as electric drills, tapping machines, hammers, sanders, planners, screw drivers, blowers, routers, winches, grinders, super abrasives, non-woven abrasives, bonded abrasives other than stone for polishing floor, stone for sharpening carpenters' instruments, tile polishing blocks and rubbing bricks;  (b) Cutting Tools such as taps, milling cutters, reamers, segments, carbide tools, saws, high speed cut-off machines, shears, nibblers, compound miter saws, masonry cutters, diamond dresser cutters, gear hobbs and gear shaper cutters;  (c) Measuring Tools such as micrometers, vernier calipers, feeler gauges, height gauges, slip gauges, snap gauges, pressure gauges, dial thermometers, water meter and measuring steel tapes;  (d) Hydraulic Tools such as jacks, pipe-benders, torque wrenches, breakers, cylinders and control valves;  (e) Pneumatic Tools such as impact wrenches, rammers, grinders, drills torque wrenches, filters, regulators and lubricant applicators;  (f) Hand Tools such as spanners, pliers, screw drivers, hammers, torque tools, cold chisels, drill bits and burrs, tool bits, hacksaws, hacksaw blades and frames, band-saw rolls, dice, die-nuts, tools for carpentry, tools for masons and steel files. 84. Tractors, threshers, harvesters and attachments and parts thereof. 114 [84A. Transformers.] 85. Transmission towers. 86. Umbrella and spare parts and components thereof but excluding garden umbrella. 87. 115 [Vanaspati (Hydrogenated Vegetable Oil) also known as vegetable ghee manufactured or made in India] and sold under various trade names and descriptions, such as Dalda; Kusum, etc. 88. Vegetable oil including gingili oil and 116 [bran oil but excluding coconut oil] 117 [88A. Waste paper.] 118 [88B. Weighing machines and weighing scales] 88C Wire cloths and felt, endless or fitted with linking devices of a kind used in paper making machine or any other machine] 119 [88D Wirenet and wirenetting] 89. Writing instruments such as lead pencils, pens of all varieties and descriptions, refills, cartridges, nozzles, 120 [nib, geometry boxes, colour boxes, crayons, erasers, pencil sharpeners and writing ink] other than those specified elsewhere in any other Schedule. 121 [90. X-Ray film and other diagnostic films. 91. Zipper or zip fasteners.] Part II [See serial No. 42 of Part I] Items under category of IT products Serial No. Description of items HSN Code (1) (2) (3) 1. Word Processing Machines and Electronic Typewriters 84.69 2. Electronic Calculators 84.70 3. Computer Systems and Peripherals, Electronic Diaries 84.71 4. Parts and Accessories of HSN 84.69, 84.70 and 84.71 for items listed above. 84.73 5. DC Micro motors. Stepper motors of an output not exceeding 37.5 Watts. 85.01 6. Parts of HSN 85.01 for items listed above 85.03 7. Uninterrupted Power Supplies (UPS) and their parts 85.04 8. Permanent magnets and articles intended to become permanent magnets (Ferrites) . 85.05 9. Electrical Apparatus for line telephony or line telegraphy, including line telephone sets with cordless handsets and telecommunication apparatus for carries-current lien systems or for digital line systems; videophones. 85.17 10. Microphones, Multimedia Speakers, Headphones, Earphones and Combined Microphone/Speaker Sets and their parts. 85.18 11. Telephone answering machines 85.20 12. Prepared unrecorded media for sound recording or similar recording of other phenomena. 85.22 13. Prepared unrecorded media for sound recording or similar recording 122 [of other phenomena including Compact Disc(CD) and Digital Video Disc (DVD) ] 85.23 14. IT software on any media 85.24 15. Transmission apparatus other than apparatus for radio broadcasting or TV broadcasting, transmission apparatus incorporating reception apparatus, 123 [cellular telephones] 85.25 16. Radio communication receivers, Radio pagers 85.27 17. (i) Aerials, antennas and their parts, (ii) Parts of items at 85.25 and 85.27 listed above 85.29 18. LCD Panels, LED Panels and parts thereof 85.31 19. Electrical capacitors, fixed, variable or adjustable (Pre-set) and parts thereof. 85.32 20. Electrical resistors (including rheostats and potentiometers) , other than heating resistors. 85.33 21. Printed Circuits 85.34 22. Switches, Connectors and Relays for up to 5 amps at voltage not exceeding 250 Volts, Electronic fuses. 85.36 23. Data/Graphic Display tubes, other than TV Picture tubes and parts thereof. 85.40 24. Diodes, transistors and similar semi-conductor devices, Photosensitive semiconductor devices, including photovoltaic cells whether or not assembled I modules or made up into panels; Light emitting diodes; Mounted piezo-electic crystals. 85.41 25. Electronic Integrated Circuits and Micro-assemblies 85.42 26. Signal Generators and parts thereof 85.43 27. 124 [Optical fibre cables and jointing kits and jointing materials thereof] 85.44 28. Optical fibre and optical fibre bundles 125 [, and jointing kits and jointing materials thereof.] 90.01 29. Liquid Crystal devices, Flat Panel display devices and parts thereof. 90.13 30. Cathode ray oscilloscopes, Spectrum Analysers, Cross-talk meters, Gain measuring instruments, Distortion factor meters, Psophometers, Net work and Logic analyser and Signal analyser. 90.30 Part III [See serial No. 47 of Part I] Industrial inputs and packing materials Serial No. Heading No. of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) Sub-heading No. of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) Description (1) (2) (3) (4) 1. 15.01 Animal (including fish) fats and oils, crude, refined or purified. 2. 15.06 Glycerol, crude, glycerol waters and glycerol lyes. 3. 15.07 Vegetable waxes (other than triglycer-ides) , bees wax, other insect waxes and spermaceti, whether or not refined or coloured; degras; residues resulting from the treatment of fatty substances or animal or vegetable waxes 4. 15.08 Animal or vegetable fats boiled, oxidised, dehydrated, sulphurised, blown, polymerised by heat in vaccum or in inert gas or otherwise chemica modified; inedible mixtures or preparations of fats and oils of this chapter 5. 17.02 126 [Liquid glucose (non-medicinal) .] 6. 2204.10 Denatured ethyl alcohol of any strength. 7. 127 [...] 8. 26.02 Manganese ores and concentrates, including ferruginous manganese ores and concentrates with a manganese content of 20% or more, calculated or the dry weight. 9. 26.03 Copper ores and concentrates. 10. 26.04 Nickel ores and concentrates. 11. 26.05 Cobalt ores and concentrates. 12. 26.06 Aluminium ores and concentrates. 13. 26.07 Lead ores and concentrates. 14. 26.08 Zinc ores and concentrates. 15. 26.09 Tin ores and concentrates. 16. 26.10 Chromium ores and concentrates. 17. 26.11 Tungsten ores and concentrates. 18. 26.12 Uranium or thorium ores and concentrates. 19. 26.13 Molybdenum ores and concentrates. 20. 26.14 Titanium ores and concentrates. 21. 26.15 128 [Niobium, Tantalum, Vanadium or Zirconium ores and concentrates.] 22. 26.16 Precious metal ores and concentrates. 23. 26.17 Other ores and concentrates. 24. 26.18 Granulated slag (slag sand) from the manufacture of iron or steel. 25. 2707.10 Benzole. 26. 2707.20 Toluole. 27. 2707.30 Xylole. 28. 2707.40 Napthalene. 29. 2707.50 Phenols. 30. 2707.60 Creosole oils. 129 [30A.  Normal Paraffin. 30B.  Butadine.] 31. 28.01 130 [Flurine, Chlorine, Bromine and Iodine]. 32. 28.02 Sulphur, sublimed or precipitated; colloidal sulphur. 33. 28.03 Carbon (carbon blacks and other forms of carbon not elsewhere specified or included) . 34. 28.04 131 [Hydrogen, rare gases, excluding oxygen (medicinal grade) .] 35. 28.05 Alkali or alkaline-earth metals; rare-earth metals, scandium and yttrium, whether or not intermixed or interal-loyed mercury. 36. 28.06 Hydrogen chloride (hydrochloric acid) ; chloro sulphuric acid. 37. 28.07 Sulphuric acid and anhydrides thereof; Oleum. 38. 28.08 Nitric acid, Sulphonitric acids. 39. 28.09 Diphosphorous penataoxide; phosphoric acid and polyphosphoric acids. 40. 28.10 Oxides of boron; boric acids. 41. 28.12 Halides and halide oxides of non-metals. 42. 28.13 Sulphides of non-metals; commercial phosphorus trisulphide. 43. 28.14 Ammonia, anhydrous or in aqueous solution. 44. 28.15 Sodium hydroxide (caustic soda) ; potassium hydroxide (caustic potash) ; peroxides of sodium or potassium. 45. 28.16 Hydroxide and peroxide of magnesium; oxides, hydroxides and peroxides of strontium or barium. 46. 132 [...]  47. 2818.10 Aluminium hydroxide. 48. 28.19 Chromium oxides and hydroxides. 49. 28.20 Manganese oxides. 50. 2821.10 Iron oxides and hydroxides. 51. 28.22 Cobalt oxides and hydroxides, commercial cobalt oxides. 52. 28.23 Titanium oxide. 53. 28.25 Hydrazine and hydroxylamine and their inorganic salts; other inorganic bases; other metal oxides, hydroxides and peroxides. 54. 28.26 133 [Fluorides, fluorosilicates, fluroalumi-nates and other complex fluorine salts.] 55. 28.27 Chlorides, chloride oxides and chloride hydroxides; bromides and bromide oxides; iodides and iodide oxides. 56. 28.29 134 [Chlorates and perchlorates; Bro-mates and perbromates; lodates and periodates.] 57. 28.30 Sulphides; Polysulphides. 58. 28.31 Dithionites and sulphoxylates. 59. 28.32 Sulphites; thiosulphates. 60. 2833.10 Copper sulphate. 61. 28.34 Nitrites; nitrates. 62. 28.35 Phosphinates (hypophosphites) , phosphonates (phosphites) , phosphates and polyphosphates. 63. 28.36 Carbonates; peroxocarbonates (percarbonates) ; commercial ammonium carbonates containing ammonium carbamate. 64. 28.37 Cyanides, cyanide oxides and complex cyanides. 65. 28.38 Fulminates, cyanates and thiocyan-ates. 135 [65A. 28.39 Sodium silicate.] 66. 28.40 Borates; peroxoborates (perborates) . 67. 2841.10 Sodium dichromate. 68. 2841.20 Potassium dichromate. 69. 28.44 Radioactive chemical elements and radioactive isotopes (including the fissile chemical elements and isotopes) and their compounds; mixtures and residues containing these products. 70. 28.45 Isotopes other than those of heading No. 28.44; compounds, inorganic or organic of such isotopes, whether or not chemically defined. 71. 28.46 Compounds, inorganic or organic, of rare earth metals, of yttrium or of scandium or of mixtures of these metals. 72. 28.48 Phosphides, whether or not chemically defined, excluding ferrophosphorus. 73. 2849.10 Calcium carbides. 74. 136 [...] 137 [Ethylene, Propelene.] 75. 29.02 Cyclic Hydrocarbons. 76. 29.03 Halogenated derivatives of Hydrocarbons. 77. 29.04 Sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of hydrocarbons, whether or not halogenated. 78. 138 [...] 139 [2905.10 140 [Methanol.]] 79. 141 [...] 142 [2905.90 Di-ethylene Glycol, Mono-ethylene Glycol, Triethylene Glycol, Ethylene Glycol, Heavy Ethylene Glycol.] 80. 29.07 Phenols, phenol-alcohols. 81. 29.08 Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of phenols or phenol- alcohols. 82. 29.09 143 [Ethers, ether-alcohols peroxides, ether peroxides, ketone peroxides (whether or not chemically defined) and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives.] 83. 29.10 Epoxides, epoxyalcohols, epoxy-phenols and epoxyethers, with a three-membered ring and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 144 [83A. 2910.00 Ethylene oxide.] 84. 29.11 Acetals and hemiacetals, whether or not with other oxygen function and their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 85. 29.12 Aldehydes, whether or not with other oxygen function; cyclic polymers of aldehydes; paraformaldehyde. 86. 29.13 Halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives of products of heading No. 29.12. 87. 145 [...] 88. 29.15 Saturated acyclic monocarboxylic acids and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 89. 29.16 Unsaturated acyclic monocarboxyiic acids, cyclic monocarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated-derivatives. 90. 29.17 Polycarboxylic acids, their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids, their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 91. 29.18 Carboxylic acids with additional oxygen function and their anhydrides, halides, peroxides and peroxyacids; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 92. 29.19 Phosphoric esters and their salts, including iactophosphates; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 93. 29.20 Esters of other inorganic acids (excluding esters of hydrogen halides) and their salts; their halogenated, sulphonated, nitrated or nitrosated derivatives. 94. 29.21 Amine-function compounds. 95. 29.22 Oxygen-function amino-compounds. 96. 29.23 Quaternary ammonium salts and hydroxides; lecithins and other phospho-aminolipids. 97. 29.24 Carboxyamide-function compounds; amide-function compounds of carbonic acid. 98. 29.25 Carboxyamide-function compound (including saccharin and its salts) and imine-function compounds. 99. 29.26 Nitrile-function compounds. 100. 29.27 Diazo-, Azo- or azoxy-compounds. 101. 29.28 Organic derivatives of hydrazine or of hydroxylamine. 102. 29.30 Organo-sulphur compounds. 103. 29.31 Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetic acid, NitrilloTriacetic acid and their derivatives. 104. 29.32 Heterocyclic compounds with oxygen heteroatom(s) only. 105. 29.33 Heterocyclic compounds with nitrogen heteroatom(s) only. 106. 29.34 Nucleic acids and their salts, other het-erocyclic compounds. 107. 29.35 Sulphonamides. 108. 29.38 Glycosides, natural or reproduced by synthesis and their salts,. ethers, esters and other derivatives. 109. 29.39 Vegetable alkaloids, natural or reproduced by synthesis, and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives. 110. 29.42 Ethylene Diarhine Tetra Acetic acid, Nitrillo Triacetic acid and their derivatives. 111. 32.01 146 [Tanning extracts of vegetable origin; tannins and their salts, ethers, esters and other derivatives.] 112. 32.02 147 [Synthetic organic tanning substances; inorganic tanning substances; tanning preparations, whether or not containing natural tanning substances; enzymatic preparations for pre-tanning.] 113. 32.03 148 [Colouring matter of vegetable or animal origin (including dyeing extracts but excluding animal black) , whether or not chemically defined; preparations based on colouring matter or vegetable or animal origin as specified in  Note 3 as appended at the end of this Part.] 114. 32.04 149 [Synthetic organic colouring matter, whether or not chemically defined; preparations based on synthetic organic colouring matters specified in Note 3 as appended at the end of this Part; synthetic organic products of a kind used as fluorescent brightening agents or as luminophores, whether or not chemically defined.] 115. 32.05 150 [Colour lakes, preparations based on colour lakes as specified in Note 3 as appended at the end of this Part.] 116. 151 [32.06] 152 [...] 153 [Pigments and other colouring matters.] 117. 154 [...] 118. 3207.10 Glass frit and other glass, in the form of powder, granules or flakes. 119. 155 [...] 120. 32.11 Prepared driers. 121. 3215.90 Printing ink whether or not concentrated or solid. 122. 35.01 Casein, caseinates and other casein derivatives, casein glues. 123. 35.07 Enzymes; prepared enzymes not elsewhere specified or included. 124. 156 [...] 125. 38.01 Artificial graphite; colloidal or semi-colloidal graphite; preparations based on graphite or other carbon in the form of pastes, blocks, plates or other semimanufactures. 126. 38.02 Activated carbon; activated natural mineral products; animal black, including spent animal black. 127. 38.04 Residual lyes from the manufacture of wood pulp, whether or not concentrated, desugared or chemically treated, including lignin sulphonates, but excluding tall-oil of heading No. 38.03 of Chapter 38 of the First Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. 128. 38.06 Rosin and resin acids, and derivatives thereof; rosin spirit and rosin oils; run gums. 129. 38.07 Wood tar; wood tar oils; wood creosote; wood naphtha, vegetable pitch; brewers' pitch and similar preparations based on rosin, resin acids or on vegetable pitch. 130. 157 [...] 158 [Cork stoppers] 131. 38.09 Finishing agents, dye carriers to accelerate the dyeing or fixing of dye-stuffs and other products and preparations (for example, dressings and mordants) , of a kind used in the textile, paper, leather or like industries, not elsewhere specified or included. 132. 38.12 Prepared rubber accelerators; compound plasticisers for rubber or plastics, not elsewhere specified or included; anti-oxidising preparations and other compound stabilisers for rubber or plastics. 133. 159 [...] Reducers and blanket wash/roller wash used in the printing industry. 134. 38.15 Reaction initiators, reaction accelerators and catalytic preparations, notelsewhere specified or included. 135. 38.17 Mixed alkylbenzenes and mixed alkylnaphthalenes, other than those of heading No. 27.07 or 29.02. 136. 38.18 Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of discs, wafers or similar forms; chemical compounds doped for use in electronics. 137. 38.23 Industrial monocarboxylic fatty acids; acid oils from refining; industrial fatty alcohols. 138. 3824.90 Retarders used in the printing industry. 160 [138A. 3901.10 LLDPE/LDPE. 138B. 3901.20 HDPE.] 139. 39.01 Polymers of ethylene in primary forms. 140. 39.02 Polymers of propylene or of other ole-fins, in primary forms. 141. 161 [...] 162 [Polymers of styrene in primary forms, polysterene resins and maleic resins.] 142. 163 [...] 164 [Polymers of vinyl acetate or of other vinyl esters in primary form, and other vinyl polymers in primary form.] 143. 39.05 165 [3904.10 PVC.] 144. 39.06 Acrylic polymers in primary forms. 145. 39.07 Polyacetals, other polyethers and ep-oxide resins, in primary forms, polycarbonates, alkyd resins, polyallyl esters and other polyesters, in primary forms. 166 [145A. 3907.60 Polyethylene Terepthalate Chips.] 146. 39.08 Polyamides in primary forms. 147. 39.09 Amino-resins, polyphenyiene oxide, phenolic resins and polyurethanes in primary forms. 148. 39.10 Silicones in primary forms. 149. 39.11 Petroleum resins, coumarone-indene resins, polyterpenes, polysulphides, polysulphones and other products specified in Note 3 of Chapter 39 of the First Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 , not elsewhere specified or included in primary forms. 150. 39.12 Cellulose and its chemical derivatives, and cellulose ethers, not elsewhere specified or included in primary forms. 151. 39.13 Natural polymers (for example, alginic acid) and modified natural polymers (for example, hardened proteins, chemical derivatives of natural rubber) , not elsewhere specified or included, in primary forms. 152. 39.14 167 [lon-exchangers based on polymers of heading Nos. 39.01 to 4.13 in primary forms.] 153. 39.19 Self-adhesive plates, sheets, film foil, tape, strip of plastic whether or not in rolls. 154. 39.20 Other plates, sheets, film, foil, and strip of plastics, non-cellular, whether lacquered or metallised or laminated, supported or similarly combined with other materials or not. 168 [154A. 3920.32 Flexible plain films.] 155. 39.23 169 [Articles for the packing of plastics; namely boxes, cases, crates, containers, carboys, bottles, jerry canes and their stoppers, lids, caps of plastics (but not including insulated wares) .] 156. 40.01 Natural rubber, balata, gutta-percha, Guayule, chicle and similar natural gums, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strips. 157. 40.02 Synthetic rubber and factice derived from oils in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip; mixtures of any product of heading No. 40.01 with any product of this heading, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip. 158. 40.03 Reclaimed rubber in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip. 159. 40.05 Compounded rubber, unvulcanised, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strip, other than the forms and articles of unvulcanised rubber described in heading No. 40.06 of Chapter 40 of the First Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. 160. 47.01 Mechanical wood pulp, chemical wood pulp, semi-chemical wood pulp and pulps of other fibrous cellulosic materials. 161. 48.19 Cartons (including flatened or folded cartons) , boxes (including flattened or folded boxes) , cases, bags and other packing containers of paper, paperboard, whether in assembled or unassembled condition. 162. 48.21 Paper printed labels and paperboard printed labels. 163. 48.23 Paper self-adhesive tape and printed wrappers used for packing. 164. 6305.10 Sacks and bags, of a kind used for the packing of goods, of jute or of other textile bast fibres of heading No. 53.03 of Chapter 53 of the First Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. 170 [164A.  Hessian and jute cloth ,cloth and woven fabric of PP or HDPE and sacks and bags made from such cloth and woven fabric] 171 [164B.  Non-woven fabric, and sacks or bags made from such fabric] 165. 70.10 Carboys, bottles, jars, phials of glass, of a kind used for the packing goods; stoppers, lids and other closures, of glass. 166. 70.14 Glass fibres (including glass wool and glass filaments) and articles thereof (for example: yarn, woven fabrics) , whether or not impregnated, coated, covered or laminated with plastics or varnish. 167. 7607.60 Aseptic packaging aluminium foil of thickness less than 0.2 mm and backed by paper and LDPE. 168. 83.09 Stoppers, caps and lids (including crown corks, screw caps and pouring stoppers) capsules for bottles, threaded bungs, bung covers, seals and other packing accessories, of base metal. 172 [169.  Wooden crates] 173 [170  Sheets of polyurethane foam 171  Railway switches, crossings, switch expansion joints, steel turnout sleepers, fish- plates, steel clips, track bolts and nuts, elastic rail clips 172  Glass shells, lead glass tubes, filaments, moly wire, lead in wire, caps, dumet wires, solder wire, capping cement 173  Scrap of plastic, glass, metals 174  Flavouring essences, synthetic essential oil 175  Zinc Oxide 176  Red lead, litharge and grey oxide 177  Sodium sulphate 178  Sodium petroleum sulphonate, calcium petroleum sulphonate 179  Acid sludge 180  Second steel stamping, hollow porcelain bushings, grinding wheel 181  Insulating papers and boards, insulating fabric tapes and sheets 182  Petroleum jelly I.P 183  lay flat tubes 184  Polythene bags, plastic bags, pouches and closures 185  Microcellular sheets and banwar sheets 186  Copper clad sheets 187  Resins, terpene chemicals like pine oil, dipentene, DD, turpentine, terpenol, camphor. 188  Electrical goods, namely  winding wires and strips; switches, selector switches, fuse-switches unit, above 5 amps.; contactors, auxiliary contactors, contact block; control gears and starters; ammeter, KWH meter, voltmeter; insulating materials, insulator; jointing materials; circuit breakers, HRC fuse, thermostat; programmable logic controller, timers; switch boards, panel boards, distribution boards, control panels, motor control centre, power control centre, bus duct, burner control cubicle, control desk, push button station, local control station, kiosk, feeder pillar, SMPS; electrical relays and single phasing preventor and timers; overhead transmission line materials including components, accessories and spare parts thereof 189  174 [Purified terepthalic acid] 190  Articles of metals, namely boxes, cases, crates, containers and their stoppers, caps, lids of metal used for the backing of goods (but not including insulated wares) .] 191  Aceton, butanone(methyl ethyl ketone) ,isophoron, cyclohexanone, anthraquinone. 192  Ammonium dichromate, potassium permanganate, hydrogen peroxide. 193  Anti-knock preparation 194  Carbon black feed stock, coal tar pitch. 195  Hoists, chain pulley blocks and parts, spares, components and accessories threreof. 196  Metal finishing chemicals, pickling preparation for metal. 197  Prepared binders for foundry. 198  Propylene glycol, dipropylene glycol, sorbitol, normal butyl alcohol, benzyl alcohol, ketone-alcohol, ketone-phenols. 199  PVC tapes. 200  Sulphates, alums, persulphates. Note 1. - Micronutrients and plant growth promoter or regulators are not covered by the scope of this Part. Note 2. -The Rules for the interpretation of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985, read with the Explanatory Notes as updated from time to time published by the Customs Cooperation Council, Brussels, shall apply for the interpretation of this Part. Note 3. -Where any commodities are described against any heading or, as the case may be, sub-heading, and the aforesaid description is different in any manner than the corresponding description in the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985, then only those commodities described as aforesaid will be covered by the scope of this Part and other commodities, though covered by the corresponding description in the Central Excise Tariff Act, will not be covered by the scope of this Part. Note 4. - Subject to Note 3, for the purpose of any entry contained in this Part, where the description against any heading or, as the case may be, sub-heading, matches fully with the corresponding description in the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985, then all the commodities covered for the purposes of the said tariff under that heading or sub-heading will be covered by the scope of this Part. Note 5. -Where the description against any heading or sub-heading is shown as "other" then the interpretation as provided in Note 2 shall apply. Substituted for the words "All intangible goods like copyright, patent, REP licence." by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "and asphaltic roofing earthen tiles" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted for the words "All types of yarn other than cotton and silk yarn in hank and sewing thread" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Aluminium utensils and enamelled utensils] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted for the words Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Articles made of rolled gold and imitation gold] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006. Prior to Omission it read as "Bed sheets, bed-spreads, bed-covers, towels, napkins, table-cloth, duster, handkerchief, sataranchi and blankets" Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted for Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [...] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted for the words "Capital goods as defined in section 2(6) of the West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003, by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006. Prior to Omission it read as " Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Cigar or cigarette, other than those manufactured or made in India]" Substituted for the words Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Clay including fireclay] by by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Conch shell and conch shell products] Omitted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following entry "5 [24A. Combs" Substituted for the words " Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Drugs and medicines]" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Inserted vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of August, 2006 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 for the following " Substituted for the words "3[Edible oils other than coconut oil, oil cake and de-oiled cake]" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [Edible oils other than coconut oil, and oil cake]" Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006. Prior to Omission it read as "Elastic Fabric Tape" Substituted for the words " Electrodes" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [...] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 for the following " Omitted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [...]" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words " Gas chimney" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Omitted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words " Husk and bran of cereals" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006. Prior to Omission it read as "Incense sticks commonly known as agarbati, Substituted for the words " dhupkathi or dhupbati" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [dhupkathi , dhupbati and havan samagri including sombrani andlobhana]" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Omitted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006. before omission it read as: " Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 [Lac and shellac] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 for the following "Lime, limestone, clinker and dolomite" Substituted for the words Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. ["Linear alkyl benzene"] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Omitted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Earlier the text as under:"Liquid product of cellulose, commonly known as L.P.C., and liquid product of earthen waste, commonly known as L.P.E., generally for use as fuel." Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [...] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "Napa slabs (Rough flooring stones) by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "and non-ferrous metals" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words " PVC pipes" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "in items (i) to (xxvii) ". Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "Plastic footwear and Substituted for the words "hawai chappals" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [hawai chappals and parts and components thereof] ". Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "and plastic powder" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [...] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. ["Processed or preserved vegetables and fruits"] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "jelly ". Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "wet dates". Substituted for the words "and wagons" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "and parts thereof". Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 Substituted for Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [...] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "Spectacles". Substituted for the words "Sewing machine" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words "and other water vessels " by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Omitted vide Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006. before omission it read as: Substituted for the words " Silk fabrics" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [Silk fabrics excluding handloom silk] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 for the following " Substituted for the words "Skimmed milk" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [Skimmed milk powder and UHT milk]" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted for the words " and dry chillies" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted for the words " Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Sponge wood or shola and all handicrafts made thereof.] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Substituted for the Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. [Textile fabrics of all varieties, other than those manufactured or made in India including wire cloth and felt, endless or fitted with linking devices of a kind used in paper making machine or any other machines.] by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2006 Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "Vanaspati (Hydrogenated Vegetable Oil) also known as vegetable ghee," by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 for the following words "bran oil". Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006. Substituted for the words "nib and writing ink" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "of other phenomena" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 Substituted vide notification no.2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November, 2006 for the words: " Substituted for the words "digital still image video cameras" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 [digital still image video cameras, cellular telephones]" Substituted for the words "Optical fibre cables" vide Notification No. : 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted for the words "and cables" vide Notification No. 1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005 Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No. 71-FT dated 13.01.2006 Omitted by the Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November of 2006. Prior to omission it was: "38.14" Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Inserted by the Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of November of 2006. Inserted by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005. Inserted vide Notification No.1447-F.T w.e.f. 01.06.2005. Substituted by the Notification No. 2039-FT dated 15.12.2006 w.e.f. 1st day of August of 2006. Prior to substituion it was: "[Purified terepthalic acid and Alluric acid]"
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.5--> State(s): West Bengal 1 [Schedule CA 2 [See clause (ba) of sub-section (2) of section 16] List of goods taxable at 12.5% Serial No. Description of goods (1) (2) 1. All other goods not specified in Schedule A, Schedule B, Schedule C or Schedule D.] Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Substituted for the words "See clause (ba) of sub-section (20) of section 16" by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2005 vide Notification No. 2020-L dated 08.08.2005 .
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.6--> State(s): West Bengal [See section 19] Goods on which tax is leviable at such rate as may be fixed by notification under section 19 Serial No. Description of goods (1) (2) 1. 1 [ * * *] Omitted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005.
West Bengal Value Added Tax Act, 2003_Section Sch.7--> State(s): West Bengal [See section 123] Amendment in the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 In the West Bengal Sales Tax Act, 1994 (West Ben. Act XLIX of 1994) ,- (a) in Schedule I, all serial numbers in column (1) and the entries relating thereto in column (2) and column (3) shall be omitted; 1 [(b) for Schedule VI, the following Schedule shall be substituted:- "Schedule IV [See sections 10 and 17(1) (c) Goods on sale of which tax is leviable at such rate as may be fixed by notification under section 18 (single-point levy) read with sub-clause (a) of clause (40) of section 2 Serial No. Description of goods (1) (2) Part A 1. Country liquor. 2. Lottery ticket. Part B 1. Motor spirit having a flashing point 24.4 degree celsius required for use as fuel in aircraft. 2. Motor spirit having a flashing point at or above 24.4 degree Celsius required for use as fuel in aircraft. 3. Motor spirit, other than motor spirit referred to in items 1 and 2 having a flashing point at or above 24.4 degree celsius. 4. Motor spirit of any other kind"]. 2 [(ba) in Schedule VIII, Serial No. 1 and the entries relating thereto in column (2) and column (3) shall be omitted.] Substituted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. Inserted by the West Bengal Finance Act, 2005. 
