Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the recognition by the Local Government of certain associations interested in the administration of local self-government in Bengal and to enable contributions to be paid by local authorities to associations so recognised. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the recognition by the Local Government of certain associations interested in the administration of local self-government in Bengal and to enable contributions to be paid by local authorities to associations so recognised; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal This Act may be called the Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936.
Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal The 1 [State Government] may, if it thinks fit, by notification in the 2 [Official Gazette], recognize any association, which, in the opinion of the 3 [State Government], has been established in 4 [West Bengal] with the sole object of encouraging the discussion of matters of importance relating to the administration of local self-government in 5 [West Bengal]. or otherwise generally promoting the interests of local self-government therein, and the 6 [State Government] may also, if it thinks fit, at any time, in like manner, withdraw such recognition. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words within square brackets were substituted for the word "Bengal" by para. (2) of Art. 3 of the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Bengal and Punjab Acts Order, 1948. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words within square brackets were substituted for the words "Calcutta Gazette" by para 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. The words within square brackets were substituted for the words "Calcutta Gazette" by para 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, the Corporation of Calcutta, the Commissioners of any municipality at a meeting, a district board or a union board may, subject to the provisions of any rules made under section 5, pay a contribution, annually or otherwise, from the municipal, district, or union fund, as the case may be, to the funds of any association which is, fur the time being, recognised by the 1 [State Government] under section 2. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, any member of a local authority which contributes to the funds of an association recognised under section 2 who attends, as a representative of such local authority, a general meeting 1 [or a meeting of an executive committee] of the association held in 2 [West Bengal] may, subject to the provisions of any rules made under section 5, be paid from the fund of such local authority the travelling expenses incurred by him in attending 3 [such a meeting:] 4 Provided that the number of meetings of an executive committee for attending which a member of a local authority may be paid travelling expenses under this section, shall not exceed four in one year. The words within square brackets were inserted by s. 2(a) of the Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Amendment Act, 1947 (Bengal Act VI of 1947). The words within square brackets were substituted for the words "Calcutta Gazette" by para 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937. The words within square brackets were substituted for the words "the meeting" by s. 2 of the Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Amendment Act, 1947 (Bengal Act VI of 1947). This proviso was added by s. 2(b) of the Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Amendment Act, 1947 (Bengal Act VI of 1947).
Bengal Local Self-Government Associations (Recognition) Act, 1936_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The 1 [State Government] may make 2 rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power the 3 [State Government] may make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the maximum rates at which, and the conditions subject to which contributions may be paid under section 3; (b) the rates at which, the conditions subject to which, and the maximum number of representatives to whom, travelling expenses may be paid under section 4. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. For the West Bengal Local Self-Government Associations Recognition Rules. 1957. notification No. 88.37/M-4A-8/58. dated 19.10.59. published in the Calcutta Gazette of 1959, Part 1. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by para. 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. 
