Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the preservation of wild rhinoceros. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the preservation of wild rhinoceros in Bengal; It is hereby enabled as follows:-
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932.1 (2) It extends to the whole of 2 [West Bengal]. In terms of the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 3 read with Schedule III of the West Bengal Transferred Territories (Assimilation of Laws) Act, 1958 (West Bengal Act XIX of 1958), this Act shall not extend to or come into force in, the territories; transferred from the State of Bihar to the State of West Bengal by s. 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 (XL of 1956). The words "West Bengal" were substituted for the word "Bengal" by Art. 3(2) of the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Bengal and Punjab Acts) Order, 1948.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall kill, injure or capture, or attempt to kill, injure or capture, a wild rhinoceros, unless- (a) in defence of himself or some other person; or (b) with the permission of the 1 [State Government] given in a license issued under rules to be made in this behalf by the 2 [State Government]. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by paragraph 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by paragraph 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Whoever in contravention of section 2, kills, injures or captures, or attempts to kill, injure or capture, a wild rhinoceros, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both. (2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under subsection (1) of this section, is again convicted of an offence thereunder shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal Every wild rhinoceros killed captured 1 [in West Bengal] by any person otherwise than with the permission of the 2 [State Government] given under section 2, and all parts of such rhinoceros shall be the property of the 3 [State Government]. The words "in Bengal" were originally inserted by s. 2 of the Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation (Amendment) Act, 1937 (Bengal Act II of 1938), and thereafter the words "West Bengal" were substituted for the word "Bengal" by Art. 3(2) of the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Bengal and Punjab Acts) Order, 1948. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by paragraph 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were originally substituted for the words "Local Government" by paragraph 4(1) of the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937, and thereafter the word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 4A--> State(s): West Bengal No person shall without the permission of the 2 [State] Government possess, sell or buy, or offer to sell or buy, any part of a rhinoceros unless he has reason to believe that such rhinoceros in not the property of the 3 [State] Government. Explanation - The expression "reason to believe" occurring in this section has the meaning assigned to it in section 26 of the Indian Penal Code. Sections 4A and 4B were inserted by s. 3 of the Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation (Amendment) Act, 1937 (Bengal Act II of 1938). The word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The word "State" was substituted for the word "Provincial" by paragraph 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 4B--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Whoever in contravention of section 4A possesses, sells or buys, or offers to sell or buy, any part of a rhinoceros, shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. (2) Whoever having been convicted of an offence under subsection (1) of this section is again convicted of an offence thereunder, shall be punished with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. Sections 4A and 4B were inserted by s. 3 of the Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation (Amendment) Act, 1937 (Bengal Act II of 1938).
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal In the event of any person killing, injuring or capturing a wild rhinoceros in defence of himself or of some other person, he shall within three days of such event report the fact in writing to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police-station or to the Forest Officer or the District or Sub-divisional Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the event took place.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal Whoever without reasonable execuse omits to make the report referred to in section 5, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
Bengal Rhinoceros Preservation Act, 1932_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal The Wild Birds and Animals Protection Act, 1912, shall, in its application to 1 [West Bengal] be amended as follows, namely,- In clause (ii) of the Schedule to the said Act the word "rhinoceroses," shall be omitted. The words "West Bengal" were substituted for the word "Bengal" by Art. 3(2) of the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Bengal and Punjab Acts) Order, 1948. 
