Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to facilitate family settlement of estates in Bengal]1 Whereas it is expedient to facilitate the making of family settlement of estates by landholders in Bengal; And Whereas, the Bengal Land-revenue Sales Act, 1859, the Indian Succession Act, 1865]2 the Court-fees Act, 1870, the Indian Limitation Act, 1877]3 , the Probate and Administration Act, 1881]4 , the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the Succession Certificate Act, 1889]5 , and the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, having been passed by the Governor-General of India in Council, the previous sanction of the Governor-General has been obtained, under Section 5 of the Indian Council Act, 1882, to the passing of this Act; It is hereby enacted as follows: - This includes the present State of Bihar. Act 10 of 1865 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 39 of 1925. Act 15 of 1877 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 9 of 1908. Act 5 of 1881 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 39 of 1925. Now repealed by Act 1 of 1938.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the Bengal Settled Estates Act, 19041 ; and 2 [(2) It extends to the 3 [State] of West Bengal and Bihar and to that part of the 4 [State] of Orissa which on the ninth day of March, 1904, was included in Bengal]. For Statement of Objects and Reasons, see Calcutta Gazette, 1903, Part IV, This Act extends to the whole of the former Province of Bengal. It is in force in the Santhal Parganas. Substituted by Indian Independence (Adaption of Bengal and Punjab Acts) Order, 1948 for sub-section (2). Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) "estate" includes - (i) immovable property, (ii) money, and securities for money, and (iii) any jewellery or other movable property which should, in the opinion of the 1 [State] Government, be treated as heirlooms; (b) "settled estate" means an estate in respect of which a settlement made under this Act is for the time being in force; (c) "settlor" means the person who makes a settlement under this Act; (d) "first tenant for life " means the settlor; (e) "second tenant for life" means the person appointed by a settlement made under this Act to take a settled estate on the death of the first tenant for life, or who, on the surrender by the first tenant for life, takes his interest under the settlement; (f) "third tenant for life" means the person appointed by a settlement made under this Act to take a settled estate on the death of the second tenant for life, or who, on the surrender by the second tenant for life, takes his interest under the settlement; (g) "tenant for life" means a first, second or third tenant for life; (h) "son" includes a son born after the execution of a settlement and, in the case of any one whose personal law permits adoption, includes also a son- (i) duly adopted, either before or after the execution of a settlement, by the adoptive father himself, or (ii) duly adopted to her deceased husband, within five years after the death, by a widow, acting under authority, in writing and registered, lawfully conferred on her by him in that behalf; (i) "secured debt" means a debt, demand or claim which is secured by way of an mortgage, charge or lien on specified property and is primarily enforceable against such property; (j) "unsecured debt" means a debt, demand or claim (other than a secured debt) for any sum exceeding five hundred rupees, which is enforceable against the person or general property of the debtor; (k) "secured creditor" means a person who is entitled to enforce payment of a secured debt; (l) "unsecured creditor" means a person who is entitled to enforce payment of an unsecured debt; (m) "incumbrance" means a secured debt, or an unsecured debt, or both; (n) the expression "the Collector", when used with reference to any estate, means the Collector of the district in which the estate or any part thereof is situated; and (o) the expression "Civil Court", when used with reference to any estate, means the principal Civil Court having original jurisdiction in the area in which the estate or any part thereof is situated. (2) A person shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be "competent to contract" if he is of the age of majority according to the law to which he is subject, and is of sound mind, and is not disqualified from contracting by any law to which he is subject. (3) All words and expressions used in this Act, which are defined in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, shall have the same meaning as in that Act. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Any landholder may apply to the 1 [State] Government for permission to make a settlement of an estate under this Act, - (a) if he is competent to contract; (b) if he is in the possession of the estate, either in his own right or alongwith or on behalf of others, and (c) if the estate is held in permanent, heritable and transferable right; (2) Provided that no application may be made under sub-section (1) in respect of any estate - (i) unless the applicant is solely entitled to the estate, or (ii) if the estate belongs to a joint Hindu family-unless the applicant is the karta or managing member of the family, or (iii) if the estate belongs to co-sharers-unless the applicant is a principal shareholder in the estate and has by custom or with the consent of his co-sharers, the sole right of management over the estate. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every such application must be in writing, and must be signed by the applicant, and verified by him in the manner prescribed in Section 52]1 of the Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of plaints; (2) Every such application must contain the following particulars, namely: - (a) a description of the estate, sufficient for its identification; (b) a statement of the income yielded annually by the property comprised in the estate, and the revenue, rates and taxes due to the Government or any Local Authority annually in respect of such property; and (c) a list giving a full and complete enumeration and description of all incumbrances held by secured and unsecured creditors respectively, and enforceable against the applicant or the estate; with the name and address of each such creditor, and a correct statement of the amount due to each such creditor. Act 14 of 1882 has been repealed and re-enacted by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and this reference should now be taken to be made to Rule 15(2) and (3) in Order VI in Schedule I to that Code-See Section 158 thereof.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If any estate in respect of which an application is made under Section 3 belongs to - (a) a joint Hindu family, or (b) co-sharers. the application must be accompanied by - (i) a sworn declaration by the applicant - in case (a) that he is the karta or managing member of the family, or in case (b), that he is a principal shareholder in the estate and has, by custom or with the consent of his co-sharers, as the case may be, the sole right of management over the estate; and (ii) a sworn declaration, in case (a), by the other co-owners, or in case (b) by the other co-sharer's that they are willing to assent to the estate being settled under this Act; and (iii) a draft of the proposed instrument of settlement. (2) If any of the said other co-owners or co-sharers is at the time when the application is made, a minor, a declaration under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) may be accepted if it is - made on behalf of such minor by the guardian of his property or (when a guardian of his property cannot lawfully be appointed) the guardian of his person, appointed or declared under the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, or any other law for the time being in force, and approved by an order in writing under the seal of the Court which appointed or declared the guardian. (3) If any of the aforesaid other co-owners or co-sharers is, at the time when the application is made, a lunatic a declaration may be accepted under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) if it is - made on behalf of such lunatic by his committee appointed under the Lunacy (Supreme Courts) Act, 1858]1 or the Lunacy (District Courts) Act, 1858]2 or any other law for the time being in force, and approved by an order in writing under the seal of the Court which appointed the committee. Acts 34 and 35 of 1858 have been repealed and re-enacted by Act 4 of 1912 and these references should now be construed as references to the later Act-See Act 10 of 1897, Section 8. Acts 34 and 35 of 1858 have been repealed and re-enacted by Act 4 of 1912 and these references should now be construed as references to the later Act-See Act 10 of 1897, Section 8.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal The 1 [State] Government may, in its discretion, and after such inquiry (if any) as it may think fit to make by written order, reject any application made under Section 3. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal If any application made under Section 3 is not rejected under Section 6, and if the 1 [State] Government is satisfied that the conditions specified in Section 3 are fulfilled, and that the provisions of Sections 4 and 5 have been duly complied with, the 2 [State] Government shall send a copy of the application, and of the declarations which accompanied it as also a copy of the draft of the proposed instrument of settlement to each creditor who is named in the application and to each person who has made a declaration in pursuance of clause (ii) of Section 5; and, 3 [...] shall publish notification- (a) setting forth the application [except the particulars inserted therein in pursuance of clause (b) of Section 4] and the declaration which accompanied it; (b) calling upon all creditors, whether secured or unsecured, holding or entitled to incumbrances enforceable against the applicant or the estate to which the application relates, and all other persons interested or claiming to be interested in the estate, to send to the 4 [State] Government written notice of their incumbrances and interests, respectively, within a period of six months from the date of the notification, and (c) intimating that any objections to the proposed settlement, whether urged by creditors or by other persons interested in the estate which may be communicated to the 5 [State] Government in writing within the said period, will be duly considered. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. "with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council" were omitted by Act 38 of 1920, Section 2 and Schedule I, Part V. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 8--> State(s): West Bengal (1) At any time after the expiration of the said period, and after considering any notices and objections received under Section 7, and after such inquiry (if any) as it may think fit to make, the 1 [State] Government may, in its discretion, by written order either - (a) reject such application, or (b) grant permission to make the proposed settlement in respect either of the whole of the property to which the application relates or of any part thereof: Provided that, if any incumbrances have been set forth in the application or brought to the notice of the 2 [State] Government, such permission shall not be granted unless - (i) the incumbrances are first discharged, or (ii) a condition is made for the insertion in the settlement of provisions, to be assented to by the creditors and approved by the 3 [State] Government, for the discharge of the incumbrances, or for their continuance, with or without modification, and for the payment of interest thereon. (2) If the right of the applicant to make the settlement is disputed by or on behalf of any person interested in the estate, the 4 [State] Government may, if it thinks fit, refer the matter in dispute to the Civil Court for decision, before determining whether to reject the application or to grant permission to make the proposed settlement; and the Civil Court shall, in dealing with any such reference follow the procedure prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure]5 for the trial of suits, so far as the same may be applicable. (3) Every decision by the Civil Court under sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be a decree within the meaning of the Code of Civil Procedure]6 ; and an appeal therefrom shall lie to the High Court. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Act 14 of 1882 has been repealed and re-enacted by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and this reference should now be taken to be made to that Code-See Section 158 thereof. Act 14 of 1882 has been repealed and re-enacted by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and this reference should now be taken to be made to that Code-See Section 158 thereof.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 9--> State(s): West Bengal The rejection under Section 6 or Section 8 of an application for permission to make settlement of an estate under the foregoing provisions of this Act shall be no bar to the making of a fresh application in respect of the same estate, if the applicant shows sufficient reason for so doing.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 10--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act in respect of any estate shall provide that the estate shall be held for life - (a) by the settlor, as first tenant for life; (b) and thereafter, by the second tenant for life, who shall be the eldest or only son of the first tenant for life. (c) and thereafter, by the third tenant for life, who shall be the eldest or only son of the second tenant for life. (2) Every such settlement shall further provide, - (i) if the estate is one to which the settlor was, immediately before the execution of the settlement, solely entitled-that, after the life of the third tenant for life, the eldest or only son of such tenant shall hold the estate absolutely; (ii) if the estate belonged, immediately before the execution of the settlement, to a joint Hindu family that, after the life of the third tenant for life, the eldest or only son of such tenant shall during his life be the karta or manager of the estate, but without prejudice to the rights of any persons who, but for the settlement, would be co-owners of the estate; and (iii) if the estate belonged, immediately before the execution of the settlement, to co-sharers-that, after the life of the third tenant for life, the eldest or only son of such tenant shall have during his life the sole right of management over the estate; but subject in each case to the terms of any fresh settlement made by a tenant for life in pursuance of permission granted under Section 16. (3) If the eldest or only son of the settlor has predeceased the settlor, or if the settlor desires to exclude such son from holding the estate on the ground of incapacity or defect of character which is proved by the settlor to the satisfaction of the 1 [State] Government, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-section, the 2 [State] Government may permit him to provide in the settlement- (i) that the second tenant for life shall be another son, of the settlor, if he has another son, or the eldest or only son of the son who has predeceased the settlor or has been excluded as aforesaid, and (ii) that the third tenant for life shall be the eldest or only son of the second tenant for life, or the eldest or only son of the son who has predeceased the settlor or has been excluded as aforesaid. (4) Any settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act may provide that any tenant for life may, with the previous sanction of the 3 [State] Government, by written instrument surrender his interest under the settlement in favour of the next tenant for life. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 11--> State(s): West Bengal Every settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act may also contain provisions for vesting the estate, in the event of the settlement on the second tenant for life or the third tenant for life or his son failing to take effect, in some other person descended from the settlor or the settlor's father in the direct male line.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 12--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act shall specify all incumbrances referred to in clause (ii) of Section 8. (2) Every such settlement shall also contain such provisions as may be approved by the 1 [State] Government with regard to the following matter, namely: (a) the discharge of incumbrances on the estate, and the payment of interest thereon; or the continuance (with or without modification), and the payment of interest thereon; (b) the maintenance of the co-owners and co-sharers (if any) by or on whose behalf a declaration has been made under clause (ii) of Section 5, and of all persons who at the time of the execution of the settlement are, or thereafter may be, legally entitled to maintenance out of the estate; (c) the management of the estate after the death of the settlor - (i) during the period not exceeding five years after such death, pending the adoption of a son under the circumstances described in sub-clause (ii) of clause (h) of Section 2, or (ii) during the minority of the second tenant for life; (d) the management of the estate after the death of second tenant for life - (i) during a period not exceeding five years after such death, pending the adoption of a son under the circumstances described in sub-clause (ii) of clause (h) of Section 2, or (ii) during the minority of the third tenant for life; (e) the management of the estate after the death of the third tenant for life - (i) during a period not exceeding five years after such death, pending the adoption of a son under the circumstances described in sub-clause (ii) of clause (h) of Section 2, or (ii) during the minority of the next holder. (3) If any settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act includes money, or movable property, the settlement shall contain such provisions as may be approved by the 2 [State] Government for vesting such money, securities or property in a trustee, for the investment or conversion of such money or securities in or into securities authorised by Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and the payment to the trustee of expenses and remuneration in accordance with rules made under Section 31, clause (c). Explanation. -The Official Trustee of Bengal]3 , the Collector or any private person may be appointed to be a trustee for the purposes of this sub-section. (4) In addition to the various matters hereinbefore specified, the 4 [State] Government may require or permit the insertion in any settlement made under the foregoing provisions of this Act or any provisions which it may think fit, and may make its approval of the settlement conditional on the insertion of provisions which it has required to be inserted: Provided that no provisions inserted in pursuance of this sub-section shall operate to the prejudice of any secured or unsecured creditor unless assented to by him. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. As to the Official Trustee, see Act 2 of 1913. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 13--> State(s): West Bengal (1) At any time after a settlement has been made under the foregoing provisions of this Act, a tenant for life may apply to the 1 [State] Government for permission to make a supplementary settlement for the purpose of adding further property to the settled estate - (a) if he is competent to contract. (b) if he is in possession of such property, either in his own right or along with or on behalf of others, and (c) if such property is held in permanent, heritable and transferable right: (2) Provided that no application may be made under sub-section (1) in respect of any property - (i) unless the applicant is solely entitled to the property, or (ii) if the property belongs to a joint Hindu family-unless the applicant is the karta or managing member of the family, or (iii) if the property belongs to co-sharers-unless the applicant is a principal shareholder in the property and has, by custom or with the consent of his co-sharers, the sole right of management over the property. (3) The provisions of Section 4 to 9 shall apply to every application made under sub-section (1) in respect of any property, and the provisions of Section 10 or 12 shall apply to every settlement of such property, as if the property were an "estate" within the meaning of those Sections. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 14--> State(s): West Bengal If, at any time after any settlement has been made under the foregoing provisions of this Act, the second tenant for life dies during the life of settlor, or the settlor desires to exclude him from holding the estate on the ground of incapacity or defect of character which is proved by the settlor to the satisfaction of the 1 [State] Government - the settlor may, if he is competent to contract, apply to the 2 [State] Government for permission to make a supplementary settlement for the purpose of appointing to be second tenant for life and third tenant for life, respectively, any other persons who might have been so appointed in pursuance of clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-section (3) of Section 10. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 15--> State(s): West Bengal At any time after any settlement has been made under the foregoing provisions of this Act, a tenant for life of a settled estate may, if he is competent to contract, apply to the 1 [State] Government for permission to make a fresh settlement of the estate. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 16--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The provisions of Section 4, sub-section (1) and Section 9 shall apply to every application for permission to make a supplementary settlement in respect of persons or a fresh settlement. (2) If any such application relates to an estate to which the settlor was, immediately before the execution of the former settlement, respectively solely entitled the 1 [State] Government may, in its discretion, and after such inquiry (if any) as it may think fit to make, by written order, either- (i) reject the application, or (ii) grant permission to make the proposed settlement. (3) If any such application relates to an estate which belonged, immediately, before the execution of the former settlement, respectively, to a joint Hindu family or to co-sharers, the application must be accompanied by a declaration by all persons (other than the applicant) who, but for such settlements, would be co-owners or co-sharers in the estate, to the effect that they are willing to assent to the proposed settlement. (4) If any of such co-sharers is, at the time when the application is made, a minor or a lunatic, a declaration under sub-section (3) of this Section may be accepted if it is made and approved as indicated in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be, of Section 5. (5) In every case referred to in sub-section (3) of this Section, the 2 [State] Government - shall send a copy of the application, and of the declarations which accompanied it, to each person who has made a declaration in pursuance of that sub-section; and, 3 [...] shall publish a notification - (a) setting forth the application and the declarations which accompanied it; (b) calling upon all persons (other than creditors) interested or claiming to be interested in the estate, to sent to the 4 [State] Government written notice of their interests within a period of six months from the date of the notification, and (c) intimating that any objections by such persons to the proposed settlement, which may be communicated to the 5 [State] Government in writing within the said period, will be duly considered; and, at any time after the expiration of the said period, and after considering any notice and objections received under this sub-section, and after such inquiry (if any) as it may think fit to make, may, in its discretion, by written order either - (i) reject the said application, or (ii) grant permission to make the proposed settlement. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. "with the previous sanction of the Governor General in Council" were omitted by Act 38 of 1920, Section 2 and Sch. I, Part V. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 17--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The provisions of Sections 10, 11 and 12 shall apply to every fresh settlement made in pursuance of permission granted under Section 16. (2) All property which, immediately before the execution of a fresh settlement in respect of any estate, is included in any former settlement of the estate made under this Act, must be included in such fresh settlement. (3) No property shall be included in any fresh settlement made under this Act in respect of any estate unless it is immediately before the execution of such settlement, included in a former settlement of the estate made under this Act. (4) If any incumbrance, which is dealt with in any former settlement made under this Act in respect of any estate, is still in existence at the time of the execution of the fresh settlement of the estate, then nothing contained in such fresh settlement shall affect the rights, of the creditor unless assented to by him. (5) Every fresh settlement made under this Act in respect of any estate shall, subject to the foregoing provisions of this Section, supersede all former settlements made under this Act in respect of such estate.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 18--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No settlement made under this Act shall take effect unless the instrument of settlement - (a) is of a non-testamentary character, (b) is attested by two or more witnesses, (c) has been approved by the 1 [State] Government before execution, and the fact of such approval having been given is certified on the instrument by one of the Secretaries of the 2 [State] Government. (d) bears a stamp of the full value prescribed by sub-section (2), or, if the sanction of the Board of Revenue]3 has been given under sub-section (3), of one-third of such value, and (e) is registered within three months after the said approval has been certified as aforesaid. (2) Every instrument of settlement made under this Act, not being supplementary settlement referred to in Section 14 or a fresh settlement referred to in Section 15, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, bear a stamp of a value equivalent to one fourth of the annual net profits of the estate comprised in the settlement: (3) Provided that a stamp of one-third of such value may be affixed, with the previous sanction of the Board of Revenue, ]4 on arrangements being made to its satisfaction for the affixing of stamp for the rest of such value at subsequent dates within three years from the date of the instrument. (4) If any question arises, with reference to sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as to the amount of the annual net profits of any estate, the decision of the Board of Revenue]5 thereon shall be final. (5) Every instrument making a supplementary settlement referred to in Section 14 or a fresh settlement referred to in Section 15 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Indian Stamp Act, 1899, bear a stamp of ten rupees. (6) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, every instrument of settlement shall take effect from the date of its execution. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. As to the present constitution and powers of the Board of Revenue, See B. & O. Act 1 of 1913. As to the present constitution and powers of the Board of Revenue, See B & O. Act 1 of 1913. As to the present constitution and powers of the Board of Revenue, See B & O. Act 1 of 1913.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 19--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No instrument of surrender referred to in sub-section (4) of Section 10 shall take effect unless it - (a) is of a non-testamentary character; (b) is attested by two or more witnesses; (c) has been approved by the 1 [State] Government before execution, and the fact of such approval having been given is certified on the instrument by one of the Secretaries to the 2 [State] Government; (d) is stamped in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and (e) is registered within three months after the said approval has been certified as aforesaid. (2) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this Section, every such instrument shall take effect from the date of its execution. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 20--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Succession Act, 1865]1 the Probate and Administration Act, 1881]2 , or the Succession Certificate Act, 1889]3 , it shall not be necessary for any person to obtain probate or letters of administration or a certificate under the last mentioned Act, to admit of his taking any property or recovering any debt or realizing any security in virtue of a settlement made under this Act. (2) If any probate, and letters of administration or any certificate granted under the Succession Certificate Act, 1889, purports to cover any property, debt or security which is comprised in a settlement made under this Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained in Article 11 or Article 12 of Schedule I to the Court-fees Act, 1870, no court-fee shall be levied under either of those Articles in respect of such property debt or security. Act 10 of 1885 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 39 of 1952. Act 5 of 1881 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 39 of 1952. Act 7 of 1889 has been repealed by Act 1 of 1938.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 21--> State(s): West Bengal At any time after the death of any tenant for life of a settled estate, any of the Secretaries to the 1 [State] Government may, upon the application of any person claiming a right to hold the settled estate under the instrument of settlement, grant a certificate to such person declaring him to be entitled to hold such estate under such instrument; and such certificate shall be presumed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 22--> State(s): West Bengal (1) When any instrument of settlement or surrender of settlement or revocation of settlement is registered, the registering officer shall report the fact to 1 [State] Government; and, on receipt of such report, the 2 [State] Government shall publish a notification stating the purport of the instrument and the office in which it has been registered. (2) The Collector shall cause a copy of every such notification to be posted in his office, and to be published on the settled estate at such places and in such manner as may, in his opinion, be sufficient for giving information to tenants and other persons interested. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 23--> State(s): West Bengal No settlement or part of a settlement made under this Act shall be liable to be avoided or set aside by any Civil Court by reason only that it contravenes- (a) any provision of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or (b) any law or rule for the time being in force for the prevention of perpetuities, or (c) any family custom or any personal law of succession to which the family is subject, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 24--> State(s): West Bengal (1) A tenant for life of a settled estate may, at any time, if he is competent to contract, apply to the 1 [State] Government for permission to revoke either wholly or as respects any particular property, any settlement made under this Act. (2) The 2 [State] Government, after considering the application, and the result of any inquiry made by it or under its orders, and any further particulars or information called for by it, may, in its discretion, by written order, either- (a) reject the application, or (b) grant the permission applied for, or (c) grant permission to revoke the settlement as respects such property only as may be specified in the order. (3) When permission is granted under sub-section (2) to revoke a settlement, either wholly or as respects any particular property, the revocation shall not take effect unless the instrument of revocation- (i) is of non-testamentary character, (ii) is attested by two or more witnesses, (iii) has been approved by the 3 [State] Government before execution, and the fact of such approval having been given is certified on the instrument by one of the Secretaries to the 4 [State] Government. (iv) is stamped in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, and (v) is registered within three months after the said approval has been certified as aforesaid. (4) Subject to the foregoing provision of this Section, every such instrument shall take effect from the date of its execution. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 25--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the 1 [State] Government may at any time declare by notification that any settlement made under this Act in respect of a settled estate shall be deemed- (a) to be cancelled, or (b) to be amended so as to exclude any part of the estate described in the notification. (2) On the publication of such notification the said settlement shall be deemed to be cancelled or amended as aforesaid, as the case may be. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 26--> State(s): West Bengal When any instrument of settlement is revoked under Section 24 or cancelled or amended under Section 25, the rights of all persons having incumbrances on the estate shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Limitation Act, 1877]1 , revive and be enforceably as if the settlement had not been made, but subject to any payments which were made while the settlement was in force. Act 15 of 1887 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 9 of 1908.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 27--> State(s): West Bengal All profits of a settled estate which are realized by a tenant for life, or which, immediately before his death, were due to him but were not realized by him, shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, belong absolutely to such tenant or his heirs, executor, administrators or assigns: Provided that, if any rents due to a tenant for life in respect of a settled estate were in arrear immediately before his death, the same shall, upon his death, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Indian Succession Act, 1865]1 , or in any other law, or in any settlement made under this Act, and notwithstanding any will or other disposition made by such tenant, become due to the next holder of the estate. Act 10 of 1865 has been repealed and re-enacted by Act 39 of 1925.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 28--> State(s): West Bengal Except as provided in Sections 29 and 30, a tenant for life of a settled estate shall not be entitled to transfer by way of sale or gift, or otherwise alienate, or to create any incumbrance upon, or to lease, the estate, or any part thereof, to assign his right to receive any of the profits thereof.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 29--> State(s): West Bengal (1) A tenant for life of a settled estate may, with the previous written sanction of the Civil Court sell the estate or any part thereof. (2) If the estate belonged, immediately before the execution of the settlement, to a joint Hindu family or to co-sharers, the Court shall, before determining to accord such sanction notify the proposed sale to all persons (except the tenant for life) who, but for the settlement, would be co-sharers in the estate, and shall hear and duly consider any objection which may be advanced by them or on their behalf. (3) The proceeds of every such sale shall be paid by the purchaser to the Collector; and shall be held by the Collector in trust to re-invest the same, with the approval of the 1 [State] Government, in immovable property, which shall upon such re-investment, be and remain subject to the settlement in like manner as if it had been originally comprised therein. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 30--> State(s): West Bengal (1) A tenant for life of a settled estate may lease the estate or any part thereof from year to year or for any term not exceeding seven years, or (with the previous written consent of the Collector) for any longer term not exceeding fourteen years, or (with the previous sanction of the 1 [State] Government for any longer term of years or in perpetuity. (2) No premium or fine shall be taken on any such lease granted for a term exceeding seven years, or in perpetuity, except with the previous written consent of the Collector. (3) When any premium or fine is taken on any lease granted under sub-section (1), then - (a) if the lease is from year to year or for a term of years a sum equivalent to four-fifth of the amount of the premium or fine, or (b) if the lease is in perpetuity, the whole of the premium or fine shall be paid - (i) to the trustee appointed for the purposes of Section 12, sub-section (3), or (ii) if no trustee has been so appointed, to a trustee to be appointed for the purpose; and shall be held by such trustee as part of the settled estate, and shall be invested by him in securities authorised by Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882: Provided that such trustee may retain, for the payment of his expenses and remuneration, such portion of the amount paid to him as may be authorised by rules made under Section 37, clause (c). (4) In respect of every such lease the best rent shall be reserved that can reasonably be obtained. (5) No payment of any instalment of such rent made to a tenant for life before it falls due shall operate to the prejudice of any subsequent holder of the estate. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 31--> State(s): West Bengal Nothing in Section 28 or sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 30 shall apply to leases of raiyati holdings.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 32--> State(s): West Bengal (1) No settled estate or part thereof shall, during the life of a tenant for life, be sold in execution of a decree of a Civil Court. (2) If any decree against a tenant for life of a settled estate is not satisfied the Court may, on the application of the decree-holder, appoint a Receiver of such estate or any part thereof, under the provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Civil Procedure]1 , for the purpose of recovering the amount of the decree and, subject to the rights of any secured creditor over such estate or part, satisfying the claims of the decree holder. (3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from any order made by a Court under sub-section (2). Act 14 of 1882 has been repealed and re-enacted by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the reference should now be taken to be made to Rules 1 to 3 and 5 in Order XL, in Schedule 1 to that Code-See Section 158 thereof.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 33--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bengal Land Revenue Sales Act, 1859, or any other law, no settled estate or part of a settled estate shall, without the previous sanction of the 1 [State] Government, be sold, during the life of any tenant for life thereof, for an arrear of land revenue or for any other arrear which is recoverable in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. (2) If any settled estate or part of a settled estate be sold, with the sanction required by sub-section (1) of this Section, to any person other than the tenant for life, the resulting surplus shall be dealt with in the manner described in sub-section (3) of Section 29; and, if the estate or any part thereof be purchased at the sale by the tenant for life, the resulting surplus shall be paid to the tenant for life, and the estate or part so purchased shall, notwithstanding the sale, continue to be subject to the settlement. (3) If the person whose name is entered in any certificate granted under the said Bengal Land Revenue Sales Act, 1859, or any other law, as purchaser of a settled estate or part thereof, is not the tenant for life, the said resulting surplus may be retained by such person, and shall not be payable to the tenant for life, even though it may be claimed that the purchase was made by such person or behalf of the tenant for life. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 34--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If any such arrear accrues in respect of a settled estate, or any part thereof, during the life of any tenant for life thereof, and if the sale of the estate or part for the recovery of the arrear is not sanctioned by the 1 [State] Government under Section 33, the Collector may attach the estate or part, and shall thereupon be entitled to the exclusion of all other persons, to receive all rents and other moneys (if any) due to such tenant in respect of such estate or part, and may manage the estate or part, either directly or through a manager, for such period as may be necessary for the recovery of such arrear. (2) Upon the expiration of the period referred to in sub-section (1) the Collector shall deduct from the proceeds of the management the amount of the said arrear and any similar arrears that may have accrued during such period, and any interest thereon, and the expenses incurred in the management; and shall then - (a) pay the balance of such proceeds to the person then entitled to hold the estate; and (b) furnish such person with an account of the receipts and expenditure during the management; and (c) release the estate or part to such person. (3) If, after a settled estate or part thereof held by a tenant for life has been managed and released by the Collector under sub-sections (1) and (2) any such arrear as aforesaid again accrues in respect of the estate or part during the life of the same tenant, and if the sale of the estate or part thereof for the recovery of the arrear is not sanctioned by the 2 [State] Government under Section 33, the Court of Wards may take charge of and deal with the estate or part under the provisions of the Court of Wards Act, 1879, and may retain such charge until the death of such tenant and if the next holder is then a minor, until such minor attains his majority; and the said tenant shall, while the Court of Wards has charge of the estate or part, be debarred from receiving any income from the estate or part, other than such monthly sum as the Court of Wards may allow for the support of himself and his family; and the powers conferred by Section 29 and 30 of this Act shall, while the Court of Wards has charge of the estate or part, be exercisable by the Court of Wards and not by the said tenant. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 35--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Every permission granted by the 1 [State] Government under Section 8, Section 10, sub-section (3), Section 12, sub-section (4), Section 13, Section 16 or Section 24 shall be in writing signed by one of the Secretaries to the 2 [State] Government and shall contain a description of the property or person in respect of which the permission is granted, sufficient to identify the same. (2) Every permission granted by the 3 [State] Government under Section 8, Section 13, Section 16 or Section 24 shall be published by notification, and shall remain in force until the expiry of twelve months from the date of the notification, or until the death of the applicant, whichever first happens. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O. Substituted by A. L. O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 36--> State(s): West Bengal Every notification prescribed by this Act shall be published in the 1 [Official Gazette] and also in such Vernacular Gazette (if any) as the 2 [State] Government may direct. Substituted by A.O. for 'Calcutta Gazette'. Substituted by A.L.O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 37--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The 1 [State] Government may, after previous publication make Rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without, prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the 2 [State] Government may make Rules for all or any of the following matters, namely: - (a) the procedure to be followed in submitting an application to the 3 [State] Government under this Act; (b) the form and contents of such applications and the documents (if any) which should accompany them; (c) the payment to trustees, out of the trust property, of expenses properly incurred in or about the execution of any trust created under this Act, and of remuneration for their trouble, skill and loss of time in executing any such trust. (d) the guidance of the Collector in managing estates attached under Section 34; (e) the payment of recovery of any expenses incurred by the 4 [State] Government in connection with any proceedings taken under this Act. Substituted by A.L.O. Substituted by A.L.O. Substituted by A.L.O. Substituted by A.L.O.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 38--> State(s): West Bengal The provisions of the Court of Wards Act, 1879, so far as they are not inconsistent with the terms of settlements duly made under this Act, shall be applicable to settled estates.
Bengal Settled Estates Act, 1904_Section 39--> State(s): West Bengal Nothing in this Act shall affect the rights of any secured creditor - (a) if his incumbrances or any of them have not been set forth in the list prescribed by Section 4, clause (c), or (b) if he has not assented to any condition inserted in a settlement made under this Act for the discharge or continuance of his incumbrances or any of them. 
