West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the dissolution and constitution of certain district school boards. WHEREAS under the award or the Boundary Commission parts or the districts of Jalpaiguri, Malda, Nadia and Dinajpur have been excluded from the Province of West Bengal; AND WHEREAS the new districts of 1 [Nadia], West Dinajpur, Malda and Jalpaiguri have been constituted comprising respectively the parts of the former districts of Nadia, Dinajpur, Malda and Jalpaiguri which have been included within West Bengal under the said award; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the dissolution and constitution of certain District School Boards; It is hereby enacted as follows:- This word was substituted for the word "Navadwip" by the West Bengal District School Boards (Amendment) Act, 1948(West Ben. Act XXXIV of 1948)
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal (1) This Act may be called the West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947. (2) It shall come into force on the date on which the West Bengal District School Boards Ordinance, 1947, ceases to operate.
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, the expression "Boundary Commission" means the Boundary Commission referred to in the Indian Independence Act, 1947.
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, or in any other law for the time being in force, on and from the date on which the award of the Boundary Commission came into force the District School Boards of the districts of Nadia, Dinajpur, Malda and Jalpaiguri constituted under the said Act shall be deemed to have been dissolved and every member of each such board shall be deemd to have ceased to hold office as such member in so far as such boards had authority over any area included within West Bengal under the said award.
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, or in any other law for the time being in force, the 1 [State] Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute District School Boards of the districts of 2 [Nadia], West Dinajpur, Malda and Jalpaiguri in such manner and consisting of such number of members as it may determine in this behalf. (2) The district school boards constituted under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been constituted on and from the date on which the award of the Boundary Commission came into force. This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Navadwip" by the West Bengal District School Boards (Amendment) Act, 1948(West Ben. Act XXXIV of 1948)
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal The 1 [State] Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix the term of office of members of the District School Boards constituted under section 4 for such period as the 2 [State] Government may think proper. This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order. 1950. This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order. 1950.
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 5A--> State(s): West Bengal The 2 [State] Government may, if it so thinks fit, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that on the expiration of the term of office of members of the District School Boards constituted under section 4, the said District School Boards shall be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, and for the purpose of such reconstitution, the members of the said Boards shall be elected and appointed, before the expiry of the term of office of the members of the District School Boards constituted under section 4, in accordance with the provisions of the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, and the rules framed thereunder and the persons, who ceased to hold their offices under section 3 shall not be deemed disqualified for such election or appointment if they are otherwise qualified therefor: Provided that such of the provisions of the Bengal (Rural) Primary Education Act, 1930, as are specially applicable to the constitution of the District School Boards for the first or second term shall not apply. This section was inserted by s. 2 of the West Bengal District School Boards (Amendment) Act, 1949 [West Ben, Act XV of 1949) This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by para. 4(1) of the Adaptation of Laws Order. 1950.
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal Any regulations made or directions issued or anything done or any action taken or any suit instituted or any proceedings commenced by or against the District School Boards dissolved under section 3 in relation to the areas comprised in the districts of 1 [Nadia], West Dinajpur, Malda and Jalpaiguri before the publication of the notification constituting the District School Boards of the said districts under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be deemed to have been made, issued, done, taken, instituted or commenced, as the case may be, by or against the respective District School Boards as so constituted as if such Boards had been constituted and were in existence at the time when such regulations were made, directions issued, thing done, action taken, suit instituted or proceedings commenced. This word was substituted for the word "Navadwip" by the West Bengal District School Boards (Amendment) Act, 1948(West Ben. Act XXXIV of 1948)
West Bengal District School Boards Act, 1947_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal Any notification issued or anything done or any action taken in exercise of any power conferred by the West Bengal District School Boards Ordinance, 1947, shall, on the said Ordinance ceasing to be in operation, be deemed to have been issued, done or taken in exercise of the powers conferred by this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 6th day of November, 1947. 
