Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section Preamble--> State(s): West Bengal An Act to provide for the taking of measures with a view to safeguarding the health, safely and welfare of the pilgrims attending the Gangasagar Mela. Whereas it is expedient in the public interest to provide for the taking of measures with a view to safeguarding the health, safely and welfare of the pilgrims attending the Gangasagar Mela and for mailers connected therewith or incidental thereto; It is hereby enacted in the Twenty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, by the Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 1--> State(s): West Bengal This Act may be called the Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 2--> State(s): West Bengal In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Gangasagar Mela" means the fair held at the Sagar Islands in the district of 24-Parganas on the occasion of the Pous Sankranti every year; (b) "notified area" means the area declared as such by notification under sub-section (1) of section 3.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 3--> State(s): West Bengal (1) If the State Government is satisfied that as a result of the influx of too many pilgrims at a time at the Sagar Islands on the occasion of the Gangasagar Mela the health, safety and welfare of these pilgrims are likely to be endangered the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazelle, declare that the whole or any portion of the area within the Sagar Islands shall be a notified area. (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) it shall be competent for the Stale Government to lake such measures for safeguarding the health, safely and welfare of the pilgrims as the State Government thinks necessary. (3) The details of the measures to be taken under sub-section (2) and the manner in which they shall be executed shall be laid down by the State Government by rules made in this behalf. (4) An order made under sub-section (1) shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in the notification.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 4--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may impose such fee not exceeding rupees ten per head per year, as may be determined by the State Government by notification, upon every pilgrim visiting the Gangasagar Mela: Provided that no such fee shall be imposed upon Government servants on duty, children under the age of twelve years, sadhus, sannyasis, beggars and such other persons including members of organisations as may be specified by the State Government by notification issued in this behalf. (2) The fee imposed under sub-section (1) shall be realised in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 5--> State(s): West Bengal The Gangasagar Mela Act, 1953, is hereby repealed.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 6--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice, to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the matters which may be or has to be prescribed by rules.
Gangasagar Mela Act, 1976_Section 7--> State(s): West Bengal (1) The Gangasagar Mela Ordinance, 1975, is hereby repealed. (2) Anything done or any action taken under the Gangasagar Mela Ordinance, 1975, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this Act as if this Act had commenced on the 18th day of December, 1975. 
