United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, Samvat 2006_Section Preamble--> An Act for the protection of judicial officers in the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Whereas it is expedient to provide for the greater protection to Magistrates and others acting judicially in the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat); It is hereby enacted as follows:-
United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, Samvat 2006_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called "The United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, Samvat 2006". (2) It shall extend to the whole of the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa 1 [Madhya Bharat Region] and shall come into force immediately on its publication in the 2 [Gazette] of the united State. Substituted by M.P. Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Substituted by M.P. Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956.
United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, Samvat 2006_Section 2--> No Judge, Magistrate Suba or other person acting judicially shall be liable to be sued in any Civil Court for any act done or ordered to be done by him in the discharge of his judicial duty whether or not within the limit of his jurisdiction : Provided that he, at the time, in good faith believed himself having jurisdiction to do or order the act complained of; and officer of any Court or other person, bound to execute the law warrants or orders of any such Judge, Magistrate, Suba or other person acting judicially shall be liable to be sued in any Civil Court for the execution of any warrant or order which he would be bound to execute, if within the jurisdiction of the person issuing the same.
United State of Gwalior, Indore and Malwa (Madhya Bharat) Judicial Officers’ Protection Act, Samvat 2006_Section 3--> As soon as this Act comes into force all Acts and other provisions having the force of law dealing with the protection of judicial officers and other persons acting judicially and in force in any part of the United State of Gwalior, Indore and Madhya 1 [Madhya Bharat Region] shall stand repealed. Substituted by M.P. Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. 
