Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> An Act to alter the name of the State of Uttaranchal. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal adopted a resolution on 5th October, 2005, that the name of the State of "Uttaranchal" should be changed to "Uttarakhand" and requested the Central Government to take necessary steps for altering the name of the State as 'Uttarakhand". The resolution, inter alia, states that the general public of the State is of the view that on the basis of mythology and history, the name of the State be 'Uttarakhand'. 2. The Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2006 provides for the alteration of the name of the State of "Uttaranchal" to 'Uttarakhand'. As required by the proviso to Article 3 of the Constitution, the President referred the said Bill to the Legislature of the State of Uttaranchal for expressing its views thereon and the Legislature has agreed to the provisions of the Bill. 3. Therefore, it has been decided to introduce the said Bill for the purpose of altering the name of the State of Uttaranchal to the State of Uttarakhand by amending, inter alia, the provisions of the Constitution and also by providing for consequential provisions. 
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006. (2) It shall come into force on such date [Fn. 1] as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. FOOTNOTES : 1. with effect from . 1-1-2007
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "appointed day" means the date appointed under sub-section (2) of Section 1 for the coming into force of this Act; (b) "appropriate Government" means, as respect a law relating to a matter enumerated in List 1 in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution , the Central Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government; (c) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of Uttaranchal.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 3--> As from the appointed day, the State of Uttaranchal shall be known as the State of Uttarakhand.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 4--> In the First Schedule to the Constitution , under the heading "I. THE STATES", in Entry 27, under the column "Name", for the word "Uttaranchal", the word "Uttarakhand" shall be substituted.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 5--> ln the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution , under the heading "Table", in Entry 18, in the second column, for the word "Uttaranchal", the word "Uttarakhand" shall be substituted.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 6--> (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the State of Uttaranchal by Section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under the said sub-section.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 7--> Notwithstanding that no provisions or insufficient provision has been made under Section 6 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.
Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006_Section 8--> Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are pending to which the State of Uttaranchal is a party, the State of Uttarakhand shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of Uttaranchal in those proceedings. 
