Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Meghalaya An Act to amend the Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Meghalaya (1) This Act may be called the Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on a date to be notified by the Government under sub-section (3) of Section 1 of the principal Act.
Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Meghalaya (a) In Section 2 of the principal Act, for the existing clause (b) the following new clause (b) and (bb) shall be substituted, namely, - (b) "marriage" includes all marriages contracted by persons belonging to any caste, tribe or religion, and the marriages contracted in accordance with customary, practices or traditions and also includes re-marriages and marriages contracted under any existing law. "(bb) "Marriage Officer" or "License Holder" means such officer or license holder notified or authorized under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (Central Act No. 15 of 1872), the Special Marriage Act, 1954 (Central Act No. 43 of 1954), the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (Central Act 25 of 1955)the Meghalaya Moslem Marriages and Divorces Registration Act (Assam Act IX of 1935) (as adopted by the State of Meghalaya) or any other Act for the time being in force in the State." (b) In Section 2 of the principal Act, for clauses (f) and (g) the following new clauses (f) and (g) shall be substituted, namely,- (f) "Registrar" means a Registrar of marriages appointed under section 4 of the Act; "(g) "Registrar General of Marriages" means the Secretary to the Government of Meghalaya in the Excise, Registration, Taxation and Stamps Department, ex-officio;". (c) For the existing clause (i) of Section 2 of the principal Act, the following new clause (i) shall be substituted, namely "(i)" to contract a marriage" means to solemnize or enter into a marriage in any form or manner, in accordance with any religion, custom, practices or traditions in force and includes marriages solemnized by a Marriage Officer or an authorized License holder under any existing law".
Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Meghalaya In Section 3, for the words "marriage certificate" appearing in between the words "such" and "certificate", the words "marriage registration" shall be inserted.
Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Meghalaya In sub-section (1) of Section 5, for the words "thirty" the words "sixty" shall be substituted.
Meghalaya Compulsory Registration of Marriage (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Meghalaya In sub-section (1) of Section 6, for the words "thirty" the words "sixty" shall be substituted. L. M. Sangma Secretary to the Government of Meghalaya, Law Department. 
