Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Meghalaya An Act further to amend the laws relating to the salaries and allowances of Ministers, Speaker, Parliamentary Secretaries, Leader of Opposition and Members of the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows,-
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Meghalaya (1) This Act may be called the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall come into force on and from the 1st October, 2015.
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Meghalaya In Section 2 of the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Speaker and Deputy Speaker Salaries and Allowance) Act 1972, for words "rupees forty nine thousand six hundred" and "rupees forty eight thousand seven hundred and fifty", the words "rupees sixty three thousand six hundred" and "rupees sixty two thousand seven hundred and fifty" shall respectively be substituted.
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Meghalaya In the Meghalaya (Ministers' Salaries and Allowance) Act, 1972, in Section 2,- in clause (a), for the words "rupees fifty thousand", the words "rupees sixty four thousand" shall be substituted. in clause (b), for the words "rupees forty nine thousand six hundred ", the words " rupees sixty three thousand six hundred" shall be substituted. in clause (c), for the words "rupees forty nine thousand two hundred and fifty", the words "rupees sixty three thousand two hundred and fifty" shall be substituted. in clause (d), for the words "rupees forty eight thousand seven hundred and fifty", the words "rupees sixty two thousand seven hundred and fifty" shall be substituted. in clause (e), for the words "rupees forty eight thousand fifty hundred ", the words "rupees sixty two thousand five hundred " shall be substituted.
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Meghalaya In the Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) Act 1972,- In Section 3, for the words " rupees twenty thousand", the words " rupees thirty four thousand" shall be substituted; In Section 4,- in clause (b) for the words " rupees two hundred", the words "rupees six hundred" shall be substituted. in clause (c) for the words "rupees three hundred" and "rupees five hundred" , the words "rupees five hundred" and "rupees eight hundred" shall respectively be substituted; the existing Section 6B shall be substituted by the following new section, namely " 6B. (1) A member along with any one of his family member shall be entitled to travel concession only once in every year for visiting to any one place in India by air by shortest air route. (2) A member along with his family member not exceeding five shall be entitled to travel concession only once during the term of his office for visiting to any one place in India by rail in first class accommodation by shortest rail route."
Legislative Assembly of Meghalaya (Members' Salaries and Allowance) (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Meghalaya In Section 3 of the Meghalaya Legislative Assembly ( Leader of Opposition) (Salaries and Allowance) Act, 1983 for the words "rupees forty nine thousand two hundred fifty" the words " rupees sixty three thousand two hundred and fifty" shall be substituted. L. M. Sangma, Special Secretary to the Government of Meghalaya, 
