Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> Act Objective: An Act further to amend the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Cable Television Networks(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 2--> In the Cable Television Networks(Regulation) Act, 1995 (7 of 1995) (hereinafter referred to as theprincipal Act), in section 2, clause (a) shall be re-lettered asclause (aa) and before clause (aa) as so re-lettered, the fol owingclause shall be inserted, namely:- '(a) "authorised officer" means, within his local limits ofjurisdiction,- (i) a District Magistrate, or (ii) a Sub-divisional Magistrate, or (iii) a Commissioner of Police, and includes any other officer notified in the Official Gazette, bythe Central Government or the State Government, to be an authorisedofficer for such local limits of jurisdiction as may be determined bythat Government;'.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 3--> In section 5 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 4--> In section 6 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 5--> For section 8 of theprincipal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "8. Compulsory transmission of Doordarshan channels.-(1) Every cableoperator shall, from the commencement of the Cable Television Networks(Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000, re-transmit at least two Doordarshanterrestrial channels and one regional langu ge channel of a State inthe prime band, in satellite mode on frequencies other than thosecarrying terrestrial frequencies. (2) The Doordarshan channels referred to in sub-section (1) shall bere-transmitted without any deletion or alteration of any programmetransmitted on such channels. (3) The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) establishedunder sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990 (25 of 1990) may, by notification inthe Official Gazette, specify the number a d name of every Doordarshanchannel to be re-transmitted by cable operators in their cable serviceand the manner of reception and re-transmission of such channels.".
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 6--> In section 11 of the principal Act, forsub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,namely:- "(1) If any authorised officer has reason to believe that theprovisions of sections 3, 5, 6 or 8 have been or are being contravenedby any cable operator, he may seize the equipment being used by suchcable operator for operating the cable television ne work.".
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 7--> In section 18 of the principal Act, forthe portion beginning with the words "by such officer" and ending withthe words "specify in this behalf", the words "by any authorisedofficer" shall be substituted.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 8--> In section 19 of the principal Act,- (i) for the portion beginning with the words "an officer, not belowthe rank of" and ending with the words "by the State Government inthis behalf", the words "any authorised officer" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "any particular programme if it is", the words andfigures "any programme or channel if, it is not in conformity with theprescribed programme code referred to in section 5 and advertisementcode referred to in section 6 or if it is" s all be substituted.
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2000_Section 9--> Section 20 of the principal Act shall bere-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as sore-numbered, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) Where the Central Government thinks it necessary or expedient soto do in the interest of the- (i) sovereignty or integrity of India; or (ii) security of India; or (iii) friendly relations of India with any foreign State; or (iv) public order, decency or morality, it may, by order, regulate or prohibit the transmission orre-transmission of any channel or programme. (3) Where the Central Government considers that any programme of anychannel is not in conformity with the prescribed programme codereferred to in section 5 or the prescribed advertisement code referredto in section 6, it may by order, regulate or proh bit thetransmission or re-transmission of such programme.". SUBHASH C. JAIN.Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
