Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> An Act to extend the Cantonments (House Accommodation) Act, 1923, and the Cantonments Act, 1924, to Part B States, to provide for elections to Cantonment Boards on the basis of adult suffrage and to provide for a temporary extension of the term of office of elected members of Cantonment Boards. BE it enacted by Parliament as follows: --
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Cantonments Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 2--> In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, 1923 , the words and letter "except Part B States" shall be omitted.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 3--> To section 2 of the Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, 1923 , the following sub-section shall be added, namely: -- "(3) In the application of this Act to any Part B State, any reference to an enactment not in force in that State shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force in that State."
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 4--> In sub-section (2) of section 1 of the Cantonments Act, 1924 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), the words and letter "except Part B States" shall be omitted.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 5--> After section 2 of the said Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely: -- "2A.Rule of construction.- In the application of this Act to any Part B State, any reference to an enactment not in force in that State shall be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force in that State."
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 6--> In section 27 of the said Act, -- (i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :-- "(1) Every person who, on such date as may be fixed by the Central Government in this behalf by notification in the Official Gazette (hereinafter in this section referred to as ' the qualifying date'), is not less than twenty-one years of age and who has realised in the cantonments for a period of not less than six months immediately preceding the qualifying date shall, if not otherwise disqualified, be entitled to be enrolled as an elector. Explanation.- When any place is declared a cantonments for the first time, or when any local area is first included in a cantonments, residence in the place or area comprising the cantonments on the aforesaid date shall be deemed to be residence in the cantonments for the purpose of this sub-section."; (ii) in sub-section (2), -- (a) for the words "aforesaid date' the words "qualifying date" shall be substituted; (b) clause (ii) shall be omitted.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 7--> Clause (b) of section 29 of the said Act shall be omitted.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 8--> Clause (c) of section 31 of the said Act shall be omitted.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 9--> Notwithstanding anything contained in section 15 of the said Act, the elected members of every Cantonments Board holding office immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to hold office until the date of the notification of the election of their successors under sub-section (7) of section 13 of the said Act.
Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1950_Section 10--> (1) The Cantonment Laws (Extension and Amendment) Ordinance, 1950 (XVIII of 1950) is hereby repealed. (2) If immediately before the 19th day of June, 1950, there was in force in any of the Part B States any law corresponding to the Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, 1923 , (VI of 1923), or the Cantonments Act, 1924 ( II of 1924), such corresponding law is hereby repealed. (3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any power conferred by or under such corresponding law shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under the Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, 1923 , or the Cantonments Act, 1924 , as the case may be, as if those Acts were in force in the State on the day on which such thing was done or action was taken. 
