Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section Preamble--> An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to central duties of excise and to salt. WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to central duties of excise on goods manufactured or produced in 1 2 certain parts of India and to salt; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 for "British India". Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "the Provinces".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944; (2) It extends to the whole of India 1 ; (3) It shall come into force on such 2 date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" omitted by Act 41 of 1954 , Section 2 and Schedule 28th February, 1944, see Notification No.III-D, dated the 26th February, 1944, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1944, p.293.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "broker" or "commission agent" means a person who in the ordinary course of business makes contracts for the sale or purchase of excisable goods for others; (b) "Central Excise officer" means any officer of the Central Excise Department, or any person (including an officer of the State Government) invested by the Central Board of Revenue with any of the powers of a Central Excise officer under this Act; (c) "curing" includes wilting, drying, fermenting and any process for rendering an unmanufactured product fit for marketing or manufacture; (d) "excisable goods" means goods specified in the First Schedule as being subject to a duty of excise and includes salt; (e) " factory" means any premises, including the precincts thereof, wherein or in any part of which excisable goods other than salt are manufactured, or wherein or in any part of which any manufacturing process connected with the production of these goods is being carried on or is ordinarily carried on; 1 (f) "manufacture" includes any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product; and (i) in relation to tobacco includes the preparation of cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, biris, cigarette or pipe or hookah tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, and (ii) in relation to salt, includes collection, removal, preparation, steeping, evaporation, boiling, or any one or more of these processes, the separation or purification of salt obtained in the manufacture of saltpetre, the separation of salt from earth or other substance so as to produce alimentary salt, and the excavation or removal of natural saline deposits or efflorescence; and the word "manufacturer" shall be construed accordingly and shall include not only a person who employs hired labour in the production or manufacture of excisable goods, but also any person who engages in their production or manufacture on his own account if those goods are intended for sale; (g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (h) "sale" and "purchase", with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions, mean any transfer of the possession of goods by one person to another in the ordinary course of trade or business for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration; (i) "saltpetre" includes rasi, sajji, and all other substances manufactured from saline earth, and kharinun and every form of sulphate or carbonate of soda; (j) "salt factory" includes- (i) a place used or intended to be used in the manufacture of salt and all embankments, reservoirs, condensing and evaporating pans, buildings and waste places situated within the limits of such place as defined from time to time by the Collector of Central Excise; (ii) all drying grounds and storage platforms and storehouses appertaining to any such place; (iii) land on which salt is spontaneously produced; and a "private salt factory" is one not solely owned or not solely worked by the Central Government; 2 (k) "wholesale dealer" means a person who buys or sells excisable goods wholesale for the purpose of trade or manufacture, and includes a broker or commission agent, who, in addition to making contracts for the sale or purchase of excisable goods for others, stocks such goods belonging to others as an agent for the purpose of sale. Clause (ee), Inserted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, omitted by Act 41 of 1954, Section 2 and Schedule Clause (jj), Inserted by the A.O.l950, omitted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section ll and Schedule IV.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 3--> (1) There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be prescribed duties of excise on all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured in 1 India and a duty on salt manufactured in, or imported by land into, any part of 2 India as, and at the rates, set forth in the First Schedule. 3 (1A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all excisable goods other than salt which are produced or manufactured in India by, or on behalf of, the Government of 4 a State (other than a Union territory) and used for the purposes of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on behalf of, that Government, or of any operations connected with such trade or business as they apply in respect of goods which are not produced or manufactured by any Government. (2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, for the purpose of levying the said duties, tariff values of any articles enumerated, either specifically or under general headings, in the First Schedule as chargeable with duty ad valorem and may alter any tariff values for the time being in force. (3) Different tariff values may be fixed for different classes or descriptions of the same article. Substituted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, for "the States". Substituted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, for "the States". Inserted by Act 45 of 1951 .s.6. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.3) Order, l956, for "a Part A State or a part B State".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 3A--> Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960. Prior to the amendment the text read as "Emergency power of Central Government to increase duties of excise. (1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in session, the Central Government is satisfied that in respect of any excisable goods the duty of excise leviable thereon should be increased and that circumstances exist which render it necessary that immediate action should be taken, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct an amendment of the First Schedule to be made so as to provide for an increase in the duty of excise leviable: Provided that such increase shall not in the aggregate be more than fifty per cent.of the duty of excise fixed by an Act of Parliament as being leviable on the goods for the time being. (2) Every such notification shall be laid before Parliament within seven days of its reassembly after the date of the notification and the Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the notification is so laid before it; and, if Parliament makes any modification in the notification or directs that the notification should cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder. (3) Where, under any notification issued under this section the duty of excise leviable on any excusable goods is increased, for so long as the notification is in force there shall be levied and collected in respect of any like goods when imported into India as an addition to and in the same manner as the duty of customs leviable thereon under the First Schedule to the Indian Tariff Act, 1934 , an amount which is equivalent to the additional duty of excise leviable in pursuance of any such notification. (4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that any notification approved by Parliament, whether with or without modifications, may be rescinded by the Central Government at any time by notification in the Official Gazette. (5) This section shall cease to have effect on the thirty-first day of December, 1957, but such cesser shall not affect the continuance of any notification approved by Parliament and in operation at the time of such cesser.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 4--> Where under this Act, any article is chargeable with duty at a rate dependent on the value of the article, such value shall be deemed to be- (a) the wholesale cash price for which an article of the like kind and quality is sold or is capable of being sold at the time of the removal of the article chargeable with duty from the factory or any other premises of manufacture or production for delivery at the place of manufacture or production, or if a wholesale market does not exist for such article at such place, at the nearest place where such market exists, or (b) where such price is not ascertainable, the price at which an article of the like kind and quality is sold or is capable of being sold by the manufacturer or producer, or his agent, at the time of the removal of the article chargeable with duty from such factory or other premises for delivery at the place of manufacture or production, or if such article is not sold or is not capable of being sold at such place, at any other place nearest thereto. Explanation.- In determining the price of any article under this section, no abatement or deduction shall be allowed except in respect of trade discount and the amount of duty payable at the time of the removal of the article chargeable with duty from the factory or other premises aforesaid. Substituted by Act 15 of 1955 , Section 24, for the former section.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 5--> Rep.by The Taxation Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1954 (41 of 1954), s.2 (2) and Sch.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 6--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, provide that, from such date as may be specified in the notification, no person shall, except under the authority and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted under this Act, engage in- (a) the production or manufacture or any process of the production or manufacturer of 1 any specified goods included in the First Schedule or of saltpetre or of any specified component parts or ingredients of such goods or of specified containers of such goods, or (b) the wholesale purchase or sale (whether on his own account or as a broker or commission agent) or the storage of 2 any specified goods included in the First Schedule. Subs by Act 18 of 1956 , Section 33, for "any specified excisable goods". Substituted by Act 18 of 1956 , Section 33, for "any excisable goods specified in this behalf in Part A of the Second Schedule".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 7--> Every licence under section 6 shall be granted for such area, if any, for such period, subject to such restrictions and conditions, and in such form and containing such particulars, as may be prescribed.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 8--> From such date as may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, no person shall, except as provided by rules made under this Act, have in his possession 1 any goods specified in the Second Schedule in excess of such quantity as may be prescribed for the purposes of this section as the maximum amount of such goods or of any variety of such goods which may be possessed at any one time by such a person. Substituted by Section 34, ibid., for "any excisable goods specified in this behalf in Part B of the Second Schedule".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 9--> Whoever commits any of the following offences, namely:- (a) contravenes any of the provisions of a notification issued under section 6 or of section 8, or of a rule made under clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 37; (b) evades the payment of any duty payable under this Act; (c) fails to supply any information which he is required by rules made under this Act to supply, or (unless with a reasonable belief, the burden of proving which shall be upon him, that the information supplied by him is true) supplies false information; (d) attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, any of the offences mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of this section; shall, for every such offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 10--> Any Court trying an offence under this Chapter may order the forfeiture to Government of any goods in respect of which the Court is satisfied that an offence under this Chapter has been committed, and may also order the forfeiture of any receptacles, packages or coverings in which such goods are contained and the animals, vehicles, vessels or other conveyances used in carrying the goods, and any implements or machinery used in the manufacture of the goods.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 11--> In respect of duty and any other sums of any kind payable to the Central Government under any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, the officer empowered by the Central Board of Revenue to levy such duty or require the payment of such sums may deduct the amount so payable from any money owing to the person from whom such sums may be recoverable or due which may be in his hands or under his disposal or control, or may recover the amount by attachment and sale of excisable goods belonging to such person; and if the amount payable is not so recovered he may prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from the person liable to pay the same and send it to the Collector of the district in which such person resides or conducts his business and the said Collector, on receipt of such certificate, shall proceed to recover from the said person the amount specified therein as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 12--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any of the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 , relating to the levy of and exemption from customs duties, drawback of duty, warehousing, offences and penalties, confiscation, and procedure relating to offences and appeals shall, with such modifications and alterations as it may consider necessary or desirable to adapt them to the circumstances, be applicable in regard to like matters in respect of the duties imposed by section 3.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 13--> (1) Any Central Excise officer duty empowered by the Central Government in this behalf may arrest any person whom he has reason to believe to be liable to punishment under this Act. (2) Any person accused or reasonably suspected of committing an offence under this Act or any rules made thereunder, who on demand of any officer duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf refuses to give his name and residence, or who gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to believe to be false, may be arrested by such officer in order that his name and residence may be ascertained.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 14--> (1) Any Central Excise officer duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf shall have power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary either to give evidence or to produce a document or any other thing in any inquiry which such officer is making for any of the purposes of this Act.A summons to produce documents or other things may be for the production of certain specified documents or things or for the production of all documents or things of a certain description in the possession or under the control of the person summoned. (2) All persons so summoned shall be bound to attend either in person or by an authorised agent, as such officer may direct; and all persons so summoned shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject respecting which they are examined or make statements and to produce such documents and other things as may be required. Provided that the exemptions under sections 132 and 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be applicable to requisitions for attendance under this section. (3) Every such inquiry as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a "judicial proceeding" within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code .
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 15--> All officers of Police and Customs and all officers of Government engaged in the collection of land revenue, and all village officers are hereby empowered and required to assist the Central Excise officers in the execution of this Act.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 16--> Every owner or occupier of land, and the agent of any such owner or occupier, in charge of the management of that land, if contraband excisable goods are manufactured thereon, shall in the absence of reasonable excuse be bound to give notice of such manufacture to a Magistrate, or to an officer of the Central Excise, Customs, Police, or land Revenue Department, immediately the fact comes to his knowledge.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 17--> Any owner or occupier of land or any agent of such owner or occupier in charge of the management of that land, who wilfully connives at any offence against the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder shall for every such offence be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 18--> All searches made under this Act or any rules made thereunder and all arrests made under this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, l898 , relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 19--> Every person arrested under this Act shall be forwarded without delay to the nearest Central Excise officer empowered to send persons so arrested to a Magistrate, or, if there is no such Central Excise officer within a reasonable distance, to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police-station
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 20--> The officer-in-charge of a police-station to whom any person is forwarded under section 19 shall either admit him to bail to appear before the Magistrate having jurisdiction, or in default of bail forward him in custody to such Magistrate.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 21--> (1) When any person is forwarded under section 19 to a Central Excise officer empowered to send persons so arrested to a Magistrate, the Central Excise officer shall proceed to inquire into the charge against him. (2) For this purpose the Central Excise officer may exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the same provisions as the officer- in-charge of a police-station may exercise and is subject to under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 , when investigating a cognizable case: Provided that- (a) if the Central Excise officer is of opinion that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the accused person, he shall either admit him to bail to appear before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody to such Magistrate; (b) if it appears to the Central Excise officer that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion against the accused person, he shall release the accused person on his executing a bond, with or without sureties as the Central Excise officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required before the Magistrate having jurisdiction, and shall make a full report of all the particulars of the case to his official superior.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 22--> Any Central Excise or other officer exercising powers under this Act or under the rules made thereunder who- (a) without reasonable ground of suspicion searches or causes to be searched any house, boat or place; (b) vexatiously and unnecessarily detains, searches or arrests any person; (c) vexatiously and unnecessarily seizes the moveable property of any person, on pretence of seizing or searching for any article liable to confiscation under this Act; (d) commits, as such officer, any other act to the injury of any person, without having reason to believe that such act is required for the execution of his duty; shall, for every such offence, be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. Any person wilfully and maliciously giving false information and so causing an arrest or a search to be made under this Act shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 23--> Any Central Excise officer who ceases or refuses to perform or withdraws himself from the duties of his office, unless he has obtained the express written permission of the Collector of Central Excise, or has given to his superior officer two month's notice in writing of his intention or has other lawful excuse, shall on conviction before a Magistrate be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to three months' pay, or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 24--> When any excisable goods are carried by sea in any vessel other than a vessel of the burden of three hundred tons and upwards, the owner and master of such vessel shall each be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 25--> Nothing in section 24 applies to- (a) any excisable goods covered by a permit granted under rules made under this Act; (b) any excisable goods covered by a pass granted by any officer whom the Central Board of Revenue may appoint in this behalf; (c) such amount of excisable goods carried on board any vessel for consumption by her crew or by the passengers or animals (if any) on board as the Central Board of Revenue may from time to time exempt from the operation of section 24.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 26--> When any officer empowered by the Central Board of Revenue, to act under this section has reason to believe, from personal knowledge or from information taken down in writing, that any excisable goods are being carried, or have within the previous twenty-four hours been carried, in any vessel so as to render the owner or master of such vessel liable to the penalties imposed by section 24, he may require such vessel to be brought-to and thereupon may- (a) enter and search the vessel; (b) require the master of the vessel to produce any documents in his possession relating to the vessel or the cargo thereof; (c) seize the vessel if the officer has reason to believe it liable to confiscation under this Act, and cause it to be brought with its crew and cargo into any port in 1 India; and (d) where any excisable goods are found on board the vessel search and arrest without a warrant any person on board the vessel whom he has reason to believe to be punishable under section 24. Substituted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, for "the States".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 27--> Any master of a vessel refusing or neglecting to bring-to the vessel or to produce his papers when required to do so by an officer acting under section 26, and any person obstructing any such officer in the performance of his duty, may be arrested by such officer without a warrant, and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 28--> (1) Every vessel (including all appurtenances) in which any excisable goods are carried so as to render the owner or master of such vessel liable to penalties imposed by section 24, the cargo on board such vessel and the excisable goods in respect of which an offence under this Act has been committed shall be liable to confiscation on the orders of the officer empowered in this behalf by the Central Government. (2) Whenever any Customs officer is satisfied that any article is liable to confiscation under this section he may seize such article, and shall at once report the seizure to his superior officer for the information of the officer empowered to order confiscation under sub-section (1) and such officer may, if satisfied on such report or after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, that the article so seized is liable to confiscation, either declare it to be confiscated, or impose a fine in lieu thereof not exceeding the value of the article.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 29--> Any offence punishable under section 24 or section 27 may be deemed to have been committed within the limits of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate of any place where the offender is found, or to which, if arrested under section 26 or section 27, he may be brought.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 30--> The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt the carriage of excisable goods within any local limits or in any class of vessels from the operation of this Chapter, and, by like notification, again subject such carriage to the operation of this Chapter.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 31--> The proprietor of a private salt factory who has by virtue of a sanad granted by 1 the Government or any former Government, a special and permanent right to manufacture salt, or to excavate or collect natural salt, shall on application made in accordance with the rules made under this Act be entitled to a licence for such purpose and to the annual renewal thereof, unless on a breach of the provisions of this Act, his licence has been cancelled by an officer duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "the British"
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 32--> Every proprietor of a private salt-work, other than a private salt factory, to which section 31 applies, of which, under the provisions of section 17 of the Bombay Salt Act, 1890 , the proprietor was entitled on application to a licence to manufacture or to excavate or collect natural salt at such factory, shall continue to be entitled, on application made in accordance with the rules made under this Act, to a licence for such purpose and to the annual renewal thereof, unless on a breach of the provisions of this Act his licence has been cancelled by an officer duly empowered by the Central Government in this behalf: Provided that the Collector of Central Excise may at any time withdraw or withhold a licence from the proprietor of any such salt factory, if no salt has been manufactured, excavated or collected in such salt factory for the three years ending on the thirtieth day of June last preceding the date of his order, or, with the previous sanction of the Central Board of Revenue, if such salt factory has not produced, on an average, during the said three years, at least five thousand maunds of salt per annum.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 33--> Where by the rules made under this Act anything is liable to confiscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation or penalty may be adjudged- (a) without limit, by a Collector of Central Excise; (b) up to confiscation of goods not exceeding five hundred rupees in value and imposition of penalty not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees, by an Assistant Collector of Central Excise: Provided that the Central Board of Revenue may, in the case of any officer performing the duties of an Assistant Collector of Central Excise, reduce the limits indicated in clause (b) of this section, and may confer on any officer the powers indicated in clause (a) or (b) of this section
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 34--> Wherever confiscation is adjudged under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the officer adjudging it shall give the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as the officer thinks fit.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 35--> (1) Any person deeming himself aggrieved by any decision or order passed by a Central Excise officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder may, within three months from the date of such decision or order, appeal therefrom to the Central Board of Revenue, or, in such cases as the Central Government directs, to any Central Excise officer not inferior in rank to an Assistant Collector of Central Excise and empowered in that behalf by the Central Government.Such authority or officer may thereupon make such further inquiry and pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, altering or annulling the decision or order appealed against: Provided that no such order in appeal shall have the effect of subjecting any person to any greater confiscation or penalty than has been adjudged against him in the original decision or order. (2) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall, subject to the power of revision conferred by section 36, be final.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 36--> The Central Government may, on the application of any person aggrieved by any decision or order passed under this Act or the rules made thereunder by any Central Excise officer or by the Central Board of Revenue, and from which no appeal lies, reeves or modify such decision or order.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 37--> (1) The Central Government may make 1 rules to carry into effect the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may- (i) provide the assessment and collection of duties of excise, the authorities by whom functions under this Act are to be discharged, the issue of notices requiring payment, the manner in which the duties shall be payable, and the recovery of duty not paid; (ii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions, or subject to such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit, the production or manufacture, or any process of the production or manufacture, of excisable goods, or of any component parts or ingredients or containers thereof, except on land or premises approved for the purpose; (iii) prohibit absolutely, or with such exceptions, or subject to such conditions as the Central Government thinks fit, 2 the transit of excisable goods from any part of 3 India to any other part thereof; (iv) regulate the removal of excisable goods from the place where produced, stored or manufactured or subjected to any process of production or manufacture and their transport to or from the premises of a licensed person, or a bonded warehouse, or to a market; (v) regulate the production or manufacture, or any process of the production or manufacture, the possession, storage and sale of salt, and so far as such regulation is essential for the proper levy and collection of the duties imposed by this Act, of any other excisable goods, or of any component parts or ingredients or containers thereof; (vi) provide for the employment of officers of the Government to supervise the carrying out of any rules made under this Act; (vii) require a manufacturer or the licensee of a warehouse to provide accommodation within the precincts of his factory or warehouse for officers employed to supervise the carrying out of regulations made under this Act and prescribe the scale of such accommodation; (viii) provide for the appointment, licensing, management and supervision of bonded warehouses and the procedure to be followed in entering goods into and clearing goods from such warehouses; (ix) provide for the distinguishing of goods which have been manufactured under licence, of materials which have been imported under licence, and of goods on which duty has been paid, or which are exempt from duty under this Act; (x) impose on persons engaged in the production or manufacture, storage or sale (whether on their own account or as brokers or commission agents) of salt, and, so far as such imposition is essential for the proper levy and collection of the duties imposed by this Act, of any other excisable goods, the duty of furnishing information, keeping records and making returns, and prescribe the nature of such information and the form of such records and returns, the particulars to be contained therein, and the manner in which they shall be verified; (xi) require that excisable goods shall not be sold or offered or kept for sale in 4 India except in prescribed containers, bearing a banderol, stamp or label of such nature and affixed in such manner as may be prescribed; (xii) provide for the issue of licenses and transport permits and the fees, if any, to be charged therefor: Provided that the fees for the licensing of the manufacture and refining of salt and saltpetre shall not exceed, in the case of each such licence, the following amounts, namely:-  Rs. Licence to manufacture and refine saltpetre and to separate and purify salt in the process of such manufacture and refining. 50 Licence to manufacture saltpetre 2 Licence to manufacture sulphate of soda (Kharinun) by solar heat in evaporating pans. 10 Licence to manufacture sulphate of soda (kharinun) by artificial heat 2 Licence to manufacture other saline substances 2 (xiii) provide for the detention goods, plant, machinery or material, for the purpose of exacting the duty, the procedure in connection with the confiscation, otherwise than under section 10 or section 28, of goods in respect of which breaches of the Act or rules have been committed, and the disposal of goods so detained or confiscated; (xiv) authorise and regulate the inspection of factories and provide for the taking of samples, and for the making of tests, of any substance produced therein, and for the inspection or search of any place or conveyance used for the production, storage, sale or transport of salt, and so far as such inspection or search is essential for the proper levy and collection of the duties imposed by this Act, of any other excisable goods; (xv) authorise and regulate the composition of offences against, or liabilities incurred under this Act or the rules made thereunder; (xvi) provide for the grant of a rebate of the duty paid on goods which are exported out of India or shipped for consumption on a voyage to any y port outside India; 5 (xvii) exempt any goods from the whole or any part of the duty imposed by this Act; (xviii) define an area no point in which shall be more than one hundred yards from the nearest point of any place in which salt is stored or sold by or on behalf of the Central Government, or of any factory in which saltpetre is manufactured or refined, and regulate the possession, storage and sale of salt within such area; (xix) define an area and any other place in which salt is manufactured, and regulate the possession, storage arid sale of salt within such area; (xx) authorise the Central Board of Revenue or Collectors of Central Excise appointed for the purposes of this Act to provide, by written instructions, for supplemental matters arising out of any rule made by the Central Government under this section (3) In making rules under this section, the Central Government may provide that any person committing a breach of any rule shall, where no other penalty is provided by this Act, be liable to a penalty not exceeding two thousand rupees and that any article in respect of which any such breach is committed shall be confiscated. For such rules, see Gazette of India, 1939, Part I, p.509; Gazette of India, 1944, Part I.p.355; Gazette of India, 1945, Part I, pp.441 and 609. The words "the bringing of excisable goods into India from the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or" omitted by Act 41 of 1954, Section 2 and Schedule Substituted by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, for " the States". Subs by Act 25 of 1950 , Section 11 and Schedule IV, for "the States". Proviso to Clause (xvi) omitted by Act 49 of 1957 , Section 2
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 38--> All rules made and notifications issued under this Act shall made and issued by publication in the Official Gazette.All such rules and notifications shall thereupon have effect as if enacted in this Act: Provided that every such rule shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 1 2 Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more sessions, and if before the expiry of that period, 3 4 Parliament makes any modification in the rule or directs that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be. The words "each of the Chambers of" omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 . Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "the Central Legislature". Substituted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948 for certain former words. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "that Legislature".
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 39--> Rep.by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1947 (2 of 1948), s.2 and Sch.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section 40--> (1) No suit shall lie against the Central Government or against any officer of the Government in respect of any order passed in good faith or any act in good faith done or ordered to be done under this Act. (2) No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall be instituted for any thing done or ordered to be done under this Act after the expiration of six months from the accrual of the cause of action or from the date of the act or order complained of.
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944_Section Sch.1-->  THE SCHEDULE (See section 3) Item No. Description of goods Rate of duty {Subs. by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35, for the original item.} 1. KEROSENE  Kerosene, that is to say, any mineral oil (excluding mineral colza oil and turpentine substitute) which has a flame height of eighteen millimetres or more and is ordinarily used as an illuminant in oil burning lamps. Three annas per imperial gallon. Explanation I. "Mineral oil" means an oil consisting of a single liquid hydrocarbon or a liquid mixture of hydrocarbons (except for associated impurities) derived from petroleum, coal, shale, peat or any other bituminous substance and includes any similar oil produced by synthesis or otherwise.  Explanation II.-- "Flame height" shall be determined in the apparatus known as the smoke point lamp in the manner prescribed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 2. MATCHES  "Match" includes a firework in the form of a match; and, where a match-stick has more heads than one capable of being ignited by striking, each such head shall be deemed to be a match.  {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957. s. 13, for the former sub items (I) to (4).}  [(1) Matches, in boxes containing 60 matches on an average, if manufactured in a factory whose output  (i) exceeds five hundred thousand gross of boxes per year; Four rupees and ninety naye paise per gross of boxes. (ii) does not exceed five hundred thousand gross of boxes per year, but exceeds one hundred gross of boxes per day; Four rupees and seventy five naye paise per gross of boxes. (iii) does not exceed one hundred gross of boxes per day, but exceeds twenty-five gross of boxes per day; Four rupees and fifty naye paise per gross of boxes. (iv) does not exceed twenty-five gross of boxes per day. Four rupees and thirty naye paise per gross of boxes. (2) Matches, in boxes containing 40 matches on an average, if manufactured in a factory whose output  (i) exceeds five hundred thousand gross of boxes per year; Three rupees and twenty five naye paise per gross of boxes. (ii) does not exceed five hundred thousand gross of boxes per year, but exceeds one hundred gross of boxes per day; Three rupees and fifteen naye paise per gross of boxes. (iii) does not exceed one hundred gross of boxes per day, but exceeds twenty-five gross of boxes per day; Two rupees and ninety-five naye paise per gross of boxes. (iv) does not exceed twenty-five gross of boxes per day. Two rupees and eighty naye paise per gross of boxes. (3) Matches in boxes containing on an average not more than twelve matches of the type known as "Bengal Lights". One rupee per gross of boxes. (4) All other matches . Eighty naye paise for every 1,440 matches or fraction thereof]. 3. MECHANICAL LIGHTERS---  "Mechanical Lighter" means any mechanical or chemical contrivance for causing ignition which is portable and which operators by producing a spark or flame whether by itself or when brought into contact with gas, and includes a mechanical lighter issued from a factory in an incomplete state or requiring for its completion the addition of a flint. Three rupees per lighter. {Subs. by Act 18 of 1956,s.35, for the former item.} 4. MOTOR SPIRIT  Motor spirit, that is to say,  (i) Any mineral oil (excluding crude mineral oil) which has its flashing point below seventy- six degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and which, either by itself or in admixture with any other substance, is suitable for use as fuel for internal combustion engines; and {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957, s.13, ,for " fifteen annas per imperial gallon".}[One rupee and twenty-five naye paise per imperial gallon.]] (ii) Power alcohol, that is say, ethyl alcohol of any grade (including such alcohol when denatured or otherwise treated), which, either by itself or in admixture with any other substance, is suitable for being used as aforesaid.  Explanation I.-- The expression "mineral oil" has the meaning assigned to it in Explanation I to item No.I.  Explanation II. "Flashing point" shall be determined in accordance with the tests specified in this behalf in the rules made under the Petroleum Act, 1934. 5. SALT  "Salt" includes swamp salt, spontaneous salt, and salt or saline solutions made or produced from any saline substance or from salt earth. {Certain words omitted by Act 48 of 1952,s.3 and Sch. II} The rate fixed annually by {Subs. by the A.O.1950 for "Act of the Central Legislature".} [a Central Act]. 6. SILVER. Three annas and seven and one fifth paise per ounce troy. 7. STEEL INGOTS. {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957, s. 13, for "Four rupees per ton".} [ Fourty rupees per ton.] 8. SUGAR, PRODUCED IN A FACTORY ORDINARILY USING POWER IN THE COURSE OF PRODUCTION OF SUGAR  "Sugar" means any form of sugar containing more than ninety per cent. of sucrose:  (1) Sugar other than Khandsari or Palmyra. {Subs. by s.13, ibid., for " Five rupees and ten annas per cwt.".} [Eleven rupees and twenty-five naye paise per cwt.] (2) Khandsari sugar that is to say, sugar in the manufacture of which neither a vacuum pan nor a vacuum evaporator is employed. Eight annas per cwt. (3) Palmyra sugar that is to say, sugar manufactured from jaggery obtained by boiling the juice of the palmyra palm. {Subs. by Act 23 of 1951, s.7, for the former item (w.e.f 1-3-1951).} Nil. 9. TOBACCO  "Tobacco" means any form of tobacco, whether cured or uncured, and whether manufactured or not, and includes the leaf, stalks and stems of the tobacco plant, but does not include any part of a tobacco plant while still attached to the earth.  I. Unmanufactured tobacco  (1) if flue cured and used in the manufacture of cigarettes containing Per lb. (i) more than 60 per cent. weight of imported. tobacco Seven rupees and eight annas (ii) more than 40 per cent. but not more than 60 per cent. weight of imported tobacco. Five rupees. (iii) more than 20 per cent. but not more than 40 per cent. weight of imported tobacco. Three rupees and eight annas. (iv) 20 per cent. or less than 20 per cent. weight of imported tobacco. Two rupees and eight annas. (v) no imported tobacco. One rupee. (2) if flue cured and used for the manufacture of smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes. Seven rupees and eight annas. (3) if flue cured and not otherwise specified. One rupee. (4) if other than flue cured and used for the manufacture of (a) cigarettes or (b) smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes-- {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957, s.13, for "Nine annas".}[Seventy-five naye paise per lb.] {Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub-items I (5) and I (6).} [(5) if not flue cured and not actually used for the manufacture of (a) cigarettes or (b) smoking mixtures for pipes and cigarettes--- Fifty naye paise per lb. (i) stems of tobacco larger than 1/4" and stems of tobacco not larger than 1/16" in size;  (ii) dust of tobacco;  {Subs. by Act 11 of 1958, s. 17, for sub-item I (5) (iii).} [(iii) granule ('rawa') of tobacco capable of passing through a sieve having 16 uniform circular or square apertures per linear inch;]  (iv) tobacco cured in whole leaf form and packed or tied in bundles, hanks or bunches or in the form of twists or coils. {Explanation omitted by s. 17, ibid.}  (6) if other than flue cured and not otherwise specified. One rupee per lb. (7) if used for agricultural purposes. Nil. (8) Stalks One anna. II. Manufactured tobacco---  (1) Cigars and cheroots of which the value--- Per hundred (i) exceeds Rs. 30 a hundred. Twelve rupees. (ii) exceeds Rs. 25 a hundred but does not exceed Rs. 30 a hundred. Ten rupees. (iii) exceeds Rs.20 a hundred but does not exceed Rs.25 a hundred. Eight rupees. (iv) exceeds Rs.15 a hundred but does not exceeds Rs.20 a hundred. Six rupees. (v) exceeds Rs.10 a hundred but does not exceed Rs.15 a hundred. Four rupees. (vi) exceeds Rs.5 a hundred but does not exceed Rs.10 a hundred. Two rupees (vii) exceeds Rs.2-8-0 a hundred but does not exceed Rs. 5 a hundred. One rupee. (viii) exceeds Rs.1-4-0 a hundred but does not exceed Rs.2-8-0 a hundred. Eight annas. (ix) exceeds 14 annas a hundred but does not exceed Rs. 1-4-0 a hundred. Four annas {Subs. by Act 15 of 1955, s. 25, for the former sub item.} [(2) Cigarettes of which the value--- Per thousand (i) exceeds Rs. 50 a thousand. Twenty-one rupees and eight annas. (ii) exceeds Rs.35 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs. 50 a thousand. Nineteen rupees . (iii) exceeds Rs.30 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs.35 a thousand. Ten rupees and eight annas. (iv) exceeds Rs.25 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs. 30 a thousand. Nine rupees and eight annas. (v) exceeds Rs.20 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs.25 a thousand. Six rupees and eight annas. (vi) exceeds Rs.15 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs.20 a thousand. Five rupees and eight annas. (vii) exceeds Rs.10 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs. 15 a thousand. Two rupees and twelve annas. (viii) exceeds Rs. 7-8-0 a thousand, but does not exceed Rs. 10 a thousand. One rupee and eight annas. (ix) does not exceed Rs. 7-8-0 a thousand. One rupee. {Ins. by Act 34 of 1954, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-7-1954).} [(3) Biris in the manufacture of which any process has been conducted with the aid of machines operated with or without the aid of power. Three rupees per thousand. 10. TYRE  "Tyre" means a pneumatic tyre in the manufacture of which rubber is used, and includes the inner tube and the outer cover of such a tyre.  (1)Tyres for motor vehicles . . . 30 per cent. ad vaIorem. (2) All other tyres 15 per cent. ad valorem. 11. VEGETABLE PRODUCT  "Vegetable product" means any vegetable oil or fat which, whether by itself or in admixture with any other substance, has by hydrogenation or by any other process been hardened for human consumption. {Subs. by Act 20 of 1948. s 7, for "Five rupees".}[Seven rupees] per cwt. {Subs. by Act 15 of 1955, s. 25, for the former items 12 and 12A.} 12. COTTON FABRICS  "Cotton fabrics" mean all varieties of fabrics manufactured either wholly or partly from cotton, and include dhoties, sarees, chadars, bed-sheets, bed spreads, counter-panes and table-cloths, but do not include any such fabric  (a) if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of wool;  (b) if it contains 50 per cent. or more by weight of rayon artificial silk; or  (c) if manufactured on a handloom.  (1) Cotton fabrics, superfine  that is to say, fabrics in which the average count of yarn is 48s or more. {Subs. by Act 58 of 1956, s. 2, for "Two annas and six pies per square yard".}.[Six annas per square yard.] (2) Cotton fabrics, fine  that is to say, fabrics in which the average count of yarn is 35s or more but is less yard than 48s. {Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "One anna per square yard".}[Six annas per square yard.] (3) Cotton fabrics, medium  that is to say, fabrics in which the average count of yarn is 17s or more but is less than 35s. {Subs. by Act 58 of 1956, s. 2, for "One anna per square yard.] [Four annas per square yard.] {Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the former sub-item (4).}  (4) Cotton fabrics, coarse  that is to say, fabrics in which the average count of yarn in less than 17s. Four annas per square yard. Explanation I.- "Count" means count of grey yarn.  Explanation II.For the purpose of determining the average count of yarn, the following rules shall apply, namely:  (a) Yarn used in the borders or selvedges shall be ignored.  (b) Far multiple-fold yarn, the count of the basic single yarn shall be taken and the number of ends per inch in the reed or the number of picks per inch, as the case may be, shall be multiplied by the number of plies in the yarn.  {Ins. by Act 49 of 1957, s. 3.} [(bb) In the case of fabrics not manufactured from cotton and other yarns, the other yarns shall, for the aforesaid purpose, be deemed to be cotton yarn.]  (c) The average count shall be obtained by applying the following formula, namely:  (Count of warp X number of ends per inch in the reed) + (Count of weft X number of picks per inch).  (Number of ends per inch in the reed) + (Number of picks per inch),  the result being rounded off, whenever necessary, by treating any fraction which is one-half or more as one, and disregarding any fraction which is less than one-half.  Explanation III.For the purposes of this item, "staple fibre" shall not be deemed to be rayon or artificial silk. 12A. RAYON OR ARTIFICIAL SILK FABRICS  "Rayon or artificial silk fabrics" include all varieties of fabrics manufactured either wholly or partly from rayon or artificial silk, but do not include any such fabric Six pies per square yard. (i) if it contains 40 per cent. or more by weight of wool;  (ii) if it contains cotton and less than 60 per cent. by weight of rayon or artificial silk;  (iii) if it contains no cotton and less than 40 per cent. by weight of wool and less than 40 per cent. by weight of rayon or artificial silk;  (iv) if manufactured on a handloom;  {Cl. (v) omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} Explanation.For the purposes of this item, "staple fibre" shall not be deemed to be rayon or artificial silk.  {Ins. by Act 15 of 1955, s. 25.} 12B. WOOLLEN FABRICS  "Woollen fabrics" mean all varieties of fabrics manufactured wholly of wool or which contain 40 per cent. or more by weight of wool, and include blankets, lohis, rugs and shawls, but do not include any such fabric Six and a quarter per cent. ad valorem. (i) if manufactured on a handloom;  (ii) if manufactured by or on behalf of the same person in one or more factories in which less than five powerlooms in all are installed.  {Added by the Indian Finance Act, 1944, s. 5 and Sch. I } 13. COFFEE cured  "Coffee" means the seed of the coffee tree (coffee), whether with or without husk, whether cured or uncured, but does not include the seed while still attached to the tree. {Subs. by Act 20 of 1948, s. 7, for " Two annas".}[Three annas per lb.] {Subs. by Act 15 of 1953, s. 2, for the former item (w.e.f. 15-4-1953)} 14. TEA  "Tea" includes all varieties of the product known commercially as tea, and also includes green tea.  (1) Package tea, that is to say, tea packed in any kind of container containing not more than 60 lbs. net of tea  (i) if, before being so packed, duty has not paid thereon under sub-item (2) of this item. Three annas per lb. net. (ii) if, before being so packed, duty has not been paid thereon under sub-item (2) of this item. Four annas per lb. net. (2) Tea not otherwise specified. One anna per lb. net. { Items 15 to 17 ins. by Act 17 of 1954, s. 8.} 15. CEMENT, all varieties {Subs. by Act 11 of 1958, s. 17, for "Twenty rupees per ton".} [Twenty-four rupees per ton.] {Subs. by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35 for the former item.} 16. "SOAP" means all varieties of the product known commercially as soap  1. Soap, in or in relation to the manufacture of which any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power or of steam for heating  (1) Soap, household and laundry  (i) plain bars of not less than one pound in weight. Rupees five and annas four per cwt. (ii) other sorts . Rupees six and annas two per cwt. (2) Soap, toilet Rupees fourteen per cwt. (3) Soap, other than household and laundry or toilet. Rupees fourteen per cwt. II. Soap, in or in relation to the manufacture of which no process has been carried on with the aid of power or of steam for heating  (i) plain bars of not less than one pound in weight. Rupees four and annas eight per cwt. (ii) other sorts . Rupees five and annas four per cwt. 17. FOOTWEAR,  produced in any factory, including the precincts thereof whereon fifty or more workers are working, or were working on any day of the preceding twelve months, and in any part of which a manufacturing process is being carried on with the aid of power or is ordinarily so carried on, the total` equivalent of such power exceeding two horsepower. Ten per cent. ad valorem. "Footwear" includes all varieties of footwear, whether known as boots, shoes, sandals chappals, or by any other name.  {Items 18 to 22 ins. by Act 15 of 1955, s. 25.} 18. ELECTRIC FANS,  including air circulators but excluding those which are designed for use in an industrial system as parts indispensable for its operation and have been given for that purpose some special shape or quality which would not be essential for their use for any other purpose, and parts of such electric fans  (1) Table, cabin, carriage, pedestal and air circulator fans, not exceeding sixteen inches. Five rupees per fan. (2) All other fans . Ten rupees per fan. (3) Parts of fans above, the following, namely, compete motors, stators and rotors  (a) if designed for use in respect of any fan falling within sub-item (1)  (i) complete motors Three rupees per motor. (ii) Stators . . One rupee and eight annas per stator. (iii) Rotors . One rupee and eight annas per rotor. (b) if designed for use in respect of any fan falling within sub-item (2)  (i) complete rnotors . Six rupees per motor. (ii) Stators . Three rupees per stator. (iii) Rotors . Three rupees per rotor. 19. ELECTRIC LIGHTING BULBS AND FLUORESCENT LIGHTING TUBES  (1) Vacuum and gas-filled bulbs  (i) not exceeding 100 watts, and train lighting bulbs. One anna per bulb. (ii) exceeding 100 watts but not exceeding 300 watts, and engine headlight bulbs. Four annas per bulb. (iii) exceeding 300 watts . Eight annas per bulb. (2) Fluorescent tubes Four annas per foot. (3) Bulbs not otherwise specified . . Four annas per bulb. 20. ELECTRIC BATTERIES AND PARTS  THEREOF  (1) Dry Ten per cent. ad valorem. (2) Storage Ten per cent. ad valorem. (3) Parts of storage batteries, the following, namely, containers, covers and plates. Ten per cent. ad valorem. {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957, s. 13, for the former item 21.} 21. PAPER,--  all sorts (including pasteboard, millboard, strawboard and eardboard), in or in relation to the manufacture of which any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power  (1) blotting, toilet, traget, tissue other than cigarette tissue, teleprinter, typewriting, manifold, bond, art paper, chrome paper, tubsized paper, cheque paper, stamp paper, cartridge paper and parchment. Fifteen naye paise per lb. (2) cigarette tissue . Thirty naye paise per lb. (3) printing and writing paper, other sorts. Ten naye paise per lb. (4) packing and wrapping paper, other sorts. Ten naye paise per lb. (5) millboard and strawboard other than corrugated board. Five naye paise per lb. (6) duplex and triplex board Ten naye paise per lb. (7) pulp board . Ten naye paise per lb. (8) manilla and corrugated board . . Ten naye paise per lb. (9) coated board including art, chrome and board for playing cards). Fifteen naye paise per lb. (10) paper and paper board, all sorts, otherwise specified. Fifteen naye paise per lb. 22. PIGMENTS, COLOURS, PAINTS, ENAMELS VARNISHES, BLACKS AND CEL LULOSE LACQUERS---  1. (1) Pigments, colours, paints and enamels {The words "all sorts" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.}  (i) Zinc oxide, red lead, white lead and titanium dioxide white. Eight rupees per cwt. (ii) Aluminium paste Four annas per lb. (2) Dry colours, namely, the following lead in chromes and brunswick green. Seven rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of dry colours exceeds 100 tons per year; Five rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of dry colours exceeds 10 tons but does not exceed 100 tons per year; and Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of dry colours does not exceed 10 tons per year. (3) Water paints  (i) Dry distemper including cement-based water paints. Seven rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints exceeds 100 tons per year; Five rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} does not exceed 100 tons per year; and {The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid.} (ii) Oil-bound distemper Twelve rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints exceeds 100 tons per year; Nine rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} does not exceed 100 tons per year; and {The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid.}. (iii) Water pigment finishes for leather One rupee and eight annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints exceeds 100 tons per year; One rupee and two annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} does not exceed 100 tons per year; and {The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid.} (iv) Plastic emulsion paint Three rupees and eight annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints exceeds 100 tons per year; Two rupees and eight annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted byAct 18 of 1956, s. 35.} does not exceed 100 tons per year; and{The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid.} (4) Oil paints and enamels  (i) Tinting paste (Blue) Four annas per lb. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels exceeds 1,000 tons per year; Three annas per lb. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s.35.} does not exceed 1,!00 tons per year; and {The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of water paints does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35 ibid.} (ii) Stiff paints and ready-mixed paints sold by weight. Seven rupees per cwt. the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels exceeds 1,000 tons per year; Five rupees per cwt. in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s.35.} does not exceed 1,000 tons per year; and {The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid}. (iii) Ready-mixed paints and enamels sold by volume. Two rupees per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels exceeds 1,000 tons per year;One rupee and eight annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of oil paints and enamels {The words "exceeds 50 tons but" omitted by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} does not exceed 1,000 tons per year; and {"The words "Nil in the case of a manufacturer {The Explanation omitted by s. 35, ibid.} whose output of oil paints and enamels does not exceed 50 tons per year" omitted by s. 35, ibid.} (5) Pigments, colours, paints and enamels not otherwise specified. Seven rupees per cwt. if sold by weight; Two rupees per imperial gallon if sold by volume. II. Varnishes and blacks  (i) Varnishes . One rupee per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of varnishes and blacks exceeds 1,00,000 imperial gallons per year; Twelve annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of varnishes and blacks exceeds 12,000 imperial gallons but does not exceed 1,00,000 imperial gallons per year; and Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of varnishes and blacks does not exceed 12,000 imperialgallons per year. (ii) Bituminous and coal tar blacks Ten annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose out of varnishes and blacks exceeds 1,00,000 imperial gallons per year; Seven annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output of varnishes and blacks exceeds 12,000 imperial gallons but does not exceed 1,00,000 imperial gallons per year; and Nil in the case of a manufacturer whose output of varnishes and blacks does not exceed 12,000 imperialgallons per year. III. Cellulose lacquers  (i) Nitrocellulose lacquers, clear and pigmented. Five rupees per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output exceeds 24,000 imperial galleons per year; Three rupees and twelve annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output exceeds 4,000 but does not exceed 24,000 imperial gallons per year; Three rupees and two annas per imperial gallon in the case of a manufacturer whose output does notexceed 4,000 imperial gallons per year. (ii) Nitrocellulose ancillaries. Three annas per lb. if sold by weight; Three rupees and two annas per imperial gallon if sold by volume. {Items 23, 24 and 25 ins. by Act 18 of 1956, s. 35.} 23. VEGETABLE NON-ESSENTIAL OILS, all sorts, in or in relation to the manufacture of which any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power. {Subs. by Act 26 of 1957, s. 13, for "Rupees seventyper ton". } [One hundred and twelve rupees per ton.] 24. REFINED DIESEL OILS  and vaporizing oil, that is to say, any mineral oil (excluding mineral cloza oil and turpentine substitute) which has its flashing point at or above seventy-six degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and satisfies either of the following requirements: {Subs. by s.13, ibid., "Four annas per imperial gallon". } [Forty naye paise per imperial gallon.] (i) the oil has a flame height of ten millimetres or more but less than eighteen millimetres; or  (ii) the oil has a flame height of less than ten millimetres but has a viscosity of less than one hundred seconds by Redwood I Viscometer at one hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and contains less than one quarter of one per cent. by weight of any bituminous substance.  Explanation.The expressions "mineral oil", "flame height" and "flashing point" have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Explanation I and 1I to item No. 1 and in Explanation 1I to item No. 4. 25. INDUSTRIAL FUEL OILS  (a) Diesel oil, not otherwise specified , that is to say, any mineral oil which {Subs. by s. l3, ibid., for "Rupees thirty per ton".}[Forty rupees per ton.] (i) has a flame height of less than, ten millimetres;  (ii) contains one quarter of one per cent. or more by weight of any bituminous substance; and  (iii) possesses a viscosity of less than one hundred seconds by Redwood I Viscometer at one hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer.  (b) Furnace oil, that is to say, any mineral oil which Rupees fifteen per ton. (i) has a flame height of less than ten millimetres;  (ii) contains one quarter of one per cent. or more by weight of any bituminous substance; and  (iii) possesses a viscosity of one hundred seconds or more by Redwood Viscometer at one hundred degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer.  Explanation.The expressions "mineral oil" and "flame height" have the meanings respectively assigned to them in Explanations I and II to item No.  { Ins. by Act 76 of 1956, s. 3} 26. RAYON and synthetic fibres and yarn. Rupee one and annas eight per lb. 27. MOTOR CARS, including taxi cabs, driven by internal combustion engines, with a carrying capacity of not more than nine persons, but excluding Rupees three thousand per car. (i) 4-cylinder cars of not more than 20 horse power by Royal Automobile Club (R.A.C.) rating.  (ii) 6-cylinder cars of not more than 16 horse power by Royal Automobile Club (R.A.C.) rating. 
