Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012.
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 2--> In section 2 of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (i), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- '(ia) "specified north-eastern region" means the area comprising of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and the tribal areas of Assam referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution; (ib) "State seats", in relation to a Central Educational Institution, means such seats, if any, out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or faculty as are earmarked to be filled from amongst the eligible students of the State in which such institution is situated;'.
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 3--> In section 3 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that the State seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution situated in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be governed by such reservation policy for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified, by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State where such institution is situated: Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central Educational Institution and the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes exceed the percentage specified under clause (1) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Tribes exceed the percentage specified under clause (ii) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes taken together exceed the sum of percentages specified under clauses (i) and (ii), but such seats are- (a) less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, the total percentage of the seats required to be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under clause (iii) shall be restricted to the extent such sum of percentages specified under clauses (i) and (ii) falls short of fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength; (b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, in that case no seat shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under clause (iii) but the extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Central Educational Institutions in the specified north-eastern region.".
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 4--> In section 4 of the principal Act, clause (a) shall be omitted.
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 5--> In section 5 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "number of such seats available", the words "number of such seats available or actually filled, whichever be less," shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "three years", the words "six years" shall be substituted.
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012_Section 6--> In section 6 of the principal Act, for the figures "2007", the figures "2008" shall be substituted. V. K. Bhasin, Secretary to the Govt. of India. 
