Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section Preamble--> 
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 These instructions are supplemental to, and must be read in conjunction with the Central Excise Act, 1944 , and Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules'). Only the general provisions and procedures applicable to the 'Manufactured Products' have been incorporated in this Manual. These instructions are applicable throughout India and should not be departed from, without the previous approval of the Commissioner, who will, where necessary, obtain Board's sanction for the deviations. 1.2 The Commissioner or Board, under Rule 32 of the said Rules are empowered to issue written instructions providing for any supplemental matters arising out of the said Rules. Such instructions may, where the Commissioner considers absolutely essential, permit temporary deviation from the standing instructions. However, such instructions should be at once communicated to the Board and unless of purely local interest, they will normally, if approved, be subsequently incorporated in this Manual. Additional/Joint Commissioners, Deputy/Assistant Commissioner and Superintendent of Central Excise will be primarily responsible in their jurisdiction for the proper observance of the procedures and checks prescribed in this Manual, and the other instructions of the Board. They should refer any doubtful point for clarification to their immediate superior.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Central Excise duty is an indirect tax levied on goods manufactured in India. The tax is administered by the Central Government under the authority of Entry 84 of the Union List (List 1) under Seventh Schedule read with Article 226 of the Constitution of India . 1.2. The Central Excise duty is levied in terms of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the rates of duty, ad valorem or specific, are prescribed under the Schedule I and II of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985The taxable event under the Central Excise law is 'manufacture' and the liability of Central Excise duty arises as soon as the goods are manufactured. The Central Excise Officers are also entrusted to collect other types of duties levied under Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act , Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act , Cess etc. 1.3 Till 1969, there was physical control system wherein each clearance of manufactured from the factory was done under the supervision of the Central Excise Officers. Introduction of Self-Removal procedure was a watershed in the excise procedures. Now, the assessees were allowed to quantify the duty on the basis of approved classification list and the price list and clear the goods on payment of appropriate duty. 1.4 In 1994, the gate pass system gave way to the invoice-based system, and all clearances are now effected on manufacturer's own invoice. Another major change was brought about in 1996, when the Self-Assessment system was introduced. This system is continuing today also. The assessee himself assesses his Tax Return and the Department scrutinises it or conducts selective audit to ascertain correctness of the duty payment. Even the classification and value of the goods have to be merely declared by the assessee instead of obtaining approval of the same from the Department. 1.5 In 2000, the fortnightly payment of duty system was introduced for all commodities, an extension of the monthly payment of duty system introduced the previous year for Small Scale Industries. 1.6 In 2001, new Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 have replaced the Central Excise Rules, 1944 with effect from 1 st July, 2001. Other rules have also been notified namely, CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 , Central Excise Appeal Rules, 2001 etc. With the introduction of the new rules several changes have been effected in the procedures. The new procedures are simplified. There are less numbers of rules, only 32 as compared to 234 earlier. Classification declaration and Price declarations have also been dispensed with, the CENVAT Declaration having been earlier dispensed with in 2000 itself.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 For the administration of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules') manufacturers' of excisable goods or any person who deals with excisable goods, with some exceptions, are required to get the premises registered with the Central Excise Department before commencing business.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 In accordance with Rule 9 of the said Rules and Notifications issued under rules 18 and 19 of the said Rules, as the case may be, the following category of persons are required to register with jurisdictional Central Excise Officer in the Range office having jurisdiction over his place of business/factory - (i) Every manufacturer of excisable goods (including Central/State Government undertakings or undertakings owned or controlled by autonomous corporations) on which excise duty is leviable . (ii) Persons who desire to issue CENVATABLE invoices under the provisions of the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 . (iii) Persons holding private warehouses. (iv) Persons who obtain excisable goods for availing end-use based exemption notification. (v) Exporters manufacturing or processing export goods by using duty paid inputs and intending to claim rebate of such duty or by using inputs received without payment of duty and exporting the finished export goods. 2.2 Separate registration is required in respect of separate premises except in cases where two or more premises are actually part of the same factory (where processes are interlinked), but are segregated by public road, canal or railway-line. The fact that the two premises are part of the same factory will be decided by the Commissioner of Central Excise based on factors, such as - (1) Interlinked process - product manufactured/produced in one premise are substantially used in other premises for manufacture of final products. (2) Large number of raw materials are common and received/proposed to be received commonly for both/all the premises (3) Common electricity supplies. (4) There is common labour /work force (5) Common administration/ works management. (6) Common sales tax registration and assessment (7) Common Income Tax assessment (8) Any other factor as may be indicative of inter-linkage of the manufacturing processes. This is neither an exhaustive list of indicators nor each indicator is necessarily in each case. The Commissioner has to decide the issued from case to case. 2.3 Separate Registration is required for each depot, godown etc. in respect of persons issuing Cenvat invoices. However, in the case liquid and gaseous products, availability of godown should not be insisted upon. 2.4 Registration Certificate may be granted to minors provided they have legal guardians i.e. natural guardians or guardians appointed by the Court, as the case may be, to conduct business on their behalf.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC), by Notification No. 36/2001-CE (NT) dt.26.6.2001, has exempted specified categories of persons/premises from obtaining registration, as follows - (i) Persons who manufacture the excisable goods, which are chargeable to nil rate of excise duty or are fully exempt from duty by a notification. (ii) Small scale units availing the slab exemption based on value of clearances under a notification. However, such units will be required to give a declaration (Annexure-1)once the value of their clearances touches Rs.90 lakhs. (iii) In respect of ready-made garments, the job-worker need not get registered if the principal manufacturer undertakes to discharge the duty liability. (iv) Persons manufacturing excisable goods by following the warehousing procedure under the Customs Act, 1962 subject to the following conditions: (a) the said excisable goods and any intermediary or by-product including the waste and refuse arising during the process of manufacture of the said goods under the Customs Bond are either destroyed or exported out of the country to the satisfaction of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or the Deputy Commissioner of Customs, in-charge of the Customs Bonded Warehouse; (b) the manufacturer shall file a declaration in the specified form annexed hereto in triplicate for claiming exemption under this notification; (c) no drawback or rebate of duty of excise paid on the raw materials or components used in the manufacture of the said goods, shall be admissible. (v) The person who carries on wholesale trade or deals in excisable goods (except first and second stage dealer, as defined in Cenvat Credit Rules, 2001 ). (vi) A Hundred per cent Export Oriented Undertaking, or a unit in Free Trade Zone or Special Economic Zone licensed or appointed, as the case may be, under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 . (vii) Persons who use excisable goods for any purpose other than for processing or manufacture of goods availing benefit of concessional duty exemption notification. 3.2 The Drugs and Cosmetics Rule 1945 recognises the concept of loan licence in the manufacture of P or P medicines. As a result the system of accepting the said concept is still prevalent under excise law. In such cases the procedure prescribed under Notification no.36/2001-CE (NT) dated 26/6/2001 has to be followed. The principal manufacturer who has under-taken to comply with the procedural formalities will have to maintain separate accounts in respect of goods manufactured on his own account and goods manufactured on behalf of the loan licensee. However, the principal manufacturer has to aggregate the clearances made by him together with clearances made on behalf of the loan licensees with regard to eligibility as well as exemption limit. In other words the clearances made on behalf of the loan licensee have to be clubbed with that of the principal manufacturer (by the manufacturer from one or more factories and from the factory by one or more manufacturers).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Under authority of Section 6 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 read with rule 9 of the said Rules, the CBEC has prescribed the format for Application as well as Registration Certificate. The application has to be made to the jurisdictional Central Excise Officer. 4.2 The application for registration should be signed by - (i) The applicant or by his authorised agent having general power of attorney. The Range Officer shall have power to call the original documents to verify 'power of attorney'. Such document shall not be retained by the Range Officer but be returned immediately after verification. (ii) In case of unregistered partnership firms, by all partners. (iii) In case of registered partnerships, by the managing partner or other partner so authorised in the Partnership Deed. 4.3 When a manufacturer who is exempt from the registration is required to file a declaration, the same will be filed with the Assistant Commissioner of the jurisdictional Central Excise Division.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The manufacturers who are exempted from the operation of Rule 9 by virtue of Notification no. 36/2001-Central Excise (NT) dt.26/6/2001 have to file a declaration with the Assistant Commissioner of the respective Divisions. Such declarations received from the assessee will have to be filed separately, tariff head-wise in the Divisional office. The details should be entered in the register to be maintained in the Divisional office in the enclosed proforma. Genuine delay in filing the required declaration need not be viewed seriously and the assessee may be allowed to enjoy the exemption from the operation of Rule 9 as well as from the payment of duty provided the conditions stipulated in the respective exemption Notifications have been duly fulfilled.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 Under the section 6 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 read with rule 9 of the said Rules, the CBEC, by notification, has specified the format for Application as well as Registration Certificate (Annexure 2 and 3, respectively). The format of application is common to manufacturers, private warehouse holders, and registered dealers issuing CENVATABLE invoice and persons who obtain goods by availing end-use based exemptions, including manufacturers or processors of export goods. 6.2 In the application for Registration, the applicant has to submit ground plan. Under the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 , there is no stipulation of any specified marked area for storing the finished goods (traditionally called the 'bonded store room'). Thus there is no need for marking such area in the ground plan. The only verification that the jurisdictional officers should conduct that the premises mentioned in the application for registration, are genuine and are intended for the purposes for which the application has been made. Assessee, however, shall be responsible for proper storage and accountal of goods manufactured in his factory at any point of time. 6.3 The verification shall be made by the Inspector or Superintendent of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the premises (Range Officer) in respect of which the applicant has sought registration, within 5 working days of the receipt of application. As per the rules/notification, the registration certificate shall be issued within 7 working days. The Range Officer (Superintendent) either himself or through the Sector Officer (Inspector) shall verify whether the declared address and operations (intended) are genuine and the declarations made in the application are correct. If found in order, he will endorse the correctness of the same and append his dated signature on the office copies of the Registration application and the copy of the application with the registrant. If any deviations or variations are noticed during the verification, the same should be got corrected. Any major discrepancy, such as fake address, non-existence of any factory etc. shall be reported in writing to the Divisional Officer within 3 working days and the Range Officer shall initiate action to safeguard revenue.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 All Registrations of each type should be numbered in a single series for the Range as a whole , commencing with serial no. 1 for each calendar year . The issuing authority should make every effort to complete all formalities and grant the Registration Certificate within 7 days of receipt of application in his office. Every Registration Certificate granted / issued by the registering authority shall be under his signature. He should also countersign the ground plan accompanying the Registration Certificate. The Registration Certificate and the duplicate copy of the plan should be returned to the registered person who shall exhibit his Registration Certificate or a certified copy thereof in a conspicuous part of the registered premises. The Registering authority in a permanent file shall keep the application as well as the ground plan. 7.2 In case of partnership firms, the Registration Certificate which is granted in the name of the said firm [which is registered or not under the Partnership Act] shall contain the names of all the partners. 7.3 The Registration Certificate or a certified copy thereof is required to be exhibited in a conspicuous part of the registered premises.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 Once Registration Certificate is granted, it has a permanent status unless it is suspended or revoked by the appropriate authority in accordance with law or is surrendered by the person or company concerned. If the person who applies for Registration with the department is an individual, then the Certificate would cease to be valid in the event of the death of the said individual. Any other person(s) who wish(es) to continue with the operations for which the deceased person was registered, he would then have to apply afresh. (See notification no. 35/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26th June, 2001.). 8.2 In the case of limited company, death of a director would not affect the status of Registration, since Registration is issued to the body corporate recognizing the same as a legal person. In the case of partnership firms also normally no difficulty would arise with regard to succession, since the surviving partners will continue either in the same name or with the change of name the business. However, in the case of proprietary business when the proprietor dies, the successor in estate has to apply for a fresh Registration. Ordinarily fresh Registration would be issued to the person who happens to be in the actual possession of the business. However, grant of fresh Registration to the successor in estate shall not be regarded that the Government has accepted the said person as the legal successor/heir to the deceased.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Registration Certificate may be surrendered as per application in prescribed form in Notification No. 35/2001-CE (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 [Annexure-4]. This is subject to compliance of the statutory obligations under the excise law, particularly the payment of all dues to the Government including the duty on finished excisable goods lying in the factory/warehouse. In case of mis-declaration regarding compliance, the surrender of registration shall not be valid. 9.2 Registration Certificate may be cancelled by the Registering authority when the registered person voluntarily surrenders the Certificate due to closure of business. 9.3 As per rule 17 of the said Rules Registration Certificate may be revoked or suspended by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, if the holder or any person under his employ has committed a breach of any condition of the Central Excise Act or the rules made thereunder or has been convicted of an offence under Section 161 read with Section 109 or Section 116 of the Indian Penal Code [45 of 1860]. 9.4 Suspension or revocation of the Registration is a heavy punishment since it amounts to suspending or stopping the business and could result in grave damage to the person concerned. Hence this penalty should be resorted to only in cases where there is persistent misdemeanor involving serious loss of revenue. 9.4 Though technically, a Registration Certificate can be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority, the power to revoke or suspend the Registration is vested only with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner. In case of suspension or revocation, the Range Officer should refer the matter to the Deputy/Assistant commissioner who will pass appropriate orders after affording a reasonable opportunity. Appeal against this order lies with the Commissioner[Appeals] and this should be specifically spelt out in the order -in-original of the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner(Preamble).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 When a Registration Certificate is reported to be lost, the registered person shall submit a written application to the Range Officer for issuing a DUPLICATE REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. The same shall be issued after making necessary entries in the record or logs in the computer data. An importer who intends to issue invoice under Cenvat Credit Rules, 2001 , will have to Register himself in the manner specified earlier.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Central Excise assessees and registered dealers have to obtain New Excise Control Code Number [New ECC Number]. The Board had issued Circular No.493/59/99-CX 12th November, 1999 wherein the components of New ECC Number has been explained and the procedure to obtain the same has been specified. This Number is based on the principles of 'Common Business Identifier' and will ultimately replace the existing registration number. New ECC Number shall be used for revenue accounting, validation of documents (e.g. CENVAT invoices), inter-agency coordination and for creation of data warehouse. Hence, all persons requiring registration must obtain the New ECC Number. Currently, he said Number has to be quoted on the TR-6 Challans covering deposit of Central Excise duties, Additional duties, Cess and other dues to the Government.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The new ECC number is alphanumeric. The first part is the 10-Character PAN issued by Income-tax authorities to the concerned person to whom the New ECC Number is to be allotted. The second part comprises of a fixed 2-Character alpha-code, which is as follows - Category Code (1) Central Excise manufacturers (Including registered warehouses) XM (2) Registered Dealers XD 2.2 This is followed by 3-Character numeric-code - 001, 002, 003.....etc. In case , a manufacturer, registered with the Central Excise Department, has only one factory /dealer's premise/warehouse, the last three characters will be "001". If there are more than one factories/warehouses/dealer's premises of such a person having common PAN for all such factories/warehouses/dealer's premises, the last 3 character of the new ECC would be "001, 002, 003.... etc. Examples: (1) Where the concerned person has only one factory: New ECC Number will be - PAN + XM + 001 Suppose PAN is ABCDE1234H, the New ECC Number will be - ABCDE1234H XM 001 (2) Where the concerned person has more than one factories, say 3 factories, having PAN as aforesaid, then the New ECC Number will be: ABCDE1234H XM 001 ABCDE1234H XM 002 ABCDE1234H XM 003 (3) Where the concerned person has one factory and is also registered as dealer, having PAN as aforesaid, then the New ECC Number will be: ABCDE1234H XM 001 (for Factory) ABCDE1234H XD 001 (for Dealer) 2.3 Since each factory have to apply for allotment of New ECC Number, a centralised allotment is done at the level of Division (where all the factories fall within the jurisdiction of the same Division) or at the level of Commissionerate (where all the factories fall within the jurisdiction of the same Commissionerate) or at the level of Director General of Inspection, Customs & Central Excise, New Delhi (where the factories fall within the jurisdiction of different Commissionerates). The same principle is applied to the allotment of New ECC Number to Dealers.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Every person registered with Central Excise is required to obtain the New ECC Number. For obtaining the same the following procedure will be followed - (i) Application will be made in the prescribed form (in duplicate) given in Annexure-5 along with a certified copy of PAN (letter/card issued by the Income Tax Department), to the Jurisdictional Range Superintendent of Central Excise. (ii) A dated acknowledgement of the application will be given immediately by the Range Office. An entry will be made in a register (serially numbered) indicating name of the concerned person , address, Range and the existing ECC Number and date of forwarding of application, New ECC Number (to be filled when allotted). The Entry Number (Receipt Number) have to be endorsed on the Acknowledgement Slip. (iii) All applications are to be forwarded to Divisional Office. Where the applications are complete in all respects and there is only one factory of the PAN-holder or more than one factory within the jurisdiction of the said Division, New ECC Number is to be allotted within 3 working days and the letter has to be issued by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner to the concerned persons (applicants) in the form given in Annexure-6. One copy of the letter has to be forwarded to the concerned Pay & Accounts Officer (PAO). (iv) Where there are more than one factories of the PAN-holder falling outside the jurisdiction of a Division, all such applications are to be forwarded to the Commissionerate Headquarters within 3 working days of the receipt of the application from the Range Office. (v) A Cell constituted in the Headquarters processes the application. Where all the factories fall within the jurisdiction of the Commissionerate, the New ECC Number is to be issued by the Commissionerate and is to be intimated to the concerned persons (applicants) individually in the format given in Annexure-III and a copy is forwarded to the concerned PAO. (vi) Where the factories of the PAN-holder fall in the jurisdiction of different Commissionerates, the applications are to be sent by the Commissioner to the Director General of Inspection, New Delhi within 3 working days of the receipt from the Division Office. DGI has also constituted a Special Cell to process such applications. The New ECC Number is to be allotted by DGI and intimated to the concerned persons in the format given in Annexure-4. A copy of these letters will also be forwarded to the concerned PAO. (vii) In the said application, the Location Code is to be filled in by the Range Office. After re-organisation of Commissionerates, the Directorate of Statistics & Intelligence has allocated revised location six digits Codes to all Range Offices. 3.2 It shall be compulsory for all the Central Excise assessees and dealers registered under the Central Excise Rules, 1944 to obtain PAN whether or not they pay Income-tax. The Income Tax Department has already been requested to allot PAN on priority basis to all Central Excise assessees and Registered Dealers.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The expressions 'assessment' and 'assessee' have been defined in the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules). "Assessment" includes self-assessment of duty made by the assessee and provisional assessment under rule 7 of the said Rules. "Assessee" means any person who is liable for payment of duty assessed or a producer or manufacturer of excisable goods or a registered person of a private warehouse in which excisable goods are stored and includes an authorized agent of such person. 1.2 Normally, duty is payable on removal of goods. Rule 4 of the said Rules provides that every person who produces or manufactures any excisable goods, or who stores such goods in a warehouse, shall pay the duty leviable on such goods in the manner provided in rule 8 of the said Rules or under any other law. No excisable goods, on which any duty is payable, shall be removed without payment of duty from any place, where they are produced or manufactured, or from a warehouse, unless otherwise provided. 1.3 An exception has been provided in the said rule 4 in respect of goods falling under Chapter 62 of the First Schedule to Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) produced or manufactured by a job worker. Such goods may be removed without payment of duty leviable thereon and the duty of excise leviable on such goods shall be paid by person who gets such goods, produced or manufactured on his account on job work as if such goods have been produced or manufactured by him, on the date of removal of such goods from his premises registered under rule 9. The payment of such duty may be secured by bond or otherwise. However, where such person has authorised the job worker to pay the duty leviable on such goods, the job worker shall pay such duty on the date of removal of such goods from his registered premises. 1.4 There is also an exception with respect to duty payment on molasses. Where molasses are produced in a khandsari sugar factory, the person who procures such molasses, whether directly from such factory or otherwise, for use in the manufacture of any commodity, whether or not excisable, shall pay the duty leviable on such molasses, in the same manner as if such molasses have been produced by the procurer. 1.5 For the purposes of the said rule 4, excisable goods manufactured in a factory and utilised, as such or after subjecting to any process, for the manufacture of any other commodity, in such factory shall be deemed to have been removed from such factory immediately before such utilisation.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Before each removal, whether outside the factory of manufacture or production or for captive consumption, duty has to be assessed on the excisable goods. The main ingredients of assessment are: (i) Classification and rate of duty: For determining the rate of duty, classification is prerequisite. Classification means the appropriate classification code which is applicable to the excisable goods in question under the First Schedule to Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986). There are Section Notes and Chapter Notes, in the Tariff which are helpful in determining the appropriate classification. In case of difficulties, there are "Interpretative Rules" in the said Act. There is large number of judicial pronouncements concerning classification, which have to be applied in relevant case. The said Tariff also prescribes the 'Tariff Rate of duty'. Some commodities may be subject to 'special duty of excise' prescribed under the Second Schedule to Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985Thus, a reference to the Second Schedule to Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 should also be made to see if the goods are covered there. However, duty chargeable is the 'effective rate'. Thus, if any exemption is available to any commodity, the same may be ascertained and the applicable rate of duty should be determined. If such exemption is subject to certain conditions, it shall be necessary to follow those conditions. Certain goods may also be subject to duty under some other Acts such as Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 or certain Cess. The manufacturer or owner of goods in a warehouse is liable to pay all such applicable duties on removal of excisable goods. (ii) Valuation: Where rate of duty is dependent on value of the goods ( ad valorem duty ), value has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of Central Excise Act, 1944 , as follows - (i) Value under section 4 including transaction value under this section (ii) Value based on retail sale price under section 4A. (iii) Tariff value fixed under Section 3. (iii) Quantity Removed: Where duty is on value, the total value is determined by multiplying unit value with the total quantity. The unit quantity of goods are also required in cases where duty is charged at specific rate.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 As per rule 6 of the said Rules a Central Excise assessee is himself (self-assessment) required to determine duty liability at the time of removal of excisable goods and discharge the same. In other words, the assessee should apply correct classification and value (where duty is ad valorem ) on the quantities being removed by him and indicate the same in the invoice (except assessee manufacturing cigarettes, in which case the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise has to assess the duty payable before removal by the assessee). 3.2 Assessee is also required to assess his return for a month and submit to the Range Office having jurisdiction over his factory within ten days of the succeeding month. They are also requited to submit 'CENVAT Return' for a month within five days of the succeeding month. A manufacturer availing exemption notification for Small Scale Industries is permitted to file his return of quarterly basis. Their returns have to be filed in the following frequency - Return for the quarter (for months) - By 20th day of the month First quarter - April, May, June - July Second quarter - July, August, September - October Third quarter -October, November, December - January Fourth quarter - January, February, March - April
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Date for determination of rate of duty and tariff value is prescribed in rule 5 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001The provision is, as follows - (1) The rate of duty or tariff value applicable to any excisable goods, other than khandsari molasses, shall be the rate or value in force on the date when such goods are removed from a factory or a warehouse, as the case may be. (2) The rate of duty in the case of khandsari molasses, shall be the rate in force on the date of receipt of such molasses in the factory of the procurer of such molasses. 4.2 If any excisable goods are used within the factory, 'the date of removal of such goods' shall mean the date on which the goods are issued for such use. 4.3 The rate of duty in the case of goods falling under Chapter 62 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986), produced or manufactured on job work, shall be the rate in force on the date of removal of such goods by the person referred to in sub-rule (3) of rule 4 from his premises registered under rule 9.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Central Excise duty is chargeable at the rates specified in the schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985The said schedule is divided into 20 sections and 96 Chapters. There are no Chapters with numbers 1,6,10,12 and 77. As such there are effectively 91 Chapters. Each Chapter is further divided into headings and sub-headings. In order to determine the applicable rate of duty in respect of a particular item, the positioning of that item under a particular head or sub-head is essential. The positioning of an item in the appropriate heading/sub-heading is called classification. The classification of an item is generally decided in view of how it is described in commercial parlance. However a deviation from this principle is made when the trade meaning or commercial nomenclature does not fit into the scheme of the statute.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1.The Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 incorporates five Rules of interpretation, which together provide necessary guidelines for classification of various products under the schedule. As regards the Interpretative Rules, the classification is to be first tested in the light of Rule 1. Only when it is not possible to resolve the issue by applying this Rule, recourse is taken to Rules 2,3 & 4 in seriatim. The provision of the individual Rule is as follows: (i) Rule 1 This rule provides that section and Chapter titles are only for the ease of reference and, therefore, do not have any legal bearing on the classification of goods, which is determined according to the terms of headings and relevant section or Chapter notes and according to the other interpretative rules if such headings or notes do not otherwise require. Thus goods are to be classified in terms of the heading and relative sections or Chapter notes without recourse to any interpretative rules. It is only when the goods cannot be classified on this basis, the assistance is to be sought from the interpretative rules. (ii) Rule 2(a) This rule provides classification of an article referred to in a heading, even if that article is incomplete or unfinished, or is presented in an unassembled or disassembled form. An important condition to be satisfied for classification in this manner is that in its incomplete or unfinished state, the article has the essential character of the complete of finished article. Some of the important aspects which are relevant in this regard are functional aspect, physical aspect and the degree of completion of the product. (iii) Rule 2(b) This rule relates to mixture or combination of materials or substances, and goods consisting of two or more materials or substances. According to this rule headings in which there is a reference to a material or substance also apply to that material or substance mixed or combined with other materials or substances. This rule does not apply where specific provisions exist in the headings or the sections or chapter notes excluding such classification. (iv) Rule 3 This rule lays down three steps for classifying the goods which are, prima facie, classifiable under several headings. The sequential order of the steps contemplated are - (a) most specific description; (b) essential character; and heading which occurs last in numerical order; This rule applies when goods are prima facie classifiable under 2 or more headings. In the first step, {Rule 3(a)} the general guidelines are that a description by name is more specific than the description by character and a description which identifies the goods clearly and precisely is more specific than the one which is less complete. The second step [Rule 3 (b)] relates only to mixtures, composite goods consisting of different materials or components and goods put up in sets. This rule finds applicability if rule 3(a) does not help. In all such cases the goods are to be classified as if they consist of material or components which gives them their essential character. When goods cannot be classified with reference to Rules 3(a) and 3(b), they are to be classified in terms of Rule 3(c)- in the heading which occurs last in numerical order among those which equally merit consideration. This is a fall back provision for resolving the matter when no heading can be regarded as providing a more specific description than the others and when it is not possible to identify the material or component which gives the concerned goods their essential character. (v) Rule 4 When goods cannot be classified in accordance with rules 1,2, & 3, then they are to be classified in a heading of a product, which is most akin to the goods in question. Kinship can, of course, depend on many factors such as description, character, purpose etc. (vi) Rule 5 This rule postulates that the classification of any product under a sub-heading is to be contemplated after the product concerned has been properly classified under its proper four digit Chapter heading. The classification in the sub-heading of a heading is determined mutatis mutandis in accordance with the principles applicable to classification in the four digit headings.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Section 37B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 empowers the Central Board of Excise & Customs to issue orders, instructions and directions, for the purpose of uniformity in the classification of goods or with respect to the levy of excise duties on such goods.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Value of the excisable goods has to be necessarily determined when the rate of duty is on ad-valorem basis. Accordingly, under the Central Excise Act, 1944 the following values are relevant for assessment of duty. Transaction value is the most commonly adopted method- (i) Transaction value under Section 4. (ii) Value determined on basis of maximum Retail Sale Price as per Section 4A. (iii) Tariff value under Section 3.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Section 4 of the Central Excise Act , as substituted by section 94 of the Finance Act, 2000 (No.10 of 2000),has come into force from the 1st day of July 2000. This section contains the provision for determining the Transaction value of the goods for purpose of assessment of duty. 2.2 For applicability of transaction value in a given case, for assessment purposes, certain essential requirements should be satisfied. If any one of the said requirement is not satisfied, then the transaction value shall not be the assessable value and value in such case has to be arrived at under the valuation rules notified for the purpose. The essential ingredients of a Transaction value are - (i) The goods are sold by an assessee for delivery at the time of place of removal. The term "place of removal" has been defined basically to mean a factory or a warehouse; (ii) The assessee and the buyer of the goods are not related; and (iii) The price is the sole consideration for the sale. 2.3 The definition of "transaction value" needs to be carefully taken note of as there is fundamental departure from the erstwhile system of valuation that was essentially based on the concept of 'Normal Wholesale Price', even though sales were effected at varying prices to different buyers or class of buyers from factory gate or Depots etc. had to be determined. 2.4 The new section 4 essentially seeks to accept different transaction values which may be charged by the assessee to different customers, for assessment purposes so long as these are based upon purely commercial consideration where buyer and the seller have no relationship and price is the sole consideration for sale. Thus, it enables valuation of goods for excise purposes on value charged as per commercial practices rather than looking for a notionally determined value. 2.5 Transaction value would include any amount which is paid or payable by the buyer to or on behalf of the assessee, on account of the factum of sale of goods. In other words, if, for example, an assessee recovers advertising charges or publicity charges from his buyers, either at the time of sale of goods or even subsequently, the assessee cannot claim that such charges are not to be included in the transaction value. The law recognizes such payment to be part of the transaction value that is assessable value for those particular transactions. Certain other elements which are included in the Transaction value are, as follows - (i) Receipts/recoveries or charges incurred or expenses provided for in connection with the manufacturing, marketing, selling of the excisable goods. In other words, whatever elements which enrich the value of the goods before their marketing and were held by Hon'ble Supreme court to be includible in "value" under the erstwhile section 4 would continue to form part of section 4 value even under new section 4 definition. (ii) If in addition to the amount charged as price from the buyer, the assessee recovers any other amount by reason of sale or in connection with sale, then such amount shall also form part of the transaction value. For example if assessee splits up his pricing system and charges a price for the goods and separately charges for packaging or warranty, the packaging charges will also form part of assessable value as it is a charge in connection with production and sale of the goods recovered from the buyer. In this context, it may be clarified that it is immaterial whether the warranty is optional or mandatory. Since the value can be different for different transactions, wherever warranty charges are paid or payable to the assessee, in those transactions warranty charges shall form part of the assessable value. In those transactions where warranty charges are not recovered, the question of including warranty charges in transaction value does not arise. (iii) Interest for delayed payments are a normal practice in industry. Interest under a financing arrangement entered between the assessee and the buyer relating to the purchase of excisable goods shall not be regarded as part of the assessable value provided that: (a) the interest charges are clearly distinguished from the price actually paid or payable for the goods; (b) the financing arrangement is made in writing; and (c) where required, assessee demonstrates that such goods are actually sold at the price declared as the price actually paid or payable. (iv) Discount of any type or description given on any normal price payable for any transaction will not form part of the transaction value for the goods, e.g. quantity discount for goods purchased or cash discount for the prompt payment etc. will therefore not form part of the transaction value. However, it is important to establish that the discount has actually been passed on to the buyer of the goods. The differential discounts extended as per commercial considerations on different transactions to unrelated buyers if extended can not be objected to and different actual prices paid or payable for various transactions are to be accepted. Where the assessee claims that the discount of any description for a transaction is not readily known but would be known only subsequently - as for example, year end discount - the assessment for such transactions may be made on a provisional basis. However, the assessee has to disclose the intention of allowing such discount to the department and make a request for provisional assessment. (v) The definition of transaction value mentions that whatever amount is actually paid or actually payable to the Government or the relevant statutory authority by way of excise, sale tax and other taxes, such amount shall be excluded from the transaction value. In other words, if any excise duty or other tax is paid at a concessional rate for a particular transaction, the amount of excise duty or tax actually paid at the concessional rate shall only be allowed to be deducted from price. (vi) As per commercial practice, the price for the goods charged, normally includes the cost of packing charges. However, at times separate charge may be billed for special packing, as per customer's requirements. Whereas in the context of erstwhile section 4 certain disputes often arose whether certain packing in relation to particular goods is secondary or primary and whether its value is to be added for assessment purposes, under the new section 4, such issues are no longer relevant. Any charges recovered for packing are obviously charges recovered in relation to the sale of the goods under assessment and will form part of the transaction value of the goods. In short, it is immaterial whether packing is ordinary or special. Whatever amount is charged from the buyer for packing and if not already included by the assessee in the price payable for the goods will be included while determining the transaction value of the goods. 2.6 Where the assessee includes all their costs incurred in relation to manufacture and marketing while fixing price payable for the goods and bills and collects an all inclusive price -as happens in most cases where sales are to independent customers on commercial consideration - the transaction price will generally be the assessable value. Nevertheless, there could be situations where the amount charged by an assessee does not reflect the true intrinsic value of goods marketed and total value split up into various elements like special packing charges, warranty charges, service charges etc. These cases would require to be scrutinised carefully to ensure that duty is paid on correct value. The definition of "transaction value" makes it clear that all the elements of cost which the assessee incurred till the sale/marketing as aforesaid, continue to be included in the assessable value even under new section 4. 2.7 The term "place of removal" has been defined in the same manner as was defined in the erstwhile section 4 prior to its amendment in 1996. If, therefore, the transaction value is with reference to delivery at the time and place of removal, such transaction value will be the assessable value.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 In those cases where any of the three requirements mentioned in para 2 above is missing, the assessable value shall be determined on the basis of the Central Excise Valuation (Determination of Price of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001 notified under Section 4(1)(b) by notification No. 45/2000-CE (NT), dated 30.6.2000. 3.2 Salient features of the new valuation rules are mentioned below- (i) If the assessee and the buyer are not related persons and the price is also the sole consideration for sale but only the delivery of goods is made by the assessee at a place other than the factory/warehouse, then the assessable value shall be the "transaction value" without the addition of the cost of transportation from the factory/warehouse upto the place of delivery. However, exclusion of cost of transportation is allowed only if the assessee has shown them separately in the invoice and the exclusion is permissible only for the actual cost so charged from his buyers. If the assessee has a system of pricing and sale at uniform prices inclusive of equated freight for delivery at factory gate or elsewhere, no deductions for freight element will be permissible. (ii) If the goods are not sold at the factory gate or at the warehouse but they are transferred by the assessee to his depots or consignment agents or any other place for sale, the assessable value in such case for the goods cleared from factory/warehouse shall be the normal transaction value of such goods at the depot, etc. at or about the same time on which the goods as being valued are removed from the factory or warehouse. It may be pertinent to take note of the definition of "normal transaction value" as given in the valuation rules. What it basically means is the transaction value at which the greatest aggregate quantity of goods from the depots etc. are sold at or about the time of removal of the goods being from the factory/warehouse. If, however, the identical goods are not sold by the assessee from depot/consignment agent's place on the date of removal from the factory/warehouse, the nearest date on which such goods were sold or would be sold shall be taken into account. In either case if there are series of sales at or about the same time, the normal transaction value for sale to independent buyers will have to be determined and taken as basis for valuation of goods at the time of removal from factory/warehouse. It follows from the Valuation Rules that in such categories of cases also if the price charges is with reference to delivery at a place other than the depot, etc. then the actual cost of transportation will not be taken to be a part of the transaction value and exclusion of such cost allowed on similar lines as discussed earlier, when sales are effected from factory gate/warehouse. (iii) As a measure of simplification, it has been decided to value goods which are captively consumed on cost construction method only as there have been disputes in adopting values of comparable goods. The assessable value of captively consumed goods will be taken at 115% of the cost of manufacture of goods even if identical or comparable goods are manufactured and sold by the same assessee. The concept of deemed profit for notional purposes has thus been done away with and a margin of 15% by way of profit etc. is prescribed in the rule itself for ease of assessment of goods used for captive consumption. (iv) In the case where price is not the sole consideration for the sale, but the other requirements of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Central Excise Act are satisfied, the value shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of rule 6 of the valuation rules. This provides for adding, to the transaction value the money value of any additional consideration flowing directly or indirectly from the buyer to the assessee. Such additional consideration would include the money value of goods and services provided free or at reduced cost by or on behalf of the buyer to the assessee. An Explanation has been added in the new rule only to remove any doubts with respect to its scope. (v) Where goods are sold through related persons, the transaction value is not applicable. The definition of related persons includes "inter-connected undertakings" as defined in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969The definition of inter-connected undertaking in the said Act is comprehensive and includes two or more under-takings which are inter-connected with each other in any of a number of ways such as if one owns or controls the other, or where the undertakings are owned by firm, or if such firms have one or more common partners, etc. A provision has been made in the Valuation Rules that even if the assessee and the buyer are 'inter-connected undertakings', the transaction value will be "rejected" only when they are "related" in the following manner: (a) They are relatives. (b) The buyer is a relative and a distributor of the assessee, or sub-distributor of such distributor. (c) They have a direct or indirect interest in the business of each other. In other cases, they will not be considered related. "Transaction value" could then form the basis of valuation provided other two conditions, namely, price is for delivery at the time and place of removal and the price is the sole consideration for sale are satisfied. If any of the two aforesaid conditions are not satisfied then, quite obviously, value in such cases will be determined under the relevant rule.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The practice being followed is to assess the price administered petroleum products like motor spirit, HSD, SKO (domestic) and LPG to duty on the ex-storage sale prices that are fixed by the Oil Coordination Committee (OCC) from time to time. The assessable value is the same irrespective of whether the administered petroleum products are sold at the refineries or through the marketing companies.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 For certain items the Government may fix a tariff value as per provisions of Section 3(3) of the Central Excise Act, 1944In such cases the assessment of duty shall be on the basis of the tariff value.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The value is based on maximum retail sale price in terms of Section 4A of the Central Excise Act, 1944This is applicable to notified commodities. The notification issued in this regard indicates the extent of abatement to be allowed for arriving at the assessable value for determination of amount of duty.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Provisional assessment is resorted to in the event the duty can not be determined at the point of clearance of the goods.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Wherever an assessee finds that final assessment is not possible, (in situations mentioned in rule 7 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) he will make a detailed request in writing to the Divisional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, indicating - (a) Specific grounds/reasons, and the documents or information's, for want of which final assessment cannot be made. (b) Period for which provisional assessment is required. (c) The rate of duty or the value or both, as the case may be, proposed to be applied by the assessee, for Provisional Assessment. (d) Undertakes to appear before the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise within 7 days or such date fixed by him, and furnish all relevant information and documents within the time specified by the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise in his order, so as to enable the proper officer to finalise the provisional assessment. 2.2 On receipt of the request, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise will examine it, if necessary, in consultation with the concerned Range Officer, to ascertain whether provisional assessment is necessary at all. If the reasons/ grounds are not sufficient, he may ask the assessee to appear before him on an appointed day and time, and if he is satisfied that provisional assessment is not necessary, he may pass a reasoned order rejecting the same and also ordering the rate of duty or the value, to be applied by the assessee. 2.3 Where the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is satisfied with the genuineness of the assessee's request he will issue a specific order directing provisional assessment clearly stating - (a) The grounds on which Provisional Assessment has been ordered. (b) The rate and /or value, as the case may be, at which duty has to be provisionally paid. (c) The amount of differential duty for which bond is to be executed covering the period, if any, during which assessee paid duty provisionally under the deeming provisions, after applying the rate and/ or value specified in (b) above. (d) The amount of security or surety as may be fixed by Assistant Commissioner keeping in view the instructions issued by the Board from time to time. 2.4 The assessee is required to mark the E.R.1 (monthly/quarterly return)and documents covered under Provisional Assessment as "PROVISIONALLY ASSESSED" vide Order No. ......... dated .............." . There is a declaration in E.R.1 where assessee have to mention the goods under 'provisional assessment'. 2.5 Notwithstanding 'self-assessment', all cases of provisional assessment has to be finalised by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, within a maximum period of 6 months. All the cases where provisional assessment cannot be finalised within 6 months must be submitted to Commissioner with the request letter of the assessee (through Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise) indicating the reasons for non-finalisation and amount of differential duty for future clearances, before the expiry of the above-said period. If the Commissioner is satisfied with the reasons, he may extend the period, or otherwise direct the method to be adopted for finalisation of the assessment. For extending the period beyond one year from the date of provisional assessment, the request letter of the assessee should be put up to the Chief Commissioner in the same manner through Commissioner with his comments. The time limit of finalising the provisional assessment shall be applicable even to cases ordered for provisional assessment prior to 1 st July, 2001. 2.6 Finalisation of provisional assessment means finalisation of an issue/ground and thereafter finalisation of each E.R.1s. The amount will be communicated to the assessee at the earliest. The amount of each differential duty shall be paid along with interest at the rate of twenty four percent per annum from the first day of the month succeeding the month for which such amount is determined, till the date of payment thereof. 2.7 In the event the assessee will be in a position to ascertain the duty himself. He may, pay the duty on his own at the earliest and in that case he will not have to incur interest on account of time taken by the Department to finalise assessment and communicate the amount. 2.8 Where any refund becomes due to the assessee, order shall be passed for such refund, but disbursement shall be subject to further verification about incidence of such duty. The assessee will be required to submit proof to the Assistant/deputy Commissioner of Central Excise that the duty incidence was borne by him (assessee). If the assessee fails to produce such proof/evidence, the Assistant/deputy Commissioner of Central Excise will pass an order for depositing the amount in Consumer Welfare Fund in the prescribed manner. Otherwise, the refund shall be give along with interest at the rate of fifteen percent per annum from the first day of the month succeeding the month for which such refund is determined, till the date of refund. 2.9 Though it is incumbent upon the assessee to ensure that the bond amount and corresponding securities are sufficient, the Divisional as well as the Range Officer will also keep a strict vigil on such cases with the help of 'Provisional Assessment Register'. 2.10 The Assistant/deputy Commissioner of Central Excise will be held responsible to ensure that bonds for proper amount i.e., 3 times of the estimated differential duty are taken, in case of general bonds and that these are backed by proper (25%) security/ bank guarantee of the bond amount. 2.11 The format of bond for provisional assessment has been specified in Notification No. 56/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 3.7.2001 (Annexure-7).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Rule 7 of the said Rules does not provide for the Department, suo moto, issuing directions for resorting to provisional assessment. Therefore, when the Central Excise Officers, during scrutiny or otherwise, find that self-assessment in not in order the assessee may be asked for all necessary document, records or other information for issue of duty demand for differential duty, if any, after conducting inquiry. Where the assessee fails to provide the records or information and Department is unable to issue demand, 'Best Judgment' method may be used to raise demand based on collateral evidences. The burden will be on the assessee to provide information for appropriate re-determination of duty, if any.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The provisions of Provisional Assessment relating to interest clause and statutory time limit are prospective. In other words, these provisions shall be applicable only to those cases of provisional assessment, which are ordered on or after 1st July, 2001.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Rule 8 of the said Rules provides that duty relating to removals during a fortnight of a month can be discharged within five days of the close of that fortnight, except that in the last fortnight of the month of March, the duty has to be discharged by the last day of the month. In case of a manufacturer availing an exemption based on value of clearances during a financial year, the duty for a month may be discharged by fifteenth day of the succeeding month. 1.2 An assessee may also exercise the option of payment of duty consignment-wise. 1.3 There is no specific provision in the new Rules for clearance of goods without payment of duty for storage outside the factory. However, considering that there may be genuine difficulties for sugar industry i.e. sugar has season production , but its off take is through out the year, and that large quantity of the off take (sale) sugar is controlled by government [levy sugar], the manufacturer may not be in a position to clear the goods on payment of duty. Storage of such huge quantities within the factory will be burdensome. Accordingly, it has been decided to allow storage of non-duty paid sugar outside the factory, under such bond and securities/sureties and such conditions and limitations as the Commissioner may specify for a manufacturer on case to case basis. 1.4 The duty can be discharged by debiting an account current (also referred to as Personal Ledger Account [PLA]) and debiting the CENVAT Credit Account maintained by the assessee under the provisions of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 . 1.5 No format for CENVAT Credit Account has been specified. The assessee has to maintain this account in his own format. This account is a credit-debit account wherein the admissible credit in respect of inputs and capital goods received by the assessee in his factory is taken and debit is made for payment of any duty. 1.5 In account current [Personal Ledger Account], credit is taken by depositing money in the banks on T.R.6 Challans. The guidelines regarding account current are mentioned in subsequent paragraphs.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 In order to open a new Personal Ledger Account, the manufacturer, quoting his registration number, shall obtain the New Excise Control Code Number (New ECC Number), which is a Permanent Account Number (PAN)-based number. Once Department adopts 'common number' for registration and accounts, separate ECC number shall not be required. 2.2 The manufacturer working under the procedure shall maintain an account current (Personal Ledger Account) in the Form specified in Annexure-8. 2.3 Each credit and debit entry should be made on separate lines and assigned a running serial number for the financial year. 2.4 The PLA must be prepared in triplicate by writing with indelible pencil and using double-sided carbon - original and duplicate copies of the PLA should be detached by the manufacturers and sent to the Central Excise Officer in charge along with the monthly/quarterly periodical return in form E.R.1.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The assessee may make credit in the PLA by making cash payment into the Treasury/or Authorised Bank. If allowed by the Commissioner, In exceptional cases, such as sudden strike in bank, natural calamity, riot etc., after sending by Registered A.D. post or by a messenger a cheque for the requisite amount to the Chief Accounts Officer of the Commissionerate, provided procedure specified in this regard are followed. 3.2 Deposit into the Treasury of the authorised bank should be made in a Challan in form TR 6 under the correct Head of Account. The Assessee's ECC No. should also be indicated in the challans. A copy of each Treasury Challan bearing Treasury/Bank seal and the signature of the authorised officer of the Treasury/Bank which is received back from the Treasury/Bank in token of having made the deposit, should be sent by the assessee to the Central Excise Office along with the monthly periodical return in form E.R.1/E.R.2. 3.3 There is an 'Explanation' to sub-rule (1) of rule 5 that the duty liability shall be deemed to have been discharged only if the amount payable is credited to the account of the Central Government by the specified date. It is being interpreted that it refers to deposit of duty amount by the focal point banks into the account of Government. This is not the intention. Once the assessee has deposited a cheque in bank and the same is honoured or pays in cash/drafts and the bank gives receipt stamp on TR-6 Challans, the same shall be treated as 'credited to the account of the Central Government' 3.4 No restriction exists with regard to any minimum amount, which should necessarily remain in balance to the credit of an assessee in his PLA. With the fortnightly/monthly payment system, there should be enough credit at the time of payment of duty for the fortnight. 3.5 Where an assessee is required/chooses to pay duty consignment wise (for the reasons of defaults earlier) - (i) Duty on each clearance should be paid by the assessee by making debit entry in the PLA prior to the removal of the goods outside the factory premises or for being taken into use inside the factory premises. If any goods are removed from the factory without such debit entry they will be treated as non-duty paid. (ii) Duty on clearances of any excisable goods as samples in such small quantities as the Commissioner may approve in respect of any commodity may be paid on the last working day of the month by a single debit in the account current. 3.6 Mutilations or erasures of entries once made in the PLA are not allowed. If any correction becomes necessary, the original entry should be neatly scored out and attested by the assessee or his authorised agent.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 In case where miscellaneous dues like rents, fines or penalties are to be paid by the holder of account current he may be advised to make payments of such accounts directly into the authorised bank under Challan in form T R 6 supported by order of demand, if any. Such challans need not be counter-signed by the Departmental Officer but should indicate the particulars of penalties, rent etc, deposited. If, however, the account holder desires that such miscellaneous dues should also be paid through an account current, he may be permitted to open a separate account current for this purpose under the group minor head "E-Miscellaneous-1 Miscellaneous".
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 Regarding the Account Code Directory for the purpose of computerisation, separate instructions have been issued by the Principal Chief Controller of Accounts C.B.E.C., which may be referred to.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 This procedure is to be followed only when all the banks nominated to collect revenues within a Commissionerate are unable to transact business, due to strike of banks or sudden closure of banks due to riots, imposition of curfew or natural calamities such as flood, cyclones, etc. 6.2 Normally in all cases of closure of bank business due to strike by bank employees, the Public gets advance intimation either through the press, or otherwise. In all such cases, the assessees should make advance arrangements to deposit money into the banks and keep sufficient amounts in their account current [PLA] so that they do not face any difficulty in the clearance of the goods during the period of the strike. 6.3 In cases, where the strike of bank employees is without notice, or where the strike called for after due notice is prolonged beyond a reasonable time (say over 3-4 days) or where there is sudden closure of banks due to riots, imposition of curfew or natural calamities such as flood, cyclones, etc., the Commissioner may adopt the procedure specified hereinafter in partial relaxation of the provisions contained in the "Manual for collection of Revenue and payment of refunds etc.(hereinafter referred to as 'Manual')" only for the duration of the strike or the sudden closures: - 6.4 The Commissioners should issue a Trade Notice stating that during the days of the closure of bank business due to such strikes (specifying the dates wherever possible), the assessees can send their cheques by registered post, acknowledgement due (R.P.A.D.) or special messenger, with the TR-6 challans (in quadruplicate) duly filled in, to the Chief Accounts Officers of the Commissionerates, with a clear declaration that they have sufficient balance in their bank account - (i) They should be advised to send a copy of the letter forwarding the cheque, to the concerned Range Officer also. (ii) On the strength of a cheque so sent, they may take credit in the P.L.As. (iii) On receipt of the cheque in his office, the Chief Accounts Officer will immediately intimate the concerned Range Officer about the name of the assessee, the number and date of the cheque and its amount. (iv) Immediately after the strike is over, all such cheques should be deposited by the Chief Accounts Officer into the Focal Point Bank/State Bank of India at the Headquarters or Reserve Bank of India, as the case may be, through TR-6 challans (in quadruplicate) according to the procedure prescribed in the Manual. (v) The Chief Accounts Officer will send the Duplicate/Triplicate copies of the receipted challans to the assessees and the quadruplicate copy to the R.Os. concerned to enable them to exercise necessary checks and prepare the monthly statement of revenue. (vi) Bank commission or collection charges, if any, chargeable by the banks should be debited in the P.L.A of the assessees by the Chief Accounts Officer under intimation to them as also the R.Os. (vii) If any of the cheques sent by the assessees are dishonoured, the Commissioners shall take appropriate penal action as prescribed under the rules. (viii) The Chief Accounts Officer should maintain a suitable record in regard to receipt and disposal of such cheques.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 For removal of doubts and to ensure uniformity of application of the procedure it is clarified that the payment of duty/other dues through cheques should not be permitted in the following cases- (i) If there is a strike in or closures of only one nominated bank of the Commissionerate and the assessee still remains in a position to deposit money in the other nominated banks or Departmental Treasury (wherever they exist) - unless the assessees' bank is the only nominated bank in the Commissionerate. (ii) In the case of declared Bank holidays because such holidays are known well in advance. (iii) Where the Public has been given advance intimation of a strike, unless the strike is unduly prolonged (say over 3-4 days). (iv) Where Bank employees adopt "go-slow" tactics.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 In view of the self-assessment procedure wherein the assessee himself assesses the duty liability the responsibility of the departmental officers is to scrutinise the assessment made for verification of its correctness.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The Central Excise Officers having jurisdiction over the factory/premises of the assessee is responsible for the scrutiny of returns. For this purpose, the said officer(s) may require the relevant documents. Though the statutory records have been dispensed with, the assessee is required to maintain private records containing all requisite information as required by different rules and also provide a list of all records maintained by him to the Range Office. The Officer responsible for scrutiny of return may require the invoices issued by the assessee, Daily Stock Account, Cenvat Account, cash ledgers, Ledger of all receipts and payments and the source documents etc. It shall be compulsory for the assessee to provide the necessary records upon receiving the "Requisition Letter' from the Range Officer or other superior officers. He shall hand over the records under proper acknowledgement and receive them back under proper acknowledgement too. The Officer scrutinizing return may require presence of the assessee or his authorised person at mutually convenient time, for seeking certain information relating to the records. 2.2 The Superintendent of Central Excise in-charge of the Range Office, with assistance of the Inspectors in-charge of the factory of an assessee, will scrutinise all the returns. They shall, in selected cases, call all connecting documents including invoices and the records and scrutinise the correctness of assessment. 2.3 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise will scrutinise the returns of the units, which pay duty-exceeding rupees one crore but less than Rs.5 crores from PLA per annum every six months. They shall requisition all connecting documents including invoices and the records and scrutinise the correctness of assessment. 2.4 The Additional/Joint Commissioner of Central Excise will scrutinise the returns of the units which pay duty Rs. 5 crores or more from PLA per annum every six months. They shall requisition all connecting documents including invoices and the records and scrutinise the correctness of assessment.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 An invoice is the document under cover of which the excisable goods are to be cleared by the manufacturer. This is also the document which indicates the assessment of the goods to duty. No excisable goods can be cleared except under an invoice. The invoice is the manufacturers own document and though the Department has specified the entries thereon, the format etc. is left to the manufacturer's choice.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Rule 11 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) provides that no excisable goods shall be removed from a factory or a warehouse except under an invoice signed by the owner of the factory or his authorized agent. 2.2 In case of cigarettes, which is under physical control, the Factory Officers are posted by rotation in the factory. If the factory is operation 24 hours, the officers are posted 24 hours. They check the operations of the assessee as per instructions, mutatis mutandis , contained in Commodity Manual for Cigarettes. Accordingly, in the case of cigarettes, each invoice shall also be countersigned by the Inspector of Central Excise or the Superintendent of Central Excise before the cigarettes are removed from the factory.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The invoice shall be serially numbered and shall contain the registration number, description, classification, time and date of removal, rate of duty, quantity and value, of goods and the duty payable thereon. The serial number shall commence from 1st April every year [beginning of a financial year]. 3.2 The serial number can be given at the time of printing or by using franking machine. But when the invoice book is authenticated in the manner specified in sub-rule (5) of rule 11, each leaf should contain serial number. Hand written serial number shall not be accepted. 3.3 In case of computer-generated invoice, the serial number may be allowed to be generated and printed by computer at the time of preparation of invoice ONLY IF the software is such that computer automatically generates the number and same number cannot be generated more than once. For this purpose, the Central Excise Officers may check the system/software from time to time.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The invoice shall be prepared in triplicate in the following manner, namely - (i) the original copy being marked as ORIGINAL FOR BUYER; (ii) the duplicate copy being marked as DUPLICATE FOR TRANSPORTER; (iii) the triplicate copy being marked as TRIPLICATE FOR ASSESSEE. 4.2 The above requirement is mainly for Central Excise purposes. However, the assessee may make more than three copies for his other requirements. But such copies shall be prominently marked "NOT FOR CENVAT PURPOSES'.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The rule 11 of the said Rules provides that only one invoice book shall be in use at a time, unless otherwise allowed by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise in the special facts and circumstances of each case. 5.2 The Board has decided that where assessee requires two different invoice books for the purposes of removals for home-consumption, and removals for export they may do so by intimating the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. 5.3 Wherever, an assessee is allowed to keep more than one invoice book, he should be asked to keep different numerical serial numbers for the different sets. 5.4 In case of running stationary used in computers, the bound book shall not be insisted upon provided the stationary is pre-printed with distinctive names and marks of the assessee. After the invoices are prepared, the triplicate copy shall be retained in bound-book form. Where invoices are to be typed written, the leafs have to be first taken out from the book for typing. In such cases also the triplicate copy shall be retained in bound-book form.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The rule provides that owner or working partner or Managing Director or Company Secretary shall authenticate each foil of the invoice book, before being brought into use. However, in order to facilitate the trade it has been decided that any person duly authorised in this regard by the Company, owner or working partner may also authenticate invoices. Copy of the letter of authority should be submitted to the Range office.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 Before making use of the invoice book, the serial numbers of the same shall be intimated to the Superintendent of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of the assessee. This can be done in writing by post/e-mail/fax/hand delivery or any other similar means.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 The amount of duty being shown in invoices issued under rule 11 of the said Rules should be rounded off to the nearest rupee as provided for under Section 37D of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the duty amount so rounded off should be indicated both in words as well as in figures.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Where the part consignments traveling in a convoy or separately do not constitute "complete machinery" falling under a single heading or sub-heading, each such consignment will be classified on merits, say, as 'parts' and also a separate invoice showing the separate value arrived at under Section 4 of Central Excise Act, 1944 and the duty amount, must accompany each such consignment. ANNEXURE - A Undertaking For Availing Special Procedure I / We ........................ hereby undertake that only those components of a 'complete machinery' in terms of rule 2(a) of the interpretative rule to CETA which have first been assembled and constitute complete machinery falling under a single heading or sub-heading, and which are later dis-assembled only for the convenience of transport shall be cleared under this procedure on payment of entire duty as per the classification of such machinery / equipment and no 'parts' not satisfying this criterion shall be transported with such components unless appropriate Central Excise duty is paid as prescribed for 'parts' under the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 . Date: Place: (Authorised Signatory)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 Considering the difficulties faced by the manufacturers in documentation where a consignment of capital goods like heavy machinery, etc. which are first assembled by the manufacturer and are later disassembled only for the convenience of transport is loaded in more than one vehicle and travel separately or at intervals, the following procedure should be followed - (i) The manufacturer will intimate, on case to case basis, his option to avail this special procedure in writing for the complete machinery sought to be cleared in a number of individual part consignments after first being assembled to the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise with a copy to the jurisdictional Superintendent of Central Excise along with the description of such machinery/ equipment giving its tariff classification and list of components of such machinery/equipment in dis-assembled form and its value and an undertaking. These intimations shall be given at least 48 hours prior to the removal on any working day. (ii) Though separate verification need not necessarily be made for each and every consignment, before the removal of the first consignment Assistant Commissioner should verify that the various part consignments are indeed constituents of the complete machinery which has been first assembled. (iii) A separate invoice shall be made out for in respect of each conveyance on which the part consignment is loaded. (iv) The manufacturer will pay the entire duty on the first such invoice (hereinafter referred to as "Parent Invoice") on the basis of entire value of the machinery unit/equipment. This parent invoice shall be prepared quoting all vehicle numbers, total value / duty of the consignment. An inventory shall be annexed to the invoice giving detailed item-wise description as loaded in different vehicles. (v) The details of removals and duty payment shall be entered in Daily Stock Account. (vi) Photocopy of the duplicate copy of the parent invoice duly attested by the authorised signatory of the Company shall accompany each conveyance. (vii) CENVAT Credit, if any, shall be taken only on receipt of parent invoice and the entire consignment.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 11--> 11.1 When an assessee is compelled to cancel invoice, the following actions should be taken:- (i) Intimation of a cancelled invoice should be sent to the range Superintendent on the same date, whenever possible. However, in case of exceptional circumstances beyond the control of assessee should this not be possible, the intimation should be sent on the next working day; (ii) Along with the intimation of the cancelled invoice sent to the range Superintendent the original copy of the cancelled invoice should also be sent. (iii) Triplicate copy of the cancelled invoice may be retained by the assessee in the invoice book so that the same can be produced whenever required by audit parties, preventive parties and other visiting officers.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The transshipment of goods from one vehicle to other vehicle(s) en route the destination(s) can be of two categories:- (a) Where the entire quantity is transshipped from one vehicle to another vehicle, which may be on account of - (i) Breakdowns; (ii) Non-availability of inter-state transport permit. (b) Where the consignment originally cleared on an invoice issued under Rule 11, is required to be split up en route for transport by different vehicles on account of - (i) breakdown of the original vehicle and non-availability of the substitute vehicle of the appropriate capacity, or (ii) requirement of splitting up of the consignment and loading in vehicle other than the vehicle on which goods were cleared from the factory, or (iii) part consignment/package(s) misplaced during transshipment, but recovered later on. 1.2 Regarding category (a) and (b), the owner of goods or his agent or the person in charge of the vehicle, at the material time, acting as his agent, shall make a suitable endorsement at the back of the transport's copy of the invoice accompanying the consignment indicating the date and time of breakdown of the vehicle and the registration number of the new vehicle in which the consignment is re-loaded. 1.3 In cases of splitting up and transshipment on account of any other reason, including pre-determined distribution of goods from an intermediate point, the assessee should prepared separate invoice for each lot. At the intermediate point, the owner of goods or his agent or the person in charge of the original vehicle shall endorse the registration number of new vehicle. Upon receipt of good in the factory, the assessee shall confirm by endorsing on the invoice that the goods were received in the factory in the specified vehicle.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Removal of liquid gases will be permitted in a tanker lorry from the factory of the manufacturer on provisional determination of central excise duty liability and provisional entry in Daily Stock Account maintained under rule 10 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules), at the time of clearance from the factory. The invoice under rule 11 of the said Rules will be allowed to be prepared afterwards and the duty will be discharged under the provisions of rule 8 of the said Rules, subject to the observance of the following procedure - (a) The assessee shall submit a written request to the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory alongwith an undertaking that he shall abide by all conditions and restrictions as may be specified, for permitting the Pass-Out System for removal of Liquid Gases. (b) The liquid gases shall be removed in the tanker lorry under the Pass-out document as per duly filled in proforma at Annexure 9. (c) The pass-out document shall indicate, inter alia, the description, net quantity of goods being despatched (gross weight minus tare weight of lorry tanker), duty liability on such net quantity. (d) This net quantity and duty leviable thereon (provisional) shall be provisionally entered/recorded in the Daily Stock Account at the time of clearance from the factory. For the sake of clarity it is mentioned that such "provisional calculation of duty and provisional entry should not be construed as "provisional assessment under rule 7 of the Rules". (e) The pass out document shall be made out in triplicate by using double-side carbon paper. (f) All pass-out documents shall bear printed serial numbers and shall be pre-authenticated by the Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory before they are put to use. (g) The original and duplicate copy of the aforesaid document will accompany the goods to the destinations. The assessees shall retain the Triplicate copy. 2.1 The quantity delivered to or received by each customer shall be recorded on original and duplicate copies of each pass-out document under the customer's signature. 2.2 On completion of deliveries, the quantity actually delivered, the quantity actually returned in tanker lorry and the quantum of loss, if any, shall be duly recorded in the Daily Stock Account. The provisional entry relating to quantity of removal and the duty liability shall be converted into final entry in Daily Stock Account immediately after the return of the lorry tanker [after a single trip/transportation] or latest by next morning. 2.3 After return of the tanker lorry, customer-wise Invoice/Application for Removal may be prepared based on the quantity actually delivered. Central Excise duty where payable shall be determined and paid by the assessee in terms of rule 8 on the total quantity of the non-exempted liquid gases delivered to the customer and on the quantity of transit loss and other losses, if any. 2.4 In case both non-exempted and exempted deliveries are effected from the same tanker, the respective invoice/clearance document raised subsequently must indicate the nature of each delivery very distinctly. 2.5 In case of transit and/or other losses the assessee shall be liable to pay central excise duty on the quantity of such losses as determined at the highest effective rate prevailing on the date of removal of the consignment. The assessee shall give a written undertaking in this regard, on each copy of Pass-out document covering the goods. 2.6 All Invoices/clearance document shall be dated as per the date of despatch of the consignment and cross-reference shall be maintained in the pass-out document. 2.7 The original copy of the Pass-out document showing particulars of the quantity despatched, quantity delivered to the individual consignees/customers, Final entry No./date in Daily Stock Account including quantity returned and accounted for therein, shall be handed over to the Sector Officer immediately after the return of the lorry tanker and the final accountal. The consignor factory should obtain an acknowledgement for the submission of the original Pass-out document. The assessee shall retain the duplicate copy of the completed Pass-out document for his record. 2.8 Before filling the lorry tanker for the next supply/clearance, the quantity of the goods already contained therein (left over undelivered goods of the previous supply) should be re-ascertained and any difference between the quantity returned from the previous clearance and the quantity re-ascertained as above shall be treated as storage loss within the factory on which the assessee shall be liable to pay duty. Such differential quantity and the particular duty thereon should be recorded in the appropriate column of Daily Stock Account.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to the ' Credit Rules') has been notified with effect from 1st July, 2001 as an independent rule under the Central Excise Act, 2001 . 1.2 These rules seek to introduce simplified CENVAT provisions and procedures for allowing credit of duty paid on specified inputs and capital goods used in or in relation to the manufacture of specified final products, whether directly or indirectly and whether contained in the final product or not (inputs) and used (capital goods) in the factory of the manufacture of the final product. The credit of duty so allowed can be utilized for payment of duty leviable on the final product subject to the conditions laid down in the rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Certain definitions have been incorporated in Rule 2 of the Credit Rules itself. It may be noted that the definition of 'capital goods' is comprehensive and would include components, spares and accessories as also other capital goods like moulds and dies, refractories and refractory materials, etc. It has been clarified that the components, spares and accessories may fall under any Chapter but they should be components, spares and accessories of the final products. Storage tanks have been added to the list of capital goods w.e.f 1.3.2001. An explanation has been added to clarify the scope of inputs i.e. Inputs include goods used in the manufacture of capital goods which are further used in the factory of the manufacturer. Among other expressions, 'Exempted goods' and 'final products' have also been defined. 2.2 Rule 3 of the Credit Rules provides type of duties to be taken as credit with Explanation, which clarifies to allow CENVAT credit of additional duty leviable under Section 3 of Customs Tariff Act on goods falling under 98.01 of First Schedule to Customs Tariff ActThis Rule also provides manner of utilization of CENVAT credit in a different situation. It also provides the manner of utilisation of credit. It also provides the manner when inputs/capital goods are removed as such. 2.3 Rule 4 of the Credit Rules provides for different conditions for allowing CENVAT credit in different situations for inputs and capital goods. 2.4 Rule 5 of the Credit Rules of the Credit Rules is regarding refund of CENVAT Credit. 2.5 Rule 6 of the Credit Rules explains obligation of manufacturers of dutiable and exempted goods, especially the details of taking credit of final dutiable products and exempted products. 2.6 Rule 7 of the Credit Rules specifies documents on which CENVAT credit can be taken. An explanation to this Rule provides the meaning of "first stage dealer" and "second stage dealer". It also provides for maintenance of accounts by first and second stage dealer. Maintenance of records of manufacture of final products. The burden of proof regarding admissibility of CENVAT credit shall lie upon manufacturers taking such credit. The manufacturer of Final Product shall submit monthly return in specified proforma (Annexure 10) within 5 days from the close of each month. In respect of manufacturers availing exemption on value or quantity based in a Financial year, he shall submit by the 5th of the following quarter. 2.7 Under rule 8 of the Credit Rules, it has been provided that the manufacturers shall be allowed to transfer CENVAT credit lying unutilized in his accounts to such transferred, sold, merged, leased or amalgamated factory on account of shifting his factory to another site or factory transferred due to change in ownership on sale, merger, amalgamation, lease or transfer of a factory to joint venture with specific provision for transfer of liabilities of such factory. This is being allowed only if stock of inputs as such or in process or capital goods is also transferred to new site and the same is duly accounted for to the satisfaction of the Commissioner. 2.8 Transitional Provisions are specified in rule 9 of the Credit Rules. Any amount of credit earned by manufacturers under this Rule and remaining unutilized on that day shall be allowed as CENVAT credit under these Rules and allowed to be utilized. However, certain restrictions are imposed in this Rule. 2.9 Provisions for special dispensation in respect of inputs manufactured in factories located in specified areas of North-East region are contained in rule 10 of the Credit Rules. 2.10 Power of Central Government to notify goods for availment of deemed credit are contained in rule 11 of the Credit Rules. Accordingly, certain inputs have been so notified on which the duties of Excise or additional duties paid shall be deemed to have been paid at the prescribed rate and allow credit of such amount subject to certain conditions. 2.11 Recoveries of credit wrongly taken are governed by rule12 of the Credit Rules. Where CENVAT credit has been taken or utilized wrongly or on account of fraud, willful mis-statement, collusion or suppression of facts etc., the same along with interest shall be recovered from manufacturers and the provision of Section 11-A, 11-AA and 11-AB of the Central Excise Act, 1944 shall apply for effecting recoveries. In case of fraud etc., the manufacturers shall also be liable to pay penalty under provision of Section 11-AC. 2.12 Provisions for confiscation and penalty, for contravention of the Credit Rules are contained in rule 13 of the Credit Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Once the SSI exemption limit of Rs. 100 lakhs is crossed and assessee starts paying duty, he is eligible to take CENVAT credit in respect of inputs lying in stock, on the inputs contained in finished goods lying in stock and on the inputs in process. For this purpose, it is obligatory on the assessee to quantify the amount of admissible credit on the basis of documentary evidence and records maintained for this purpose. 3.2 The CENVAT credit can be utilised for payment of duty on waste and scrap as waste and scrap are 'final products' within the definition given in the Credit Rules. 3.3 Raw material used for making packing material CENVAT credit is permissible on the ' raw material' so used. This is for the reason that the packing material being and input, the raw material used for making packing material is also to be construed as inputs used in or in relation to the manufacture of finished products. 3.4 There is no bar for a manufacturer to remove the inputs or capital goods as such for export under bond. 3.5 Manufacturer is entitled to take the CENVAT credit in a situation where capital goods were received before 1-4-2000 and also installed before that date but MODVAT/CENVAT was not taken due to some reason prior to 1-4-2000 because even though the modvat credit was not taken by the manufacturer, the modvat credit had been "earned" by him. 3.6 CENVAT credit is required to be taken immediately on receipt of inputs in the factory. This, however, does not mean, nor is it even intended that if the manufacturer does not take credit as soon as the inputs are received in the factory, he would be denied the benefit of CENVAT credit such interpretation is not tenable. 3.7 In respect of capital goods, which are included in the project import, the CENVAT credit shall be admissible only to the extent of an amount not exceeding 50% of the Additional Duty of Customs paid on such capital goods. However, on the other materials, which are not in the nature of capital goods, the CENVAT credit of the Additional Duty paid shall be allowed to the full extent. 3.8 Air-conditioners and refrigerating equipment and computers would be eligible to CENVAT credit as capital goods. The only condition is that the manufacturers should use them in the manufacture of final product. For example, an air-conditioner used in the office premises or a computer used in the office premises of the factory shall not be eligible to CENVAT credit. 3.9 CENVAT credit shall be admissible in respect of the amount of inputs contained in any of the aforesaid waste, refuse or bye product. Similarly, CENVAT should not be denied if the inputs are used in any intermediate of the final product even if such intermediate is exempt from payment of duty. The basic idea is that CENVAT credit is admissible so long as the inputs are used in or in relation to the manufacture of final products, and whether directly or indirectly. 3.10 If the inputs or capital goods are cleared to a job worker, they should be received back within 180 days. If they are not received, the manufacturer shall debit the CENVAT credit attributable to such inputs or capital goods, otherwise it will be an offence. However, the manufacturer shall be entitled to take CENVAT credit as and when the goods sent to the job worker are received back. If part of the goods is received back within 180 days and the rest of the goods are received back after 180 days, the obligation for debiting the credit shall arise only in respect of CENVAT credit attributable to that part which is not received within 180 days. 3.11 Provision has been made for permitting the CENVAT credit when the inputs or capital goods are purchased from the first stage dealer or from the second stage dealer. These dealers should be registered under rule 9 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001The other procedural requirements in respect of first stage dealer and second stage dealer will continue as in the case of modvat rules. 3.12 In the case of capital goods, the CENVAT rules do not provide installation of capital goods as a pre-requisite for taking CENVAT credit. The credit can be taken as and when the capital goods are received in the factory. For example if such capital goods were received prior to 1.4.2001 but not installed up to 1.4.2001, the CENVAT credit would be admissible. However, in respect of all capital goods whether received on or after 1.4.2001 or those that were received prior to 1.4.2001 but not yet installed, the condition that CENVAT credit only up to 50% of the total admissible amount would be available in the financial year 2001-2002 would apply. The balance of the CENVAT credit in respect of such capital goods can be taken in a financial year subsequent to 2001-2002 3.13 The documents on which CENVAT credit can be taken have been prescribed to enable verification, where needed, by the department. The admissibility of the amount of CENVAT credit should be discernible from the records of the manufacturer, including the payment made to the sellers of inputs and capital goods. The basic responsibility is upon manufacturer to prove that inputs or capital goods were purchased and were used by him for the intended purpose.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Records are to be necessarily maintained in the course of any business activity. These records are also used to determine the tax liability of the assessee. Earlier, for this purpose the Government had prescribed the records to be maintained, referred to as 'Statutory records'. The statutory records under Central Excise Rules, 1944 were dispensed with in the year 2000 and it was decided to rely on private records of the assessee. This was done as a measure of simplification and for adopting a common accounting system. While framing the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules), CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 and other Rules issued under Central Excise Act, 1944 , the Government has continued with the policy of relying on the private records of the assessee.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The main features of the acceptance of private records are as below - (i) The fact that the rules do not prescribe 'statutory records' shall not be construed that no record has to be maintained. Every assessee shall maintain private record. (ii) the rules which require certain records to be maintained, are self contained and they specify the minimum information that an assessee MUST enter in their own record; (iii) There is no format for record-keeping, except in the case of Rule 17 of the said Rules where it is provided that the 100% EOU unit or a unit in /FTZ/SEZ shall maintain in proper form appropriate account relating to production, description of goods, quantity removed, duty paid and each removal shall be made on an invoice. This Format has been notified by Notification No. 59/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) Dated 6 th August, 2001 and is given at Annexure-11. (iv) This means that the assessee is free to device his record-keeping, depending upon his accounting requirements but shall ensure that the requirements of particular rules are met; (v) There is a specific requirement about maintenance of "Daily Stock Account' in rule 10 of the said Rules. It provides that every assessee shall maintain proper records, on a daily basis, in a legible manner indicating the particulars regarding description of the goods produced or manufactured, opening balance, quantity produced or manufactured, inventory of goods, quantity removed, assessable value, the amount of duty payable and particulars regarding amount of duty actually paid. The first page and the last page of each such account book shall be duly authenticated by the producer or the manufacturer or his authorised agent. All such records shall be preserved for a period of five years immediately after the financial year to which such records pertain. (vi) There is no requirement of 'authentication' of records by jurisdictional Central Excise Officer before a book/register is brought into use by an assessee. These records (relevant for Central Excise) shall, however, be authenticated on the first and last page by the assessee in the same manner as the Daily Stock Account. They shall also be preserved for a period of five years immediately after the financial year to which such records pertain. (vii) Every assessee is statutorily required to furnish to the Range Officer, a list in duplicate, of all the records prepared or maintained by him for accounting of transactions in regard to receipt, purchase, manufacture, storage, sales or delivery of the goods including inputs and capital goods. (viii) Every assessee shall, on demand make available to the Range officer duly empowered by Commissioner or the audit party deputed by the Commissioner or the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,- (a) the records maintained or prepared by him in terms of sub-rule (2) of rule 22 of the said Rules; (b) the cost audit reports, if any, under section 233B of the Companies Act, 1956 ( 1 of 1956); and (c) the Income-tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of Income-tax Act, 1961 ( 43 of 1961), (d) for the scrutiny of the officer or audit party, as the case may be. (ix) Every assessee who is having more than one factory and maintains separate records in respect of every factory for the purpose of audit, then, he shall produce the said records for audit purposes. 2.2 Records shall mean all the records prepared or maintained by the assessee for accounting of transactions in regard to receipt, purchase, manufacture, storage, sales or delivery of the goods including inputs and capital goods. All accounts, agreements, invoice, price-list, return, statement or any other source document ,whether in writing or in any other form shall be treated as records. Source documents are those documents which form the basis of accounting of transactions and include sales invoice , purchase invoice, journal voucher, delivery challan and debit or credit note. 2.3 Every assessee should be asked to furnish the list of all records prepared or maintained by him for accounting of transactions in regard to receipt, purchase, manufacture, storage, sales or delivery of goods including inputs and capital goods, if they have not done it so far. If there is any modification in the list, the same may be communicated to the Department as and when such modification takes place. 2.4 Non-maintenance of daily stock account as contemplated under rules or other information mentioned in other rules mentioned above by the assessee in his private records will mean contravention of specified rules attracting appropriate penal action. If such non-maintenance of records is with intent to evade payment of Central Excise duty, the more stringent penal provisions of the Central Excise Act and Central Excise Rules shall be attracted. Trade and industry are advised to ensure that the requisite information as required under amended rules is scrupulously maintained in their identified private records to avoid any penal action. 2.5 The private records relevant for Central Excise including the Daily Stock Account maintained in compliance with the provisions of the said Rules shall necessarily be kept in the factory to which they pertain.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) provide that the assessee shall be required to file certain periodic returns, which relate to his tax liability and other transaction, such as relating to CENVAT credit .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Rule 12 of the said Rules has provides that every assessee shall submit to the Superintendent of Central Excise a monthly return in proper form, of production and removal of goods and other relevant particulars, within ten days after the close of the month to which the return relates. However, where an assessee is availing of the exemption under a notification based on the value of clearances in a financial year, he shall file a quarterly return in proper form, of production and removal of goods and other relevant particulars, within twenty days after the close of the quarter to which the return relates. The prescribed return is E.R.1 Return, notified by Notification No. 48/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. (Anneuxre-12) 2.2 As duties payable on individual consignments need not be paid at the time of removal from the factory or approved place of storage, and sum total of this duty liability can be discharged on fortnightly basis in respect of clearances for a fortnight, certain details for removals for each fortnight, duties payable and the manner in which the actual duty payments are effected by the assessee, the interest payment - if any, where duties paid beyond permitted dates etc. have been specified in the E.R.1 Return. 2.3 The assessees would continue to submit alongwith the E.R.1 Return for the month, copies of the PLA and relevant TR6 challans etc. The PLA Extracts will give details of all the credits made through TR6 challans during the month and up to the 5th of the following month - up to which the duty liability can be discharged for the month. A summary could also be put at the end of the PLA Extracts indicating the following (a) opening balance, after discharging the duty liability for the second fortnight of the previous month; (b) the credits made during the month; and upto the 5th of the following month; (c) total duty discharged through PLA for the first fortnight; (d) total duty discharged through PLA for the second fortnight; and (e) closing balance in the PLA after discharging the second fortnight duty liability. 2.4 The units in the SSI sector could suitably modify this summary, as they are required to pay duty on monthly basis. 2.5 The instructions in the form of "NOTES" given at the end of E.R.1 return further elaborate the manner in which it should be compiled and the information to be furnished to the Department. 2.6 Return to be filed by Hundred per cent Export Oriented Undertakings/Units in Free Trade Zones/Units in Special Economic Zones is the E.R.2 Return, notified by Notification No. 49/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. (Anneuxre-13)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Any person may electronically maintain or generate all or any of the records, returns, invoices and other documents prescribed under the rules made under 								Central Excise Act, 1944							 , using a computer, in electronically readable format. 							No specific permission from the Central Excise Department is required for this purpose. 							Such person is also not required to give any intimation to the Department. 1.2 The Range Office, however, will record in "Scrutiny Register" or any other record indicating a person's profile, the fact that such person is electronically maintaining records or generating returns, invoices or other documents, using computer. 1.3 The records can be kept on any electronic media, such as hard disk of computers, floppies, CDs or tapes and preserved. 1.4 The records, returns and documents should be in electronically readable format. 							This also means that a person who uses computerized system to generate records/books of accounts, returns etc., must keep the electronic record, even when a hard copy is kept. 1.5 The printouts (hard copies) of records and documents must be taken out at the end of each month and kept in bound folders, separately for each type of record, return, documents etc. 1.6 The person should ensure that proper back-up records are also maintained and preserved so that in the event of destruction due to unavoidable accidents or natural causes, the information can be restored within reasonable period of time. 							All such records, returns, invoices and other documents (both electronic and hard copy, including back-ups) shall be preserved for a period of five years (counted from the first day of the financial year following the financial year to which a record, return, invoice or document pertain). 1.7 It shall be incumbent upon a person (who maintains electronic records, returns, documents etc.) to produce, on demand, the relevant records, returns or documents, in hard copy and/or in the form of tapes or floppies or cartridges or compact disk or any other media in an electronically readable format (duly authenticated by the assessee), documentation including policy and procedure manuals, instructions to record the flow and treatment of transactions through accounting system, from the stage of initiation to closure and storage to the Central Excise Officers, or the Audit parties deputed by the Commissioner or the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 							Such records, returns, invoices or other documents will be produced pertaining to such period (subject to the period of preservation) as may be requested including the daily entries in electronic format relating to the current month for which the printouts are not taken out. 1.8 He shall also provide account of the audit trail and inter-linkages including the source document, whether paper or electronic, and the financial accounts record layout, data dictionary and explanation for codes used and total number of records in each field alongwith sample copies of documents. 							Whenever changes are made in the aforesaid systems adopted by the assessee, he shall inform the Central Excise Officers and submit the relevant document. 1.9 In case any person is found to be misusing this facility or not providing access to the information or if there are any other cogent reasons, the Assistant Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise may, after recording such reasons and after taking into consideration the explanation tendered by the person, regarding the discrepancies, if any, prohibit a person from electronically maintaining or generating any records, returns, invoices or other documents using computer and inform the immediate superior officer.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The conditions and procedure relating to export without payment of duty (i.e. duty under the Central Excise Act, 1944 , the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), the Additional Duties of Excise (Textiles and Textile Articles) Act, 1978 (40 of 1978); and special excise duty collected under a Finance Act ) are contained in Notification Nos. 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) to 45/2001-Central Excise (N.T.), all dated 26th June, 2001 issued under rule 19 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules). The new rule 19 corresponds to rule 13 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 . 1.2 Some important changes have been introduced under the present procedure, which are mentioned below and explained in detail subsequently - The concept of furnishing of a 'Letter of Undertaking' by a manufacturer-exporter has been introduced. The clearances for export by a manufacturer-exporter will be effected similar to clearances for home consumption after he furnishes Letter of Undertaking. The merchant-exporters are required to file 'bond' in specified format. A manufacturer-exporter may also file bond and follow the 'bond-procedure' specified in the notification. Under bond procedure, the concept of 'self-debit' by the exporter has been introduced. The exporter need not go to the 'bond-accepting authority for a 'debit-certificate' before each removal. The procedure of 'acceptance of proof of export' has been simplified. The concept of ' Self-credit" based on the copy of A.R.E.1 duly certified by Customs authorities at the place of export is being introduced. In each Commissionerate of Central Excise, there will be an officer designated as 'Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise (Exports)' whose functions will be similar to the Maritime Commissioners. Number of copies of 'application for Removal (A.R.E.1)' has been reduced compared to AR-4. This will be further reduced after completion of computer networking in the Department enabling 'on-line verification' of exports.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1There are two categories of export without payment of duty - (i) Export of finished goods without payment of duty under bond or undertaking. (ii) Export of manufactured/processed goods after procuring raw material without payment of duty under bond.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Procedures and conditions for export to all countries except Nepal and Bhutan are specified in notification No. 42/2001-CE(N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. The details are mentioned in this part.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 An exporter shall furnish bond in Form B-1 and obtain certificate in Form CT-1. A manufacturer-exporter may furnish annual Letter of Undertaking (no CT-1 is required in this case). The export shall be subject to the following conditions" - (i) The goods shall be exported within six months from the date on which these were cleared for export from the factory of the production or the manufacture or warehouse or other approved premises within such extended period as the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Maritime Commissioner may in any particular case allow; (ii) When the export is from a place other than registered factory or warehouse, the excisable goods are in original packed condition and identifiable as to their origin; (iii) The exports of mineral oil products falling under Chapter 27 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) as stores for consumption on board of an aircraft on foreign run shall be subject to conditions and limitations, to be applied mutatis mutandis, as notified in the Notification No.40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26th June, 2001 issued under rule 18 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 ARE.1 is the export document for export clearance (Annexure-14), which shall be prepared in quintuplicate (5 copies). This is similar to the erstwhile AR.4. This document shall bear running serial number beginning from the first day of the financial year. During this year, for the sake of continuity, the serial number, as started from 1.4.2001, may continue. The stationary for AR.4 Form may be used with modified name "ARE.1" during this financial year. On A.R.E.1, certain declarations are required to be given by the exporter. These should be signed by the exporter or his authorised agent. The different copies of ARE.1 forms should be of different colours indicated below - Original - White Duplicate - Buff Triplicate - Pink Quadruplicate - Green Quintuplicate - Blue 3.2 It will be sufficient if the copies of ARE.1 contain a color band on the top or right hand corner in accordance with above color scheme. 3.2 An invoice shall also be prepared in terms of rule 11 of the said Rules. It should be prominently mentioned on top "FOR EXPORT WITHOUT PAYMENT OF DUTY". 3.3 The Letter of Undertaking is to be furnished in the Form UT-1 specified in Annexure-15 to Notification No. 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.), supra. Any manufacturer, who is an assessee for the purposes of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 , shall furnish a Letter of Undertaking only to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over his factory from which he intends to export. The Letter of Undertaking should not be furnished to the Maritime Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the Board. A 'Letter of Undertaking' shall be valid for twelve calendar months provided the exporter complies with the conditions of the Letter of Undertaking, especially the procedure for 'acceptance of proof of export' under this instruction. In case of persistent defaults or non-compliance causing threat to revenue, the manufacturer-exporter may be asked to furnish bond with security/surety. For the sake of clarification, it is mentioned that this Letter of Undertaking should not be taken for each consignment of export. 3.4 The obligation of the manufacturer flows from statutory requirement of exporting the goods within six months or such extended period as the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may allow. Failing this, the exporter is required to deposit the requisite sum (duty and interest) suo moto, considering that the manufacturer has to do 'self-assessment'. Any non-payment within 15 days of expiry of the stipulated time period, shall be treated as arrears of revenue and the Department will proceed to recover the same as 'sum due to Government'. Suo moto payment within 15 days of expiry of the stipulated time period will not be treated as 'default'. 3.5 On repeated failure of the manufacturer-exporter to comply with the conditions of the Letter of Undertaking or the procedure for 'acceptance of proof of export' under this instruction, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may direct him in writing that the letter of undertaking is not valid and he should furnish B-1 Bond with sufficient security/surety. 3.6 The Letter of Undertaking shall not be discharged unless the goods are duly exported, to the satisfaction of the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise within the time allowed for such export or are otherwise accounted for to the satisfaction of such officer, or until the full duty due upon any deficiency of goods, not accounted so, and interest, if any, has been paid. 3.7 Though any exporter (Manufacturer-exporter or merchant-exporter) can furnish bond, the merchant-exporters are necessarily required to furnish bond in the B-1 Form specified in Annexure-16 of notification no. 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.), supra with such security or surety as may be specified by the concerned bond accepting authority. The bond shall be in a sum equal at least to the duty chargeable on the goods for the due arrival of export goods at the place of export and their export therefrom under Customs or as the case may be postal supervision. The officer who will accept the bond, will also be responsible for discharging that bond upon furnishing proof of export by the exporter. 3.8 The bond shall not be discharged unless the goods are duly exported, to the satisfaction of the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Maritime Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Board on this behalf within the time allowed for such export or are otherwise accounted for to the satisfaction of such officer, or until the full duty due upon any deficiency of goods, not accounted so, and interest, if any, has been paid 3.9 Certificate 'CT-1", as specified in Annexure-17 have to be obtained by merchant-exporters for procuring goods from a factory or warehouse. Such certificates need not be obtained for each consignment but will be given in lot of 25.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Bond may be accepted by any of the following officers - (i) The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or warehouse or any other premises approved by the Commissioner for storing non-duty paid goods; (ii) Maritime Commissioners at Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Paradeep, Kandla, Tuticorin, Visakhapatnam and Cochin. (iii) The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise(Export) as officers authorised by the Board for this purpose. 4.2 Exporters are required to clearly indicate on the ARE.1 the complete postal address of the authority before whom the bond is executed and to whom the documents are to be submitted/ transmitted for admission of proof of export.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 Wherever bond is taken, sufficient security or surety is also required as the per the notifications issued under rule 19 of the said Rules. In 1996, Board had taken a decision that in respect of exporters having good track record may be allowed to furnish bond with nil security or surety. The Board in Circular No.284/118/96 dated 31.12.1996 issued an instruction. Now, since the manufacturer-exporters, who are also assessee of the Central Excise Department, have an option to furnish 'Letter of Undertaking" (without any security or surety), the question of furnishing of 'security or surety' is mainly relate to merchant-exporters who are not assessees of the Central Excise Department. In this scenario, the Board has decided that security (Bank Guarantee or Cash Guarantee or Cash Security) or surety need not be insisted upon from Super Star Trading Houses, Star Trading Houses, Trading Houses and Export Houses provided that - (i) the exporter has not come to adverse notice of the Central Excise or Customs Department in last three years from the date under consideration; (ii) all the formalities required under Central Excise Act and rules made thereunder are regularly complied with by the exporter, especially regarding timely submission of proof of export and deposit of duty with interest in time where proof of export is not received within stipulated time frame; (iii) A self-attested copy of the proof of Status (Super Star Trading Houses, Star Trading Houses, Trading Houses and Export Houses) from concerned authority (Ministry of Commerce and Industry - Directorate General of Foreign Trade) is submitted. 5.2 Other exporters shall be required to furnish surety equal to full bond amount or security equal to twenty five percent. (25%) of the bond amount, along with the bond. 5.3 The bond shall be furnished on non-judicial stamp paper of the value as applicable in the State in which bond is being furnished. 5.4 Where export is effected by merchant-exporter, the bond has to be necessarily furnished . It is open for the manufacturer to furnish bond on behalf of the merchant-exporter. It is clarified that in such cases, the manufacturer will not take a stand that since he is responsible for the duty liability, the export should be allowed on the basis of the 'Letter of Undertaking', which he has already furnished to the Department. In such circumstances, the application in Form ARE.1 will be in the name of the manufacturer who executes the Bond. All other procedures for admission of the proof of export would be the same as in the case of manufacturer-exporters. 5.5 It should be noted that once a manufacturer furnished bond for exports by merchant exporters, it would be his responsibility to account for the export goods. 5.6 It may be noticed that only General bond (B-1) has been specified. Even where bond is required for only one consignment, the Form will remain the same. The exporter may get the bond redeemed immediately after he completes the exports and obtains the proof of export. 5.7 In case of B-1 general bond a running bond account in proforma of Annexure-18 shall be maintained by the exporter because he is responsible for debit the bond before preparation of 'certificate' for obtaining goods for export. He shall also take self-credit in the manner specified in this instruction. 5.8 For the sake of clarity it is informed that the concept of ' Block Transfer' has lost its relevance in the context of self-debit and self-credit of bond and the new system of acceptance of proof of export [to be explained in subsequent paragraphs] by the exporter. 5.9 It is further mentioned that where the merchant exporter executes bond, it shall be necessary that both the merchant-exporter and the manufacturer sign the ARE.1.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 A Manufacturer-exporter who has furnished a Letter of Undertaking will prepare the export documents (A.R.E.1 and invoice under rule 11) for clearance from his factory of production. 6.2 A Merchant-exporter who has furnished a bond shall be provided sufficient number of certificates (CT-1), duly signed/certified, in multiples of 25 copies, normally covering a period of one to three months, depending upon the track record of compliance by the exporter. The 'bond accepting authority' shall be responsible for verifying and accepting the proof of export and in case of any defaults by the exporter, to recover the sum and enforcing the bond. The certificate should be provided according to the volume of exports projected by the exporter (which should also reflect in the amount of bond). The compliance of the exporter in submitting the requisite documents towards 'proof of export' shall be another criterion. 6.2.1 The second part of CT-1 is very important. The exporter shall determine the description of goods for procurement from a particular factory or warehouse or an approved place of storage, quantum, value of procurement (provisional figures) and duty involved therein (provisional figures - but based on correct rate of duty and contracted transaction value). This 'duty' element will be debited provisionally. The exporter shall ensure that at the time of debit, sufficient credit is available at that point of time to cover the said debit. The provisional debit shall be converted into final debit within a period of seven days form the date of removal of goods on A.R.E.1, based on the 'duty payable' in goods cleared for export reflected in the said A.R.E.1 and invoice. 6.2.2 The manufacturer shall record the clearance in his Daily Stock Account indicating, inter alia, the invoice number/date, A.R.E.1 number/date and duty payable but foregone under rule 19. 6.3 The exporter has two optional procedures regarding the manner in which he may clear the export consignments from the factory or warehouse or any other approved premises, namely: - Examination and sealing of goods at the place of despatch by a Central Excise Officer Under self-sealing and self-certification
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 The exporter is required to prepare five copies of application in the Form ARE-1. The Form is specified in Annexure-I to notification No. 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. The goods shall be assessed to duty in the same manner as the goods for home consumption, though duty is not required to be paid considering clearance is meant for export without payment of duty. The classification and rate of duty should be in terms of Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 read with any exemption notification and/or the said Rules. The value shall be the "transaction value" and should conform to section 4 or section 4A, as the case may be, of the Central Excise Act, 1944It is clarified that this value may be less than, equal to or more than the F.O.B. value indicated by the exporter on the Shipping Bill. 7.2 The duty payable shall be determined on the ARE.1 and invoice and recorded in the Daily Stock Account as "duty foregone on account of export under rule 19". 7.3 The exporter may request the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of production or manufacture, warehouse or approved premises for examination and sealing at the place of despatch 24 hours in advance, or such shorter period as may be mutually agreed upon, about the intended time of removal so that arrangements can be made for necessary examination and sealing. 7.4 In case of exports under Duty Exemption Entitlement Certificate Scheme (DEEC), Duty Exemption Pass Book Scheme (DEPB) and claim for Drawback, the Superintendent of Central Excise shall also examine and seal the consignment and sign the documents in token of having done so. In exceptional cases, where the exporter has unblemished track record of compliance (Central Excise) and where there is non-availability of Superintendent of Central Excise due to leave, vacant post or other reasonable causes, the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may permit examination and sealing by Inspector. All other types of export may be examined and sealed by the Inspector of Central Excise. 7.5 The Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise, as the case may be, will verify the identity of goods mentioned in the application and also verify whether the duty self-assessed is appropriate and that the particulars of the duty payable has been has recorded in the Daily Stock Account. If he finds that the declaration in ARE.1 and the invoices are correct from the point of view of identity of goods and its assessment to duty, he shall seal each package or the container ensuring that the goods cannot be tampered with after the examination. Normally, individual packages should be sealed by using wire and lead seals and an all-sides-closed container by using numbered One time Lock/Bottle seals or in such other manner as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise by a special or general written order. Thereafter, the said officer shall endorse and sign each copy of the application in token of having such examination done and put his stamp with his name and designation below his signature;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> Original (First Copy) - The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature Duplicate (Second Copy) : The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature. Triplicate (Third Copy) : Sent to the bond sanctioning authority, either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover after posting the particulars in official records. Quadruplicate (Fourth Copy) : Retain for official records Quintuplicate (Fifth Copy) : Optional copy - The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Where goods are not exported directly from the factory of manufacture or warehouse, the distribution of A.R.E.1 will be same as above except that the triplicate copy of application shall be sent by the Superintendent having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture or warehouse who shall, after verification forward the triplicate copy in the manner specified above.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 Self-sealing and self-certification is a procedure by which the exporter who is a manufacturer or owner of a warehouse, may remove the goods for export from his factory or warehouse without examination by a Central Excise Officer. This procedure will also be permitted in the cases where a merchant-exporter procures the goods directly from a factory or warehouse. In both cases, the manufacturer of the export goods or owner of the warehouse shall take the responsibility of sealing and certification. For this purpose the owner, the working partner, the Managing Director or the Company Secretary, of the manufacturing unit of the goods or the owner of warehouse or a person (who should be permanent employee of the said manufacturer or owner of the warehouse holding reasonably high position) duly authorised by such owner, working partner or the Board of Directors of such Company, as the case may be, shall certify on all the copies of the application (A.R.E. 1) that the goods have been sealed in his presence. The exporter shall distribute of the copies of A.R.E. 1 in the following manner - Original (First copy) and Duplicate (Second copy) - Send to the place of export along with the goods Triplicate (Third copy) and Quadruplicate (Fourth copy) - Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or warehouse within twenty four hours of removal of the goods Quintuplicate (Fifth copy) - Optional copy - Send to the place of export along with the goods 10.2 The said Superintendent and Inspector of Central Excise shall verify the particulars of assessment, the correctness of the amount of duty paid or duty payable, its entry in the Daily Stock Account maintained under rule 10 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (the manufacturer or warehouse owner will be required to present proof in this regard), corresponding invoice issued under rule 11. If he is satisfied with the particulars, he will endorse the relevant A.R.E. 1 and append their signatures at specified places in token of having done the verification. In case of any discrepancy, he will take up the matter with the assessee for rectification and also inform the jurisdictional Assistant/Deputy Commissioner. Once verification is complete and the A.R.E. 1 is in order, he shall distribute the documents (A.R.E. 1) in the following manner- Triplicate (Third copy) - Send to the bond accepting authority, either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover after posting the particulars in official records. Where manufacturer has given LUT, triplicate shall be retained and will be forwarded to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of the Division along with Statement, after matching them with original copies of A.R.E.1s. Quadruplicate (Fourth copy) - Retain for Range records (The notification does not specify this distribution of this copy)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 11--> 11.1 In case of export by parcel post after the goods intended for export has been sealed, the exporter shall affix to the duplicate application sufficient postage stamps to cover postal charges and shall present the documents, together with the package or packages to which it refers, to the postmaster at the Office of booking.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 12--> 12.1 The place of export may be a port, airport, Inland Container Depot, Customs Freight Station or Land Customs Station. 12.2 The exporter shall present together with original, duplicate and quintuplicate (optional) copies of the application (A.R.E. 1) to the Commissioner of Customs or other duly appointed officer - normally goods are presented in the designated export shed. 12.3 The goods are examined by the Customs for the purposes of Central Excise to establish the identity and quantity, i.e. the goods brought in the Customs area for export on an A.R.E. 1 are the same which were cleared from the factory. The Customs authorities also examine the goods for Customs purposes such as verifying for certain export incentives such as drawback, DEEC, DEPB or for determining exportability of the goods. 12.4 For Central Excise purposes, the Officers of Customs at the place of export shall examine the consignments with the particulars as cited in the application (A.R.E. 1) and if he finds that the same are correct and the goods are exportable in accordance with the laws for the time being in force (for example, they are not prohibited or restricted from being exported), shall allow export thereof. Thereafter, he will certify on the copies of the A.R.E. 1 that the goods have been duly exported citing the shipping bill number and date and other particulars of export and distribute in the following manner - (i) The officer of customs shall return the original and quintuplicate (optional copy for exporter) copies of application to the exporter and forward the duplicate copy of application either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover to the officer specified in the application, from whom exporter wants to claim rebate. (ii) Quintuplicate A.R.E. 1 is the Export Promotion Copy and the exporter shall use this copy for the purposes of claiming any other export incentive.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 13--> 13.1 The procedure relating to acceptance of proof of export or the 'validation' of actual export has been simplified. The original and duplicate copies of A.R.E. 1 are presented to the Customs authorities at the place of export [with option for exporter to also present quintuplicate copy]. The Customs authority certify the actual export on these documents and distributes the copies as specified. 13.2 The exporter shall submit a Statement, at least once in a month, in Form specified in Annexure-19 along with the Original copies of A.R.E. 1 with due certification of export (Pass for Shipment Order) by Customs authorities at the place of export to the Divisional office (through Range)or in the office of the bond-accepting authority. Other supporting documents shall also be furnished, namely, Self-attested photocopy of Bill of Lading and Self-attested photocopy of Shipping Bill (Export Promotion Copy). The Range office or the Office of the bond-accepting authority immediately on receipt shall acknowledge the Statement. 13.3 The exporter is permitted to take credit in his running bond account on the basis of copy of the Statement referred to above, duly acknowledged the Range office or the office of the bond-accepting authority 13.4 It shall be the responsibility of the Range Office and Division Office or the other bond-accepting authority to verify the correctness of Statement and A.R.E.1 furnished by the exporter within the shortest possible time. The Statement and A.R.E.1 will be tallied by the Range Officers with the triplicate copies of A.R.E.1 already with them and the A.R.E.1 or its summary received directly from the place of export (hard copies or electronic summary or e-mail) within 15 days of the receipt. The Divisional Officer shall accept the proof of export or initiate necessary action in case of any discrepancy. 13.5 In case of other bond-accepting authority, their office will do this work. The bond-accepting authority shall accept the proof of export or initiate necessary action in case of any discrepancy. He will also intimate about the acceptance of proof of export or any other action to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise from whose jurisdiction goods were cleared for export. 13.6 In case of non-export within the six month from the date of clearance for export (or such extended period, if any, as may be permitted by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the bond-accepting authority) or discrepancy, the exporter shall himself deposit the excise duties along with interest on his own immediately on completion of the statutory time period or within ten days of the Memorandum given to him by the Range/Division office or the Office of the bond-accepting authority. Otherwise necessary action can be initiated to recover the excise duties along with interest and fine/penalty. Failing this, the amount shall be recovered from the manufacturer-exporter along with interest in terms of the Letter of Undertaking furnished by the manufacturer. In case where the exporter has furnished bond, the said bond shall be enforced and proceedings to recover duty and interest shall be initiated against the exporter. 13.7 In case of any loss of document, the Divisional Officer or the bond accepting authority may get the matter verified from the Customs authorities at the place of export or may call for collateral evidences such as remittance certificate, Mate's receipt etc. to satisfy himself that the goods have actually been exported.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 14--> 14.1 Under the normal export procedure, the merchant-exporters including those manufacturer-exporters (Project-exporters who have to export bought out goods) have to procure the excisable goods for export under bond manufactured in different parts of the country. For this purpose, they have to have to furnish either several bonds with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise of the supplier's area and submit proof of exports for discharge of such bonds or furnish a bond with the Maritime Commissioner who are located only at seven ports, namely, Considering that there have been tremendous export potentials from the inland areas located at considerable distance from a sea port and that there have been considerable growth of exports from Inland Container Depots and the Air Cargo Units located in such inland areas, the Board had appointed an officer in each Commissionerate except those Commissionerates in which the Maritime Commissioner is posted as Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise (Export) for the purpose of facilitating export under bond by Circular No. 500/66/99-CX dated 15th December, 1999, under authority of rule 19 of the said Rules read with notification No.42/2001-Central Excise (N.T) dated 26.6.2001. 14.2 Any merchant exporter/manufacturer-cum-merchant exporter can file the required bond with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise(Export) under whose jurisdiction his Head Office/factory is located (within the jurisdiction of the Commissionerates). In such case the exporter can procure the goods from a factory located anywhere in India. 14.3 For clarification it is mentioned that the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise (Export) will not deal with the exports where the manufacturer-exporters are permitted to export by furnishing an Annual Undertaking (UT-1) in lieu of bond.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Units, which are fully exempted from payment of duty by a notification granting exemption based on value of clearances for home consumption, may be exempted from filing ARE.1 and Bond till they remain within the full exemption limit. The following simplified export procedure shall be followed in this regard by such units: -
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Manufacturers exempted for payment of duty will not be required to take Central Excise Registration. They shall however, file a declaration in terms of Para 2 of Notification No. 36/2001-CE (NT) dated 26.6.2001, and obtain declarant code number [notwithstanding they are exempted form declaration, but for this procedure].
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The clearance document will be, as follows: (i) Such manufacturers are permitted to use invoices or other similar documents bearing printed Serial Numbers beginning from 1st day of a financial year for the purpose of clearances for home consumption as well as for exports. (The printing of Serial Numbers can be done by use of franking machine). The invoices meant for use during a month shall be pre-authenticated by the owner or partner or Director/Managing Director of a Company or other authorised person. (ii) The declarant's Code Number should be mentioned on all clearance document. (iii) Such clearance document should contain particulars of the description of goods, name and address of the buyer, destination, value, [progressive total of total value of excisable goods cleared for home consumption since beginning of the financial year], vehicle number, date and time of the removal of the goods. (iv) The clearance document will be signed by the manufacturer or his authorised agent at the time of clearance. (v) In case of export through merchant exporters, the manufacturer will also mention on the top "EXPORT THROUGH MERCHANT EXPORTERS" and will mention the Export-Import Code No. of such merchant exporters. (vi) In case of direct export by the manufacturer-exporters, he will mention on the top "FOR EXPORT" and his own Export - Import Code No., if any. 3.2 Records 3.2.1 Such units shall maintain a simple record of quantity and value of production and clearance. Entries in production record should either be allowed to be made at the close of the day or before the commencement of the production on the following day. Entries need not be made on days when there is no production or clearance of goods. 3.3 Statement 3.3.1 Such units shall file a prescribed quarterly statement to the Jurisdictional Range Superintendent containing various particulars. (Annexure-20)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Following documents shall be accepted as proof of export : 4.1.1 In the case of direct export by the Manufacture- exporter (i) Duly attested photocopy of shipping bill (Export Promotion Copy) bearing the particulars and date of clearance document under which the goods are cleared from the factory of production, having endorsement on its reverse by the Customs of the particulars of mate's receipt no. (wherever applicable), name of the ship/ flight no., of the aircraft, vehicle no. - by which the goods were exported out, date of export, and EGM Number/ Airway Bill Number (wherever applicable); (ii) Duly Custom's attested copy of Bill of lading; and (iii) Foreign Exchange Remittance Certificates. 4.1.2 In the case of export through Merchant-exporter the document prescribed by Sales Tax Department will be accepted as the proof of export. Sales made by manufacturer of the goods' to the merchant exporter which ultimately are exported are exempt from Central Sales Tax. The Sales Tax Department issues booklet to the merchant exporters containing serially numbered H-Forms/ST-XXII form or equivalent Sales Tax form. After the goods have been exported by the merchant exporters, the latter issues these forms to the manufacturers of the goods. The merchant exporters in turn have to account all these serially numbered forms to the sales Tax Department by furnishing a proof that the goods have been exported out. These proofs are in the from of presentation of the Shipping Bill duly completed by the customs, bill of landing, foreign exchange remittance certificates etc. The liability of the manufacturers to the Central Sales Tax gets discharged only when they submit these forms to the Sales Tax Department. It is, therefore, seen that indirectly exports get accounted for through the issue of H-form or ST-XXII Form. Thus, photocopy of H-form or ST-XXII Form or any other equivalent Sales Tax form duly attested and stamped by the manufacturer or his authorised agent will be accepted for purpose of proof of export. 4.2 Submission of proof of export and processing thereof 4.2.1 The proof of export should be submitted to the Range Officer within a period of 6 months from the date of clearance of goods from the factory of production. 4.2.2 If Range Superintendent finds that the clearances for home consumption, and the clearances for export where proof of exports have not been furnished within 6 months, when taken together, are likely to exceed the exemption limit (which is presently Rs. 100 lakhs for home consumption), he should issue show cause notices for safeguarding revenue. These show cause notices, however, should be kept pending for another three months by which time proof of exports are expected to be received. 4.2.3 The Range Superintendent will maintain manufacturer wise record on the basis of the quarterly return and the proof of exports submitted by the manufacturer from time to time in order to ascertain that the clearances for exports and the proofs of exports are duly accounted for and in case of failure on the part of exporter to submit proof of export, necessary action can be initiated promptly on the lines already mentioned in the above para. 4.2.4 In case clearances of such manufacturers for home consumption plus clearance for export where proof of export were not furnished within 6 months, exceed the exemption limit, they should take Central Excise Registration and follow the regular A.R.E.1 procedure. 4.2.5 This procedure will also be applicable to exports of ready-made garments.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The conditions and procedure for export to Nepal and the Board in Notification No. 45/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001(hereinafter referred to as the 'said notification') has specified Bhutan without payment of duty (under bond).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Under the said notification, export can be made from any of the following places - (i) the factory of production or manufacture (ii) warehouse, or (iii) any other premises as may be approved by the Commissioner of Central Excise.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The export shall be required to file a general bond in the Form specified in the said notification Annexure-16 with such security or surety as may be specified by the concerned bond accepting authority. The bond shall be in a sum equal at least to the duty chargeable on the goods for the due arrival of export goods at the place of export (Land Customs Station) and their export therefrom under Customs supervision. The officer who will accept the bond, will also be responsible for discharging that bond upon furnishing proof of export by the exporter. 3.2 The bond shall not be discharged unless the goods are duly exported, to the satisfaction of the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Maritime Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Board on this behalf within the time allowed for such export or are otherwise accounted for to the satisfaction of such officer, or until the full duty due upon any deficiency of goods, not accounted so, and interest, if any, has been paid 3.3 Invoice in the Form specified in the said notification (Annexure-21) shall be used for export clearances. Six copies of invoice shall be prepared. This document shall bear running serial number beginning from the first day of the financial year. During this year, for the sake of continuity, the serial number, as started from 1.4.2001, may continue. The stationary for invoice under erstwhile notification no. 50/94-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 22.9.1994 may be used for the time being" during this financial year. On the invoice, certain declarations are required to be given by the exporter. They should be signed by the exporter or his authorised agent. 3.4 Certificate shall be required in the Form specified in the said notification (Annexure-22) from the Reserve Bank of India or any other bank authorised to deal in foreign exchange by the Reserve Bank of India, for the receipt of full payment in freely convertible currency. Certificate may also be required where remittance is received in Indian Rupee.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Export under bond to Nepal or Bhutan where payment is in freely convertible currency 4.1.1 Export under bond to Nepal or Bhutan where payment is in freely convertible currency, shall be subject to following conditions, namely: - (i) The importer in Nepal or Bhutan, as the case may be, shall open an irrevocable letter of credit in favour of the exporter in India, before the export takes place. However, this is not necessary int eh following cases of export: (a) All excisable goods other than consumer goods and (b) Motor vehicle, if they are exported without payment of duty as - (i) supplies to projects financed by any United Nations agency, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Development Association, the Asian Development Bank or any other multilateral agency of like nature; and (ii) to all diplomatic missions in Nepal or Bhutan provided the Indian Embassy or the Ministry of External Affairs certifies that the import is for the personnel of the diplomatic community; (ii) The exporter shall furnish a bond in Form specified in Annexure-I of the above-mentioned notification before the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory, warehouse, or the approved premises or such other officer as authorised by the Board on this behalf, from where the goods are removed for export to Nepal, as the case may be, or Bhutan; (iii) After the exports are effected the exporter shall furnish a certificate of remittances from the Reserve Bank of India or an authorised bank in India, showing that full payment for the goods has been duly received in freely convertible currency, as defined in the said notification. On receipt of such a certificate and on the satisfaction that the goods have been exported in terms of the bond, the bond accepting authority shall discharge the exporter of his liabilities under the bond. 4.2 Export to Nepal in bond against payment in Indian rupee 4.2.1 As an exception to the above category of export, capital goods, as defined in the said notification may be exported under bond directly from the factory of manufacture to Nepal against any global tender invited by His Majesty's Government of Nepal without payment of duty, for which payment is received in Indian currency. Such exports shall be subject to the following further conditions, namely - (i) the exporter shall furnish a bond in specified Form before the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise or such other officer as authorised by the Board on this behalf; and (ii) the exporter shall furnish a certificate of remittances in specified Form from a bank in India showing that full payment for the goods has been duly received in Indian currency by the said bank; 4.2.2 On receipt of the certificate of remittances and on the satisfaction that the goods have been exported in terms of bond, the bond accepting authority shall discharge the exporter of his liabilities under the bond. 4.3 Export in bond of petroleum oil and lubricant products to Nepal 4.3.1 The export in bond without payment of duty of excise of petroleum oil and lubricant products to Nepal is permitted through the agency of Nepal Oil Corporation from calibrated stocks of M/s Indian Oil Corporation registered as a warehouse in accordance with the provisions rule 20 the said Rules, and situated at places notified for the purpose or purchased without payment of duty from tanks of other Oil Companies or Undertakings. For this facility, the Indian Oil Corporation shall be required to furnish a bond in the specified Form to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the installation from which the petroleum oil and lubricant products are to be exported. 4.4 Export in bond for supplies to Government of India Aided Projects in Nepal and the Embassy Cooperative Store and Embassy Petrol Pump located in Nepal for the bonafide use of officers and staff of the Embassy in Nepal 4.4.1 Export in bond for supplies to Government of India Aided Projects in Nepal and the Embassy Cooperative Store and Embassy Petrol Pump located in Nepal for the bonafide use of officers and staff of the Embassy in Nepal shall be subject to the following conditions, namely - (i) the exporter shall furnish a bond in specified Form to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise; and (ii) the First Secretary (Economic), Embassy of India, Nepal, certifies the signature and stamp or seal of the person authorised to place the order for supply of excisable goods to the specified Government of India Aided Projects in Nepal; 4.5 Export without payment of duty to Kurichu Hydro Electric Project and Tala Hydro Electric Project in Bhutan 4.5.1 Export of all excisable goods without payment of duty to Kurichu Hydro Electric Project and Tala Hydro Electric Project in Bhutan shall be subject to the following conditions, namely - (i) The exporter shall furnish a bond in Form in specified Form before the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or warehouse from which the goods have to be cleared; (ii) The goods are supplied against one or more specified contract which have been registered with the Directorate General of Inspection, Customs and Central Excise in the following manner: (a) Every Project Authority specified in the notification (notification no. 45/2001-CE(N.T.), supra, desirous of obtaining supplies under benefits of this notification shall apply in writing to the Director General, Directorate General of Inspection (Customs and Central Excise) [hereinafter referred to as DGICCE], 5th Floor, Drum Shape Building, I.P. Estate, New Delhi for registration of the contract through Ministry of External Affairs as soon as the contract has been concluded with the suppliers; (b) The application shall be accompanied by the original deed of contract and list of items duly approved by the Ministry of External Affairs; (c) The Project Authority shall also furnish such other documents or other particulars as may be required by the DGICCE in connection with the project. (d) DGICCE, on being satisfied, shall register the contract by entering the particulars in a Register maintained separately for each project and shall assign a number in token of registration and communicate the same to the Project Authority and shall also return to the project authority all original documents which are no longer required. This number shall be indicated on all the invoices and other related documents. (e) A copy of the contract so registered along with the approved list of items shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory/warehouse to which the contract pertains for extending benefits under this notification and consequent benefits under the Central Excise CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 to the supplier. 4.5.2 Amendment of Contract (a) If any contract referred to hereinabove is amended, whether before or after registration, the Project Authority shall make an application for registration of amendments to the said contract to the DGICCE. (b) The application shall be accompanied by the original deed of contract relating to the amendment and a list of items pertaining to amendment, if any, duly approved by the Ministry of External Affairs. (c) On being satisfied that the application is in order the DGICCE shall make note of the amendments in the relevant entries. (d) The DGICCE shall forward copy of the amended contract and the amended list of items, if any, to the concerned Commissioner of Central Excise. 4.5.3 Finalisation of Contract (a) Each Project Authority shall submit a statement of supplies received on quarterly basis along with relevant invoices and other documents to the DGICCE within one month from the last date of the quarter. (b) The Commissioner of Central Excise to whom a registered contract has been forwarded shall forward a statement, after all the items covered under the contract have been exported, to the DGICCE. (c) The DGICCE shall, on receipt of the statement, reconcile both and, if satisfied, finalise the contract and close the entry in the register." 4.5.4 There should be a release order from the officer authorised by the General Manager of the concerned project authority covering he goods; 4.5.5 The exporter shall furnish a bond in the specified Form to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or warehouse or the approved premises or from where the goods are removed for export to the specified project.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 Procedure at the place of despatch 5.1.1 Six copies of invoice shall be presented to the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory, warehouse or any other approved premises along with the export goods; 5.1.2 In case of export for supplies to Government of India Aided Projects in Nepal and the Embassy Cooperative Store and Embassy Petrol Pump located in Nepal for the bonafide use of officers and staff of the Embassy in Nepal, the order from Project Implementation Authority shall also be presented; 5.1.3 the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory, warehouse or any other approved premises shall verify the identity of goods with reference to description mentioned in the invoice and the particulars of the duty payable but for export, and if found in order, he shall seal the consignment, tank or container with Central Excise seal or in such other the manner as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise and endorse each copy of the export invoice in token of having such verification and examination done by him; 5.1.4 The said Superintendent or Inspector will allow export and distribute invoices in the following manner - Original (First copy) - Hand over to the exporter Duplicate, triplicate and quadruplicate (second, third and fourth copies) - Hand over to the exporter or his agent in a sealed cover for delivery to the Customs officer in-charge of the Land Customs Station through which the goods are intended to be exported. Quintuplicate copy (Fifth copy) - Forwarded to the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise who has accepted the bond Sixtuplicate (Sixth copy) - Retain for official record 5.1.5 The exporter or his agent shall then be free to remove the goods for export to Nepal through the Land Customs Station indicated on the respective invoices; 5.1.6 Where the goods are exported by land, the export shall take place through any of the following land customs stations, namely, Sukhiapokhri, Panitanki, Jogbani, Jayanagar, Bairgania, Bhimnagar, Bitamore (Sursand), Raxaul, Sonauli, Barhni, Nepalganj Road, Shohratgar (Khunwa), Jarwa, Katarniaghat, Gauriphanta, Banbasa, Jhulaghat, Dharchula, Naxalbari, Galgalia, Kunauli, Sonabarsa, Tikonia, or such other check-post as may be specified by the Board;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The exporter or his agent shall present the goods to the officer of customs in-charge of the land customs station along with the original copy of the invoice and the sealed cover containing duplicate, triplicate and quadruplicate copies and obtain acknowledgement; 6.2 Where the contents of all the copies of invoices tally and the packages, goods or container are satisfactorily identified with their seals in tact, the officer of customs in-charge of the land customs station shall make necessary entries in the register maintained at the land customs station and allow the goods to cross into the territory of Nepal or Bhutan and certify accordingly on each of the four copies of the invoice and indicate the running serial number in red ink prominently visible and encircled. In case the seals are not found intact, the officer of customs in charge of the land customs station may re-seal the containers with his own seal after satisfying himself as to the identity of the containers and the goods from the particulars shown on the invoice by opening and examining the goods, if necessary; 6.3 Distribution of invoices by Customs Officer - Original (First copy) : Hand over to the exporter or his agent alongwith the goods for presentation to the Customs Officer of Nepal or Bhutan. Duplicate and triplicate (Second and third copy) : Send to the Nepalese or Bhutanese Customs Officer in-charge of the check post through which the goods are to be imported into Nepal or Bhutan, as the case may be 6.4 Presentation of goods to Nepalese or Bhutanese Customs Officers: the goods are then to be produced before the Nepalese or Bhutanese Customs Officer, as the case may be, at the corresponding border check-post alongwith the original copies of the invoice. The Nepalese or Bhutanese Customs Officer shall deal with the original and triplicate copies of the invoice as directed by His Majesty's Government of Nepal or His Majesty's Government of Bhutan and return the duplicate copy, after endorsing his certificate of receipt of goods in Nepal or Bhutan, as the case may be, directly to the officer of customs-in-charge of the land customs station in India; 6.5 Further distribution of invoices: The officer of customs in-charge of the land customs station shall forward the duplicate copy to the Central Excise Officer in charge of the factory or warehouse from which the goods were removed for export without payment of duty. For this purpose, the said officer in charge of the land customs station should keep a note of the return of duplicate copies from the Customs Officer of Nepal or Bhutan and remind the exporter for such copies as have not been received, failing which the exporter may be liable to pay full duty on such consignments; 6.6 The officer of customs officers, at the land customs station shall also maintain a separate record of all such in-bond exports of the goods without payment of duty and shall assign running serial number on the invoice at the time of export as indicated earlier;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 Essential ingredients for discharge of bond have already been mentioned under each category of exports. 7.2 The general procedure would be - the exporter shall submit the quadruplicate copy duly endorsed by the officer of customs in-charge of land customs station to the Central Excise officer who has accepted the bond alongwith bank, certificate evidencing receipt of payment in freely convertible currency (in Indian Rupee in particular category), within six months from the date of removal of the goods. It may be noticed that earlier, the above mentioned period has been extended from 'three' months to 'six' months, as compared to erstwhile notification. 7.3 The Central Excise officer will tally the particulars with quintuplicate copy of the invoice received from the Central Excise officer who has allowed clearance from the factory or warehouse or any other approved premises and make suitable entries in Bond Account of the exporter, giving provisional credit or discharging the bond provisionally. 7.4 On receipt of the duplicate copy of invoice, duly endorsed by customs officer of Nepal or Bhutan from the customs officer in charge of land customs station, certifying export of the goods and after tallying the particulars with those in quadruplicate copy of the invoice make suitable entries in Bond Account and the obligation under the said bond will then be discharged. 7.5 In case of failure to export within six months from the date of removal from the factory or warehouse or any other approved premises, or shortages noticed, the exporter shall discharge the duty liability on the goods not so exported or shortage noticed along with twenty four per cent. interest thereon from the date of removal for export without payment of duty till the date of payment of duty in terms of the bond.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 If the excisable goods cleared under A.R.E.1 are not exported for any reason and the exporter intends to divert the goods for home consumption, he may request in writing the authority who accepted the bond or letter of undertaking to allow cancellation of application, and diversion of goods for consumption in India. He will be permitted to do so if he pays the duty as specified in the application along with interest at the rate of twenty four percent per annum on such duty from the date of removal for export from the factory or warehouse till the date of payment of duty. The permission shall be granted within 3 working days. Since duty assessment on A.R.E 1 has to be done in normal course, there will not be any need for re-assessment by the Department or the assessee unless there are reasons to believe that the assessment was not correct. After the duty is discharged, the exporter may take credit in his running bond (where bond is furnished) on the basis of letter of permission, invoice and TR-6 Challans on which duty is paid. He shall record these facts in the Daily Stock Account 1.2 If the exporter, after clearing the goods for export without payment of duty, intends to change the destination or buyer or port/place of export, he may do so provided he informs the bond/LUT accepting authority in writing about the changes and makes necessary changes in all the copies of A.R.E.1 and the invoices. If he intends to cancel the original export documents and issue fresh ones, the same may be done under permission and authentication by bond/LUT accepting authority who will ensure that the serial no. and date of the initial documents are endorsed on the fresh documents. In such cases, if bond was furnished for single consignment, fresh bond may not be asked.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The excisable goods cleared for export under bond or undertaking but not actually exported for any genuine reasons may be returned to the same factory provided - (i) such goods are returned to the factory within six months along with original documents (invoice and A.R.E.1); (ii) the assessee shall give intimation of the re-entry of each consignment in Form D-3 within twenty-four hours of such re-entry; (iii) such goods are to be stored for separately at least for 48 hours from the time intimation is furnished to Range Office or shorter period if verification is done by the Superintendent of Central Excise in the manner mentioned subsequently ; and (iv) the assessee shall record details of such goods in the daily stock account and taken in the stock in the factory; 2.2 The Superintendent of Central Excise will verify himself or though Inspector in charge of the factory, about the identity of such goods with reference to invoice, A.R.E.1 and the daily stock account in respect of 5% of intimations, within another 24 hours of receipt of intimation.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 It has been provided in the Notification 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.), supra, that the exported excisable goods which are re-imported for carrying out repairs, re-conditioning, refining, re-making or subject to any similar process may be returned to the factory of manufacture for carrying out the said processes and subsequent re-export. It may be noted that 're-import and re-export' shall be governed by the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 . 3.2 So far Central Excise is concerned, the manufacturer shall maintain separate account for return of such goods in a daily stock account and make suitable entry on the said account after goods are processed, repaired, re-conditioned, refined or re-made. When such goods are exported, the usual export procedure shall be followed. 3.3 Any waste or refuse arising as a result of the said processes shall be removed from the factory on payment of appropriate duty or destroyed after informing the proper officer in writing at least 7 days in advance and after observing such conditions and procedure as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise and thereupon the duty payable on such waste or refuse may be remitted by the said Commissioner of Central Excise.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Goods removed without payment of duty for export on A.R.E.1 from one factory (hereinafter referred to as 'the first factory') of a manufacturer are allowed to enter in another factory of the said manufacturer (hereinafter referred to as the 'subsequent factory') ONLY for the purpose of consolidation and loading of goods manufactured in subsequent factory and export therefrom subject to following conditions - (i) The exporter shall be required to get his goods examined and sealed at each factory [the places of despatch] by a Central Excise Officer. (ii) The export goods shall be brought under cover on invoice and A.R.E.1 in the subsequent factory in original packing and duly sealed by Central Excise Officers. In case goods are stuffed in a container, Central Excise Officer shall duly seal the container in the first factory and the sealing of each package shall not be insisted upon. The Central Excise Officer having jurisdiction over the subsequent factory shall supervise the opening of the seal of container, loading of goods (duly sealed if these goods are to be loaded in open truck/vehicle) belonging to the subsequent factory in vehicle or container and sealing of the container. (iii) The exporter or the manufacturer shall pay the supervision charges.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The Central Excise Officer examining the consignment would draw representative samples wherever necessary in triplicate. He would hand over two sets of samples, duly sealed, to the exporter or his authorized agent, for delivering to the Customs Officer at the point of export. He would retain the third set for his records. The instructions and procedure for drawl of samples specified by the Board should be followed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Board has, by Notification No. 43/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 [hereinafter referred to as the 'said notification'] notified the conditions, safeguards and procedures for procurement of the excisable without payment of duty for the purpose of use in the manufacture or processing of export goods and their exportation out of India, to any country except Nepal and Bhutan. 1.2 It may be noted that in rule 19 of the said Rules and in said notification, expression 'export goods' has been used. This refers to excisable goods (dutiable or exempted) as well as non-excisable goods. Thus, the benefit of input stage rebate can be claimed on export of all finished goods whether excisable or not. 1.3 It may be also noted that materials, as defined in the said rule 19 may be used for manufacture or processing. In other words, any processing not amounting to manufacture (such as packing, blending etc.) will also be eligible for the benefit under said notification. 1.4 Removal without payment of duty of equipment and machinery in the nature of capital goods used in relation to manufacture or process of finished goods shall not be allowed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The conditions and procedure for manufacture of export goods in bond shall be, as follows - (i) The manufacturer or the processor intending to avail benefit of this notification shall register himself under rule 9 of the said Rules; and (ii) The procedure specified in the Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001 shall be followed, mutatis mutandis. It is clarified that there is no need for any separate exemption notification for applying this rule. (iii) The manufacturer or processor shall file a declaration with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture under the Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001 , and also declare ratio of input and output and rate of duty payable on excisable goods to be procured without payment of duty. Where there are more than one export product, separate statement of the input-output ratios may be furnished for each export product. The consumption should be net of recycled materials. Where recoverable wastage are generated but not recycled but sold on account of its unsuitability, the same should be clearly reflected in the declaration. The declarant should also enclose, in case of a new product or in case where the manufacturer is not regularly manufacturing the export goods and clearing for home consumption or export, a write up of manufacturing process. 2.2 Verification of Input-output ratio and grant of permission 2.2.1 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise shall verify the correctness of the ratio of input and output mentioned in the declaration filed before commencement of export of such goods, if necessary, by calling for samples of finished goods or by inspecting such goods in the factory of manufacture or process. If, after such verification, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is also satisfied that there is no likelihood of evasion of duty, he may grant permission to the applicant for manufacture or processing and export of finished goods and countersign the application in the manner specified in the Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001 ; 2.2.2 It is clarified that for the sake of convenience and transparency, input output norms notified under the Export Import Policy may be accepted by the Department unless there are specific reasons for variation. However, in case, the input output norms notified under the Export Import Policy does not include all the materials used in export goods, the claim under this scheme should not be denied merely on that ground. 2.3 If for any reason the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is not satisfied with reference to the correctness of the consumption norms claimed by the applicant, especially where the product is being manufactured for the first time in his jurisdiction, he may permit the manufacturing operations and the verification of the consumption norms should be completed while the process of manufacture is on. The verification should be completed before allowing the export of the goods as the manufacturer working under this Scheme is expected to declare the raw materials costumed in ARE-2. 2.4 The permission granted by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise can be withdrawn at any time if any glaring misuse resulting into loss of revenue comes to his notice. 2.5 Any change in the consumption ratio [input-output ratio] should be promptly intimated by the manufacturer to the deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise and the jurisdictional Range Superintendent giving reference of the permission granted. If necessary, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may order fresh verification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The procedure of procurement of material required for the manufacture shall be governed by the provisions of the Central Excise (Removal of Goods at Concessional Rate of Duty for Manufacture of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2001 .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may permit a manufacturer to remove the materials as such or after the said materials have been partially processed during the course of manufacture or processing of finished goods to a place outside the factory - (a) for the purposes of test, repairs, refining, reconditioning or carrying out any other operation necessary for the manufacture of the finished goods and return the same to his factory without payment of duty for further use in the manufacture of finished goods or remove the same without payment of duty in bond for export, provided that the waste, if any, arising in the course of such operation is also returned to the said factory of the manufacture or process; or (b) for the purpose of manufacture of intermediate products necessary for the manufacture or processing of finished goods and return the said intermediate products to his factory for further use in the manufacture or process of finished goods without payment of duty or remove the same, without payment of duty for export, provided that the waste, if any, arising in the course of such operation is also returned to the factory of manufacturer or processor; (c) Any waste arising from the processing of materials may be removed on payment of duty as if such waste is manufactured or processed in the factory of the manufacturer or processor;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The goods shall be exported on the application in Form A.R.E. 2 specified in the Annexure-23 and the procedures specified in the Notification No. 42/2001-Central Excise dated 26th June, 2001 shall be followed. It is mentioned that in such cases, fresh A.R.E.1 is not required because export will be effected on A.R.E.2 itself. But the procedure specified in the aforementioned notifications relating to removals, distribution of documents at the place of despatch and place of export, acceptance of proof of export etc. shall be followed mutatis mutandis 5.2 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise should point out deficiency, if any within 15 days of filing of A.R.E.1 duly certified by Customs indicating actual export. Queries/ deficiencies shall be pointed out at one go and piecemeal queries should be avoided. 5.3 Only a manufacture or processor of finished goods who exports the goods can claim benefit of input stage rebate. This facility shall not be extended where export are through merchant exporters. 5.4 The benefit of input stage rebate cannot be claimed in any of the following situations - (i) where the finished goods are exported under Claim for Duty Drawback (ii) where the finished goods are exported in discharge of export obligations under a Value Advance Licence or a Quantity Based Advance Licence issued before 31.03.95. (iii) where facility of input stage credit is availed under CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 6. Accounts & Returns.- 6.1 The manufacturer shall maintain register of duty free materials brought to the factory for manufacture of finished goods for export and the account for finished goods manufactured and exported. Any officer duly empowered by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise in this behalf shall have access at all reasonable times to any premises indicated in the application. The applicant shall also permit the officer of Central Excise access to any records relating to the production, storage and export of goods. 6.2 The colour coding of A.R.E.2 will be as follows - Original White Duplicate Buff Triplicate Pink Quadruplicate Green Quintuplicate Blue
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 Samples will be invariably drawn by the Customs Officers for testing at the place of export in case the export goods are of sensitive nature considering that they are made from materials bearing high Central Excise Duty. 7.2 Customs officer responsible for making endorsement in A.R.E. 2 shall carefully check that exports are not covered under any of the following: The Duty Drawback Scheme A Value Based Advance Licence issued prior to 31.03.95 A Quantity Based Advance Licence issued prior to 31.03.95 8. The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner sanctioning rebate shall ensure that the relevant transport copies (duplicate copies) of Duty paying document have been suitably defaced before payment is made.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The conditions and procedure relating to export under claim of rebate are contained in Notification 40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26th June, 2001 issued under rule 18 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules). The new rule 18 corresponds to the earlier rule 12 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 . 1.2 It is worth mentioning that as per the definition of the term 'refund' in section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 , refund includes 'rebate' of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India or on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods which are exported out of India. Thus, the procedure specified in the said Rules and the notification issued thereunder are subject to section 11B of the said Act.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 There are mainly three categories of exports- (i) Export of all excisable goods to all countries except Nepal and Bhutan except certain mineral oils supplied as ship stores to aircraft on the foreign run; (ii) Export to Nepal; and s (iii) Export of mineral oils supplied as ship stores to aircraft on the foreign run to all the countries.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Conditions relating to the said export are, as follows - (i) It is essential that the excisable goods shall be exported after payment of duty, directly from a factory or warehouse. The condition of "payment of duty" is satisfied once the exporter records the details of removals in the Daily Stock Account maintained under rule 10 of the said Rules, whereas the duty may be discharged in the manner specified under rule 8 of the said Rules, i.e. on fortnightly or monthly basis, as the case may be. (ii) In certain cases, the Board may issue instructions/procedures for exporting the duty paid goods from a place other than the factory or the warehouse. In this regard, a general permission has been granted in respect of goods where it is possible to correlate the goods and their duty paid character. (iii) The excisable goods shall be exported within six months from the date on which they were cleared for export from the factory of manufacture or warehouse. This date will be indicated on the ARE.1 and invoice issued for the purpose. However, the Commissioner of Central Excise has powers to extend this period, for reasons to be recorded in writing in any particular case. The exporter will be required to submit written request to the Commissioner specifying the reasons why they could not export within the stipulated six months' period. The Commissioner should give his decision within seven working days of the receipt of the request. It should also be noted that such permissions should not given in a routine manner. (iv) The excisable goods supplied as ship's stores for consumption on board a vessel bound for any foreign port are covered by the notification mentioned above. in such quantities as the Commissioner of Customs at the port of shipment may consider reasonable; (v) The market price of the excisable goods at the time of exportation should not be less than the amount of rebate of duty claimed; (vi) The rebate claim will be admissible only if the amount of rebate of duty admissible is five hundred rupees or more. (vii) The rebate of duty paid on those excisable goods export of which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force, shall not be made.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 ARE.1 is the export document (Annexure-14), which shall be prepared in quintuplicate (5 copies). This is similar to the erstwhile AR.4. This document shall bear running serial number beginning from the first day of the financial year. During this year, for the sake of continuity, the serial number, as started from 1.4.2001, may continue. The stationary for AR.4 Form may be used with modified name "ARE.1" during this financial year. On A.R.E.1, certain declarations are required to be given by the exporter. They should be read carefully and signed by the exporter or his authorised agent. The different copies of ARE.1 forms should be of different colours indicated below - Original White Duplicate Buff Triplicate Pink Quadruplicate Green Quintuplicate Blue It will be sufficient if the copies of ARE.1 contain a color band on the top or right hand corner in accordance with above color scheme. 2.2 An invoice shall also be prepared in terms of rule 11 of the said Rules. 2.3 For filing rebate claim: There is no specified form for filing claim of rebate. The same may be done by the exporter on their letterhead and filed with the requisite documents.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The exporter has two optional procedures regarding the manner in which he may clear the export consignments from the factory or warehouse, namely - (i) Examination and sealing of goods at the place of despatch by a Central Excise Officer. (ii) Under self-sealing and self-certification
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The exporter is required to prepare five copies of application in the Form ARE-1, as per format specified in Annexure-I to Notification No. 40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. The goods shall be assessed to duty in the same manner as the goods for home consumption. The classification and rate of duty should be in terms of Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 read with any exemption notification and/or Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001The value shall be the "transaction value" and should conform to section 4 or section 4A, as the case may be, of the Central Excise Act, 1944It is clarified that this value may be less than, equal to or more than the F.O.B. value indicated by the exporter on the Shipping Bill. 4.2 The duty payable shall be determined on the ARE.1 and invoice and recorded in the Daily Stock Account it should be paid in the manner specified in rule 8 of the said Rules. 4.3 The exporter may request the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of production or manufacture, warehouse or approved premises for examination and sealing at the place of despatch 24 hours in advance, or such shorter period as may be mutually agreed upon, about the intended time of removal so that arrangements can be made for necessary examination and sealing. 4.4 In case of exports under Duty Exemption Entitlement Certificate Scheme (DEEC), Duty Exemption Pass Book Scheme (DEPB) and claim for Drawback, the Superintendent of Central Excise shall also examine and seal the consignment and sign the documents in token of having done so. In exceptional cases, where the exporter has unblemished track record of compliance (Central Excise) and where there is non-availability of Superintendent of Central Excise due to leave, vacant post or other reasonable causes, the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may permit examination and sealing by Inspector. Other types of export may be examined and sealed by the Inspector of Central Excise. 4.5 The Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise, as the case may be, will verify the identity of goods mentioned in the application and the particulars of the duty paid or payable. If he finds that the declaration in ARE.1 and the invoices are correct from the point of view of identity of goods and its assessment to duty, and that the exporter has recorded the duty payable in Daily Stock Account, he shall seal each package or the container ensuring that the goods cannot be tampered with after the examination. Normally, individual packages should be sealed by using wire and lead seals and an all-sides-closed container by using numbered One time Lock/Bottle seals or in such other manner as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise by a special or general written order. Thereafter, the said officer shall endorse and sign each copy of the application in token of having such examination done;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 Export from the factory or warehouse 5.1.1 In the case when export takes place from the factory of warehouse, the distribution of ARE.1 shall be, as follows- Original (First Copy) - The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature Duplicate (Second Copy) - The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature. Triplicate (Third Copy) - Sent to the officer with whom rebate claim is to be filed, either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover after posting the particulars in official records. Quadruplicate (Fourth Copy) - Retain for official records Quintuplicate (Fifth Copy) - Optional copy - The said Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise shall return to the exporter immediately after endorsements and signature. 5.2 Export from place other than factory or warehouse (including diversion of duty paid goods for export) 5.2.1 Where goods are not exported directly from the factory of manufacture or warehouse, the distribution of A.R.E.1 will be same as above except that the triplicate copy of application shall be sent by the Superintendent having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture or warehouse who shall, after verification forward the triplicate copy in the manner specified above.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 Self-sealing and self-certification is a scheme where the exporter who is a manufacturer or owner of a warehouse, may remove the goods for export from his factory or warehouse without examination by a Central Excise Officer. This procedure will also be permitted in the cases where a merchant-exporter procures the goods directly from a factory or warehouse. In both cases, the manufacturer of the export goods or owner of the warehouse shall take the responsibility of sealing and certification. For this purpose the owner, the working partner, the Managing Director or the Company Secretary, of the manufacturing unit of the goods or the owner of warehouse or a person (who should be permanent employee of the said manufacturer or owner of the warehouse holding reasonably high position) duly authorised by such owner, working partner or the Board of Directors of such Company, as the case may be, shall certify on all the copies of the application (A.R.E. 1) that the goods have been sealed in his presence. 6.2 The exporter shall distribute of the copies of A.R.E. 1 in the following manner - Original (First copy) and Duplicate (Second copy) - Send to the place of export along with the goods Triplicate (Third copy) and Quadruplicate (Fourth copy) - Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or warehouse within twenty four hours of removal of the goods Quintuplicate (Fifth copy) - Optional copy - Send to the place of export along with the goods 6.3 The said Superintendent and Inspector of Central Excise shall verify the particulars of assessment, the correctness of the amount of duty paid or duty payable, its entry in the Daily Stock Account maintained under rule 10 of the said Rules (the manufacturer or warehouse owner will be required to present proof in this regard), corresponding invoice issued under rule 11. If he is satisfied with the particulars, he will endorse the relevant A.R.E. 1 and append their signatures at specified places in token of having done the verification. In case of any discrepancy, he will take up the matter with the assessee for rectification and also inform the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner. Once verification is complete and the A.R.E. 1 is in order, he shall distribute the documents (A.R.E. 1) in the following manner: Triplicate (Third copy) - Send to the officer with whom rebate claim is to be filed, either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover after posting the particulars in official records Quadruplicate (Fourth copy) - Send to the officer with whom rebate claim is to be filed, either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover after posting the particulars in official records
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 The place of export may be a port, airport, Inland Container Depot, Customs Freight Station or Land Customs Station. 7.2 The exporter shall present together with original, duplicate and quintuplicate (optional) copies of the application (A.R.E. 1) to the Commissioner of Customs or other duly appointed officer - normally goods are presented in the designated export shed. 7.3 The goods are examined by the Customs for the purposes of Central Excise to establish the identity and quantity, i.e. the goods brought in the Customs area for export on an A.R.E. 1 are the same which were cleared from the factory. The Customs authorities also examine the goods for Customs purposes such as verifying for certain export incentives such as drawback, DEEC, DEPB or for determining exportability of the goods. 7.4 For Central Excise purposes, the Officers of Customs at the place of export shall examine the consignments with the particulars as cited in the application (A.R.E. 1) and if he finds that the same are correct and the goods are exportable in accordance with the laws for the time being in force (for example, they are not prohibited or restricted from being exported), shall allow export thereof. Thereafter, he will certify on the copies of the A.R.E. 1 that the goods have been duly exported citing the shipping bill number and date and other particulars of export. 7.5 The officer of customs shall return the original and quintuplicate (optional copy for exporter) copies of application to the exporter and forward the duplicate copy of application either by post or by handing over to the exporter in a tamper proof sealed cover to the officer specified in the application, from whom exporter wants to claim rebate. However, where exporter claims rebate by electronic declaration on Electronic Data Inter-change system of Customs, the duplicate shall be sent to the Excise Rebate Audit Section at the place of export. 7.6 The exporter shall use the quintuplicate copy for the purposes of claiming any other export incentive.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 The rebate claim can be sanctioned by any of the following officers of Central Excise:- Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of production of export goods or the warehouse; or Maritime Commissioner. 8.2 It shall be essential for the exporter to indicate on the A.R.E. 1 at the time of removal of export goods the office and its complete address with which they intend to file claim of rebate. 8.3 The following documents shall be required for filing claim of rebate - (i) A request on the letterhead of the exporter containing claim of rebate, A.R.E. 1 numbers and dates, corresponding invoice numbers and dates amount of rebate on each A.R.E. 1 and its calculations, (ii) original copy of the A.R.E.1, (iii) invoice issued under rule 11, (iv) self attested copy of shipping Bill, and (v) self attested copy of Bill of Lading. (vi) Disclaimer Certificate [in case where claimant in other than exporter] 8.4 After satisfying himself that the goods cleared for export under the relevant A.R.E. 1 applications mentioned in the claim were actually exported, as evident by the original and duplicate copies of A.R.E.1 duly certified by Customs, and that the goods are of 'duty -paid' character as certified on the triplicate copy of A.R.E. 1 received from the jurisdictional Superintendent of Central Excise (Range Office), the rebate sanctioning authority will sanction the rebate, in part or full. In case of any reduction or rejection of the claim, an opportunity shall be provided to the exporter to explain the case and a reasoned order shall be issued. 8.5 Where the individual rebate claim exceeds 5 lakh rupees, they shall be pre-audited before these are disbursed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 In case of export by parcel post after the goods intended for export have been sealed, the exporter shall affix to the duplicate application sufficient postage stamps to cover postal charges and shall present the documents, together with the package or packages to which it refers, to the postmaster at the Office of booking.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 The new concept of filing of rebate claim and its sanction through EDI established by the Customs formations at different ports/airports/ICDs/CFSs has been incorporated in the new procedure. However, its implementation is dependent upon development of software and formats of electronic forms, administrative set-up at the places of exports for auditing such claims and putting in place the necessary hardware. The new process will also require to be tested. This may take some time. Accordingly, the provision has been made that this facility will be available at such places and from such time as may be specified by the Board. 10.2 For this purpose, the expression 'electronic declaration" has been defined as the declaration of the particulars relating to the export goods, lodged in the Customs Computer System, through the data-entry facility provided at the Service Centre or the date communication networking facility provided by the National Informatic Centre, from the authorised person's computer.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 For export to Nepal, a different procedure has to be followed considering that the rebate is granted to the His Majesty's Government of Nepal based on Indo-Nepal Treaty. Currently, the procedure is specified only for exports through specified Land Customs Stations. There is no rebate procedure for Bhutan.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The conditions of export are similar to export to other countries. For clarity, these are explained below - (i) It is essential that the excisable goods shall be exported after payment of duty, directly from a factory or warehouse. The condition of "payment of duty" is satisfied once the exporter records the details of removals in the Daily Stock Account maintained under rule 10 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules), whereas the duty may be discharged in the manner specified under rule 8 of the said Rules, i.e. on fortnightly or monthly basis, as the case may be. (ii) In certain cases, the CBEC may issue instructions/procedures for exporting the duty paid goods from a place other than the factory or the warehouse. (iii) The excisable goods shall be exported within six months from the date on which they were cleared for export from the factory of manufacture or warehouse. This date will be indicated on the Nepal Invoice issued for the purpose. However, the Commissioner of Central Excise has powers to extend this period, for reasons to be recorded in writing in any particular case. The exporter will be required to submit written request to the Commissioner specifying the reasons why they could not export within the stipulated six months' period. The Commissioner should give his decision within seven working days of the receipt of the request. It should also be noted that such permissions should not given in a routine manner. (iv) The market price of the excisable goods at the time of exportation should not be less than the amount of rebate of duty claimed. (v) The rebate claim will be admissible only if the amount of rebate of duty admissible is five hundred rupees or more. (vi) The rebate of duty paid on those excisable goods export of which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force, shall not be made. (vii) The whole or that part of duty as is granted as rebate to the exporter is not allowed as rebate to His Majesty's Government of Nepal. (viii) The goods can only be exported by land through any of the following land customs stations, namely, Sukhiapokhri, Panitanki, Jogbani, Jayanagar, Bairgania, Bhimnagar, Bitamore (Sursand), Raxaul, Sonauli, Barhni, Nepalganj Road, Shohratgar (Khunwa), Jarwa, Katarniaghat, Gauriphanta, Banbasa, Jhulaghat, Dharchula, Naxalbari, Galgalia, Kunauli, Sonabarsa, Tikonia, or such other check-post as may be specified by the CBEC.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The Format of 'Nepal Invoice' has been specified in the notification no. 40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 (Annexure-21)It is similar to the erstwhile form except minor modifications such as incorporating "duty paid or payable" in place of "duty paid" so as to attune it with the Fortnightly Payment System.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The exporter is required to prepare five copies of Nepal Invoice. The goods shall be assessed to duty in the same manner as the goods for home consumption. The classification and rate of duty should be in terms of Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 read with any exemption notification and/or the said Rules. The value shall be the "transaction value" and should conform to section 4 or section 4A, as the case may be, of the Central Excise Act, 1944It is clarified that this value may be less than, equal to or more than the F.O.B. value indicated by the exporter on the Bill of Export. 4.2 The duty payable shall be determined on the Nepal Invoice and recorded in the Daily Stock Account it should be paid in the manner specified in rule 8 of the said) Rules. 4.3 The exporter may request the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of production or manufacture, warehouse or approved premises for examination and sealing at the place of despatch 24 hours in advance, or such shorter period as may be mutually agreed upon, about the intended time of removal so that arrangements can be made for necessary examination and sealing. 4.4 In case of exports under Duty Exemption Entitlement Certificate Scheme (DEEC), Duty Exemption Pass Book Scheme (DEPB) and claim for Drawback, the Superintendent of Central Excise shall also examine and seal the consignment and sign the documents in token of having done so. In exceptional cases, where the exporter has unblemished track record of compliance (Central Excise) and where there is non-availability of Superintendent of Central Excise due to leave, vacant post or other reasonable causes, the jurisdictional Assistant/Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise may permit examination and sealing by Inspector. Other types of export may be examined and sealed by the Inspector of Central Excise. 4.5 The Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise, as the case may be, will verify the identity of goods mentioned in the application and the particulars of the duty paid or payable. If he finds that the declaration in Nepal Invoice are correct from the point of view of identity of goods and its assessment to duty, and that the exporter has recorded the duty payable in Daily Stock Account, he shall seal each package or the container ensuring that the goods cannot be tampered with after the examination. Normally, individual packages should be sealed by using wire and lead seals and an all-sides-closed container by using numbered One time Lock/Bottle seals or in such other manner as may be specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise by a special or general written order. Thereafter, the said officer shall endorse and sign each copy of the application in token of having such examination done; 4.6 The distribution of the Nepal invoice shall be, as follows - Original (First copy) - Hand over to the Exporter or his agent along with the goods, packages or container after sealing it. Duplicate (Second Copy) - To be put in a sealed cover and given to the exporter or his agent by the Central Excise Officer for being handed over to the officer of Customs In-Charge of the concerned land customs station Triplicate (Third Copy) - To be put in a sealed cover and given to the exporter or his agent by the Central Excise Officer for being handed over to the officer of Customs In-Charge of the concerned land customs station Quadruplicate (Fourth Copy) - To be retained by the Central Excise Officer; 4.7 The exporter or his agent shall then be free to remove the goods for export to Nepal, through the specified land customs stations.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The exporter or his agent shall present the goods to the officer of Customs in-charge of the land customs station along with the original copy of invoice and the sealed cover containing duplicate and triplicate copies; 5.2 The said officer shall examine the goods with reference to the declarations in the Nepal Invoice. Where the contents of all the copies of invoices tally and the packages, goods or container are satisfactorily identified with their seals in tact, the said customs officer shall make necessary entries in the register maintained at the land customs station and allow the goods to cross into the territory of Nepal. He may, to satisfy himself as to the identity of the packages, goods or containers from the particulars shown on the invoice, open container or packages and examine the goods, especially where the seals are broken; 5.3 He will also certify on each of the three copies of the invoice to this effect and simultaneously indicate the running serial number in red ink prominently visible and encircled against Item 3 on all the three copies of the invoice. 5.4 the customs officer, then deliver the original copy of the invoice duly endorsed to the exporter or his agent alongwith the goods for presentation to the Nepalese Customs Officer. 5.5 He shall also send, directly the duplicate and triplicate copies of the invoice to the Nepalese Customs Officer in-charge of the check post through which the goods are to be imported into Nepal; 5.6 the goods will then be produced before the Nepalese Customs Officer at the corresponding border check post along with the original copy of the invoice. The Nepalese Customs Officer, shall deal with the original copy as directed by His Majesty's Government of Nepal and return the duplicate copy, after endorsing his certificate of receipt of goods in Nepal directly to the officer of customs in-charge of the land customs station; 5.7 the officer in-charge of the land customs station shall forward the duplicate copy to the Deputy Director of Inspection, Customs and Central Excise, Nepal Refund Wing, New Delhi. For this purpose, the said officer in-charge of the land customs station should keep a note of the return of duplicate copies from the Nepalese Customs Officer and remind the exporter for such copies as have not been received.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The Directorate General of Inspection, Customs and Central Excise (Nepal Refund Wing), New Delhi [hereinafter referred to as "the Directorate"] shall maintain separate registers for each Indian Border Customs Check Post. 6.2 The duplicate invoice will be entered in the respective registers showing the running serial number in the recapitulation statement register prescribed for the purpose. 6.3 At the end of every month he shall calculate the amount of rebate due in respect of all certificates of exports received during that month and shall prepare a consolidated statement to arrive at the amount of rebate due to His Majesty's Government of Nepal. 6.4 One copy of the recapitulation statement shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Central Excise concerned for verifying the payment of rebate to Nepal Government and for issue of a post audit certificate in respect of the amount allowed as rebate against each invoice passed in that bill. In order to detect errors in the duty amount and quantity indicated. Internal Audit Department of the Commissionerate concerned should check this factor by comparison with the recapitulation statement forwarded by the Directorate and the monthly return of the factories concerned. 6.5 Where any over payment is noticed the fact should be brought to the notice of the Directorate for making necessary adjustment. 6.6 One copy of the recapitulation statement shall be forwarded to His Majesty's Government of Nepal. 6.7 One copy of the recapitulation statement shall remain as office copy with the Directorate. 6.8 After receiving the recapitulation statement, the Commissioner will get a verification conducted that the concerned factories have actually paid the duty of excise against which the rebate is to be given and the Commissioner/PAO of that Commissionerate shall furnish a certificate to the Directorate to the effect that all the concerned factories have paid the amounts of duty as indicated in the Annexure to the recapitulation statement. 6.9 In case the Directorate does not receive the duplicate copy of the invoice from the Officer in-charge of the Indian Land Customs Station and the triplicate copy is not received by the Nepal Government, necessary check should be made with the officer in-charge of the Indian Land Customs Station concerned as to the whereabouts of the particular invoice.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 A separate rebate procedure has been notified in respect of supplies of mineral oil products falling under Chapter 27 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) exported as stores for consumption on board an aircraft on foreign run.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 In respect of 7 products falling under the aforementioned Chapter, rebate has to be granted at a reduced rate. The rate for reducing rebate is specified in Notification no. 40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. 2.2 Earlier, the rebate was limited, by notification, to all countries, which did not have land frontiers with India, except Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar and Bhutan (though these countries have land frontier with India). But this facility was available by executive instructions to all countries, including the countries, which were not appearing in the notification for grant of this facility. The Government has decided to extend this facility to all countries, without any restrictions about the countries having land frontier. The supplies of ATF and other listed items (supplies to aircraft going to Nepal, Afghanistan and Bhutan) will be allowed in the same manner as it is allowed to supplies of ATF and other listed items to aircraft going to other foreign countries, including the payments or remittances. 2.3 The products as remain on board an aircraft after completion of an internal flight but prior to its reversion to foreign run, the rebate for which shall be granted without production of documents evidencing the payment of duty thereon. The proper officer of Customs shall certify in the manner specified by the Commissioner of Central Excise the quantity of products left on board for determining the quantum of rebate therefor.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The rebate sanctioning authority should point out deficiency, if any, in the claim within 15 days of lodging the same and ask the exporter to rectify the same within 15 days. Queries/ deficiencies shall be pointed out at one of and piecemeal queries should be avoided. The claim of rebate of duty on export of goods should be disposed of within a period of two months.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The Supplementary Rebate Claim, if any, should be filed within the stipulated time provided under section 11B of the Central Excises Act, 1944 .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Goods removed on A.R.E.1 from one factory of a manufacturer may be allowed to enter in another factory of the said manufacturer ONLY for the purpose of consolidation and loading of goods in second or subsequent factory(ies) and export therefrom. For this facility the exporter shall be required to get his goods examined and sealed at each factory [the places of despatch] by a Central Excise Officer. The packages loaded in the vehicle shall be in sealed condition in their original packing. Where goods are stuffed in a container, the container shall be sealed. The Central Excise Officer having jurisdiction over the second or subsequent factory(ies) shall supervise the opening of the seal of container, loading of goods (duly sealed if these goods are to be loaded in open truck/vehicle) belonging to the subsequent factory in vehicle or container and sealing of the container.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 After the goods are cleared for export on payment of appropriate duties of excise under claim of rebate but are not exported for any reason, the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory or the warehouse, shall, on being requested by the exporter in writing, cancel the export documents and make necessary endorsements. Thereafter, the goods shall be treated as if these were cleared for home-consumption. The goods need not be brought back to the factory or warehouse.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Government has, by Notification No. 41/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 [hereinafter referred to as the 'said notification'] allowed rebate of whole of the duty paid on excisable goods, which are in fact materials or inputs for manufacture or processing of other goods, on their exportation out of India, to any country except Nepal and Bhutan, to be paid subject to the conditions and the procedure specified in the above-mentioned notification. 1.2 It may be noted that in rule 18 and in said notification, expression 'export goods' has been used. It refers excisable goods (dutiable or exempted) as well as non-excisable goods. Thus the benefit of input stage rebate can be claimed on export of all finished goods whether excisable or not. 1.3 It may be also noted that materials may be used for manufacture or processing. In other words, any processing not amounting to manufacture (such as packing, blending etc.) will also be eligible for the benefit under said notification. 1.4. The expression 'material' shall mean all raw materials, consumables, components, semi-finished goods, assemblies, sub-assemblies, intermediate goods, accessories, parts and packing materials required for manufacture or processing of export goods. Rebate of Central Excise duty paid on equipment and machinery in the nature of capital goods used in relation to manufacture or process of finished goods being shall not be allowed. 1.5 The benefit of input stage rebate cannot be claimed in any of the following situations - (i) where the finished goods are exported under Claim for Duty Drawback. (ii) where the finished goods are exported in discharge of export obligations under a Value Advance Licence or a Quantity Based Advance Licence issued before 31.03.95. (iii) where facility of input stage credit is availed under CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 . (iv) The market price of the goods is less than the rebate amount. (v) The amount of rebate admissible is less then Rs. 500/- 1.6 The claim for rebate should be filed within the time stipulated under Section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The manufacturer or processor shall file a declaration (Annexure-24) with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture describing the finished goods proposed to be manufactured or processed along with their rate of duty leviable and manufacturing/processing formula with particular reference to quantity or proportion in which the materials are actually used as well as the quality. The declaration shall also contain the tariff classification, rate of duty paid or payable on the materials so used, both in words and figures, in relation to the finished goods to be exported. Where there are more than one export product, separate statement of the input-output ratios may be finished for each export product. The consumption should be net of recycled materials. Where recoverable wastage are generated but not recycled but sold on account of its unsuitability, the same should be clearly reflected in the declaration. The declarant should also enclose, in case of a new product or in case where the manufacturer is not regularly manufacturing the export goods and clearing for home consumption or export, a write up of manufacturing process.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise shall verify the correctness of the ratio of input and output mentioned in the declaration filed before commencement of export of such goods, if necessary, by calling for samples of finished goods or by inspecting such goods in the factory of manufacture or process. If, after such verification, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is also satisfied that there is no likelihood of evasion of duty, he may grant permission to the applicant for manufacture or processing and export of finished goods. 3.3 It is clarified that for the sake of convenience and transparency, input output norms notified under the Export Import Policy may be accepted by the Department unless there are specific reasons for variation. However, in case, the input output norms notified under the Export Import Policy does not include all the materials used in export goods, the claim under this scheme should not be denied merely on that ground. 3.4 If for any reason the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is not satisfied with reference to the correctness of the consumption norms claimed by the applicant, especially where the product is being manufactured for the first time in his jurisdiction, he may permit the manufacturing operations and the verification of the consumption norms should be completed while the process of manufacture is on. The verification should be completed before allowing the export of the goods as the manufacturer working under this Scheme is expected to declare the raw materials costumed is the ARE-2 for claiming rebate. 3.5 The permission granted by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise can be withdrawn at any time if any glaring misuse resulting into loss of revenue comes to his notice. 3.6 Any change in the consumption ratio [input-output ratio] should be promptly intimated by the manufacturer to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise and the jurisdictional Range Superintendent giving reference of the permission granted. If necessary, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may order fresh verification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The manufacturer or processor shall obtain the materials to be utilised in the manufacture of the finished goods intended for export directly from the registered factory in which such goods are produced, accompanied by an invoice under rule 11 of the said Rules. 4.2 The manufacturer or processor may also procure materials from dealers registered for the purposes of the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 under invoices issued by such dealers.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may permit a manufacturer to remove the materials as such or after the said materials have been partially processed during the course of manufacture or processing of finished goods to a place outside the factory- (i) for the purposes of test, repairs, refining, reconditioning or carrying out any other operation necessary for the manufacture of the finished goods and return the same to his factory without payment of duty for further use in the manufacture of finished goods or remove the same without payment of duty in bond for export, provided that the waste, if any, arising in the course of such operation is also returned to the said factory of the manufacture or process; or (ii) for the purpose of manufacture of intermediate products necessary for the manufacture or processing of finished goods and return the said intermediate products to his factory for further use in the manufacture or process of finished goods without payment of duty or remove the same, without payment of duty for export, provided that the waste, if any, arising in the course of such operation is also returned to the factory of manufacturer or processor; Any waste arising from the processing of materials may be removed on payment of duty as if such waste is manufactured or processed in the factory of the manufacturer or processor;
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The goods shall be exported on the application in Form A.R.E. 2 specified (Annexure-23) and the procedures specified in Notification No.40/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26 th June, 2001 shall be followed. In other words, the exporter has option to pay duty on finished export goods (if these are excisable) and claim rebate of such duty. He may also export the excisable goods without payment of duty. In both cases, fresh A.R.E.1 is not required because export will be effected on A.R.E.2 itself. But the procedure specified in the aforementioned notifications relating to removals, distribution of documents at the place of despatch and place of export, acceptance of proof of export/filing of claim etc. shall be followed mutatis mutandis . 6.2 The colour coding of A.R.E.2 will be as follows - Original White Duplicate Buff Triplicate Pink Quadruplicate Green Quintuplicate Blue
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 The claim for rebate of duty paid on materials used in the manufacture or processing of goods shall be lodged only with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction of the place approved for manufacture or processing of such export goods. The following documents shall be presented with the claim - (i) Original copy of the ARE2 duly endorsed by the Customs Officer; (ii) Duty self-attested copy of Shipping Bill (Export Promotion Copy) (iii) Duly self-attested copy of Bill of lading/ Air way bill (iv) Duplicate copy of the Central Excise Invoice under which Central Excise duty was paid/accounted as payable on goods cleared for export. [where rebate of finished goods are also being claimed] (v) Duplicate copy of the ARE.2 received from the customs officer in a sealed cover (if obtained).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 The Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise should point out deficiency, if any within 15 days of lodging of the claim and ask the exporter to rectify the same within 15 days. Queries/ deficiencies shall be pointed out at one go and piecemeal queries should be avoided. The claim of rebate should be disposed of within a maximum period of two months. 8.2 Only a manufacture or processor of finished goods who exports the goods can claim benefit of input stage rebate. Benefit of the input stage rebate shall not be extended where export are through merchant exporters. 9. Accounts & Returns.- 9.1 The manufacturer shall maintain register of duty paid materials brought to the factory for manufacture of finished goods for export under claim for input stage rebate and the account for finished goods manufactured and exported. Any officer duly empowered by the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise in this behalf shall have access at all reasonable times to any premises indicated in the application. The applicant shall also permit the officer of Central Excise access to any records relating to the production, storage and export of goods.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 Samples will be invariably drawn by the Customs Officers for testing at the place of export in case the export goods are of sensitive nature considering that they are made from materials bearing high Central Excise Duty. 10.2 Customs officer responsible for making endorsement in A.R.E.2 shall carefully check that exports are not covered under any of the following: The Duty Drawback Scheme A Value Based Advance Licence issued prior to 31.03.95 A Quantity Based Advance Licence issued prior to 31.03.95
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1. In rule 18 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 and Notification 41/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001, the expression "processing" has been used. It includes blending, packaging or any other operation. One problem which comes into the way is that the Notification No. 41/2001-CE (N.T.), supra, provides for procurement of goods directly from the factory of manufacture and the open market procurement is allowed only where goods are in original packed condition and the invoices are issued by registered dealers. In case of tea, condition relating to open market purchase cannot be fulfilled. Accordingly, a special procedure has been framed for export of tea bought in auctions (on which duty is paid at specific rate), under claim of rebate regard are specified below -
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The exports shall be made under the provisions of notification No.41/2001-CE (N.T) dated 26.6.2001. Boards instructions in Part-I of this Chapter may be followed mutatis mutandis. 2.2 For the purpose of export of blended/packaged tea where such blending/packaging was/is done after purchasing bulk tea from the open market or in auctions, the condition of the aforesaid notification regarding procurement of materials (tea in this case), directly from the factory will be relaxed, provided: (i) Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise is satisfied that the bulk tea contained in the blended/packaged tea has actually been exported and appropriate duty of excise has been paid. For this purpose, the copies ARE.2 together with Bill of Lading and Shipping Bill duly endorsed by the Customs at the place of export may be verified. (ii) in case of tea purchased in auctions, the brokers catalogue indicating the details of the invoices on which the bulk tea was removed from the factory for home consumption on payment of appropriate duty and the brokers contract relating to purchase of such tea is submitted along with rebate claim. (iii) in case tea is purchased other than in auctions, copies of relevant invoices evidencing payment of duty are submitted along with rebate claim. 2.3 It shall be ensured that exporters do not claim drawback as well as rebate under notification 41/2001-CE(N.T.), supra., simultaneously.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Refund of any duty of excise is governed by Section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944By definition, refund includes rebate of duty paid on goods exported out of India or on materials used in the manufacture of goods exported out of India. The refund claim can be filed within one year from the relevant date in the specified Form [for the time being the format R-1 specified under rule 173S of the erstwhile Central Excise Rules, 1944 ] by an assessee or even a person who has borne the duty incidence, to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the factory of manufacture. 1.2 The "relevant date" has been defined in the said section and refund of duty paid can be sought provided the manufacturer has not passed on the burden of duty. In case the burden of duty has been passed on, the refund can be claimed by the person who has actually paid the duty or, in the alternative, the amount can be deposited in the Consumer Welfare Fund created by the statute. 1.3 The Central Excise Act also provided for payment of interest on delayed payment of refund. As per Section 11BB, if any duty ordered to be refunded under Section 11B has not been refunded within three months from the date of receipt of the refund application in the prescribed manner and form along with the supporting documentary evidence as laid down in the relevant rules, interest at the rate notified by the Government shall have to be paid on such duty from the date immediately after the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of application till the date of refund of such duty.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Any person, who deems himself entitled to a refund of any duties of excise or other dues, or has been informed by the department that a refund is due to him shall present a claim in proper Form, along with all the relevant documents supporting his claim and also the copies of documents/records supporting his declaration that he has not passed on the duty incidence. 2.2 The claim will be filed with the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise with a copy to the Range Officer. 2.3 The claim shall be presented in duplicate and shall be duly signed by the claimant or by a duly authorised person on his behalf and shall be pre-receipted (with revenue stamp on original copy, where necessary). 2.4 It may not be possible to scrutinise the claim without the accompanying documents and decide about its admissibility. If the claim is filed without requisite documents, it may lead to delay in sanction of the refund. Moreover, the claimant of refund is entitled for interest in case refund is not given within three months of the filing of claim. Incomplete claim will not be in the interest of the Department. Consequently, submission of refund claim without supporting documents will not be allowed. Even if post or similar mode files the same, the claim should be rejected or returned with Query Memo (depending upon the nature/importance of document not filed). The claim shall be taken as filed only when all relevant documents are available. In case of non-availability of any document due to reasons for which the Central Excise or Customs Department is solely accountable, the claim may be admitted that the claimant in not in disadvantageous position with respect to limitation period.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The Range Officer will complete the scrutiny of the papers within 2 weeks from the date of receipt of the claim in the Range Office and send a report to their scrutiny to the Divisional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. 3.2 The Divisional Office will scrutinise the claim, in consultation with Range, and check that the refund application is complete and is covered by all the requisite documents. This should be done, as far as possible, the moment refund claim is received and in case of any deficiency, the same should be pointed out to the applicant with a copy to the Range Officer within 15 days of receipt. 3.3 In the Divisional Offices, final processing of refund claims after the receipt of Range Officer's report should be completed including the verification of the fact whether the assessee has passed on the duty incidence to their buyer (in cases where the refund claim is filed by a manufacturer or owner of warehoused goods). The types of cases to which this provision will not be attracted are already specified in section 11B itself. Where the duty incidence has been passes on, the duty refund, if otherwise admissible, will be ordered in file, but will also be ordered to be credited to the Consumer Welfare Fund. The burden of proving that the duty incidence has not been passes on, is on the claimant and the latter may be required to submit sufficient documentary proof for this purpose. It is clarified that the question of unjust enrichment has to be looked into case by case. There cannot be a general instruction indicating the documents and /or record, which the claimant should produce as a proof that he has not, passes on the duty incidence to any other person. 3.4 Claim for refund of less than Rs. 100 shall not entertained in respect of all excisable commodities.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Where the claim has been admitted whether in part or in full, and claimant is eligible for refund, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise should ensure that payment is made to the party within 3 days of the order passed after due audit, if any. 4.2 All claims shall be paid to the applicant by a cheque on the authorised bank with which the sanctioning authority maintains account. 4.3 On receipt of sanctioning claims from the dealing hands, the cheque shall be written out by the cashier (or his assistant) and simultaneously an entry made in the cash book. The Assistant Commissioner shall sign the cheque as well as the entry in the cashbook simultaneously. A receipt of the cheque should be obtained from the payee and placed on file. 4.4 After the cheque has been signed, it shall either be delivered to the claimant or his authorised representative personally when the next calls for it or sent to him by Registered Post 'Acknowledgement Due' at Government cost.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 All refund claim papers should be sent by the Divisional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner to the Commissionerate Headquarters (to the Additional/Joint Commissioner-Audit) within a week after the payment thereof irrespective of the amount involved. At the Commissionerate Headquarters, a special cell comprising Deputy/Assistant Commissioner (Audit) - for immediate supervision - one superintendent, one Inspector and two Deputy Office Superintendents may be created out of the sanctioned strength of the audit staff in the Commissionerate for post -audit of these claims. 5.2 This cell may undertake examination on merits of each such claim where the amount of refund granted is Rs. 5 lakh or more. In regard to the remaining refund claims involving amounts below Rs. 5 lakh, post audit may be undertaken on the basis of random selection by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner (Audit). This post audit may be completed before the expiry of three months from the date of payment and where ever the grant of refund is not found to be correct, action should be taken in terms of provisions contained in Section 35E of the Central Excises Act, 1944 , this special Cell may work directly under the charge of Additional/Joint Commissioner (Audit).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The Commissioner of Central Excise should devise appropriate control to ensure that the refund/rebate claims are expeditiously sanctioned within the time limit stipulated above.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Facility of warehousing of excisable goods without payment of duty has been provided in respect of the specified commodities by Notification No.47/2001CE(NT) dated 26th June, 2001. The Central Board of Excise and Customs has also specified detailed procedure including the conditions, limitations and safeguards for removal of excisable goods sub-rule (2) of Rule 20 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules) 1.2 Any goods warehoused may be left in the warehouse in which they are deposited, or in any warehouse to which such goods have been removed, till the expiry of three years from the date on which such goods were first warehoused.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Commissioner of Central Excise will specify the places under his jurisdiction where warehouse can be registered, by issuing Trade Notice. Any person desiring to have warehouse will get himself registered under the provisions of Rule 9 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The consignor (i.e. the manufacturer or the registered person of the warehouse) shall prepare an application for removal of goods from a factory or a warehouse to another warehouse in quadruplicate in the specified Form (Annexure-25). 3.2 The consignor shall also prepare an invoice in the manner specified in Rule 11 of the said Rules in respect of the goods proposed to be removed from his factory or warehouse. 3.3 The consignor shall send the original, duplicate and triplicate application and duplicate invoice along with the goods to the warehouse of destination. 3.4 The consignor shall send quadruplicate copy of the application to the Superintendent-in-charge of his factory or warehouse within twenty-four hours of removal of the consignment. 3.5 On arrival of the goods at the warehouse of destination, the consignee (i.e. the registered person of the warehouse who receives the excisable goods from the factory or a warehouse) shall, within twenty-four hours of the arrival of goods, verify the same with all the three copies of the application. The consignee shall send the original application to the Superintendent-in-charge of his warehouse, duplicate to the consignor and retain the triplicate for his record. 3.6 The Superintendent-in-charge of the consignee shall countersign the application received by him and send it to the Superintendent-in-charge of the consignor. 3.7 The consignor shall retain the duplicate application duly endorsed by the consignee for his record.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The consignor should receive the duplicate copy of the warehousing certificate, duly endorsed by the consignee, within ninety days of the removal of the goods. If the warehousing certificate is not received within ninety days of the removal or such extended period as the Commissioner may allow, the consignor shall pay appropriate duty leviable on such goods. 4.2 If the Superintendent-in-charge of the consignor of the excisable goods does not receive the original warehousing certificate, duly endorsed by the consignee and countersigned by the Superintendent-in-charge of the consignee, within ninety days of the removal of the goods, weekly reminders must be issued by him to the Superintendent-in-charge of the consignee. If despite such reminders the original warehousing certificate is not received within a further period of sixty days of the expiry of the ninety days period, the Superintendent-in-charge of the consignor shall inform his Assistant Commissioner/Deputy Commissioner who shall either secure a satisfactory proof of the goods having been duly received by the consignee or ensure that the duty of excise due on the goods not received at destination is recovered from the consignor.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The registered person of the warehouse shall maintain a register showing all entries in to and removals of the goods from his warehouse and shall indicate the value, quantity of the goods removed, their marks and numbers as well as the rate of duty and amount of duty involved. The processes carried out on the warehoused goods, if any, shall also be recorded. 5.2 The first and last pages of the register should be pre-authenticated by the owner of the warehouse or his authorised agent.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The registered person of the warehouse shall be responsible for due reception of the goods in to the warehouse and delivery therefrom including their safety during the period they are lodged in the warehouse. 6.2 The registered person shall be responsible for the payment of penalty or interest leviable in respect of the goods which are warehoused as per the provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the rules made thereunder.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 If the registration of a warehouse is revoked or suspended, the excisable goods lodged therein shall either be cleared for home consumption on payment of duty or shall be removed to another warehouse without payment of duty.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 A warehouse shall be used solely for storing excisable goods belonging to the registered person of the warehouse alone. He shall not admit or retain in the warehouse any excisable goods on which duty has been paid; 8.2 The Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the warehouse may permit storage of excisable goods along with the excisable goods belonging to another manufacturer; 8.3 The Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the warehouse may permit the registered person of the warehouse to store duty paid excisable goods or duty paid imported goods along with non-duty paid excisable goods in the warehouse.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 The owner of the warehouse may sort, separate, pack or re-pack the goods and make such alterations therein as may be necessary for the preservation, sale or disposal thereof.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 In pursuance of sub-rule (1) of rule 20 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules') the Board has issued notification no. 46/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26 th June, 2001 which has come into force on 1 st July, 2001, whereby the warehousing provisions have been extended to all excisable goods specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 intended for storage in a warehouse registered at such places as may be specified by the Board and export therefrom. 1.2 In pursuance of the above-mentioned notification the Board has also specified by Circular No. 581/18/2001-CX dated 29 th June, 2001 the places and class of persons to whom the provisions of the notification No.46/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26 th June, 2001 shall apply. In the same Circular, the Board has specified the conditions (including interest), limitations, safeguards and procedures. 1.3 The facility of export warehousing is available to the following exporters and places, namely - (1) Exporters: The exporters who have been accorded status of Super Star Trading House or Star Trading House, the foreign departmental stores of repute and the automobiles manufacturers who have signed Memorandum of Understanding with Directorate General of Foreign Trade in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. (2) Places: The warehouses may be established and registered in Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kanpur, Ludhiana, District of Pune and Mumbai.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The exporter shall furnish a general Bond (B-3) under rule 19 of the said Rules read with notifications issued thereunder, backed by twenty five per cent security of the bond amount. 2.2 Where any goods are diverted to home consumption from the warehouse, interest shall be charged at the rate of twenty four per cent per annum on the duty payable, calculated from the date of clearance from the factory of production or any other premises approved by the Commissioner, till the date of payment of duty and clearances; and
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Registration 3.1.1 The exporter shall make a written request along with application for registration under rule 9 to the Commissioner for being allowed to establish a export warehouse under this provision. The Commissioner may cause an enquiry to be made in respect of the security of the premise for warehouse indicated by the exporter in the application. If found in order, the Commissioner will accord his approval subject to such directions, terms and manners as he may specify and forward the application to the jurisdictional Superintendent of Central Excise through the jurisdictional Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise (having jurisdiction over the premise) within seven working days of the receipt of the application. 3.1.2 The registration certificate containing registration number will be issued by the jurisdictional Superintendent of Central Excise immediately on receipt. Procedure relating to registration will be same as notified in Notification No.36/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001. 3.2 Execution of bond 3.2.1 Every exporter registered in the aforesaid manner, shall execute before the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise having jurisdiction over the warehouse a general bond under Rule 19 of the said Rules for export of goods from the warehouse in the B-3 Bond (General Security) Format at Annexure-26. The exporter availing this scheme shall be required to furnish security equal to 25% of the bond amount. In case any bank guarantees are furnished, it shall be the sole responsibility of the exporter to renew its validity from time to time. 3.2.2 A 'Running Bond Account ' will be opened in the format specified at Annexure-27. This register shall be maintained by the exporter in the warehouse and shall be made available to the officer-in -charge or officers of Internal Audit for scrutiny and checking. 3.3 Removal of goods to warehouse 3.3.1 For removal of excisable goods from a factory or any other premise approved by the Commissioner to a warehouse, procedure laid down in Circular No. 579/16/2001-CX dated 26.6.2001 issued under rule 20 of the said Rules will be applicable. It is clarified that the Notification No . 46/2001-CE(NT) dated 26.6.2001 do not cover removal from one warehouse to another. 3.3.2 The Central Excise Officer in-charge of the warehouse will issue certificate of removal in duplicate in the Form CT-2 specified at Annexure-28 indicating details of the general bond executed by the exporter. The CT-2 shall bear per-printed serial numbers running for the whole financial year beginning on the 1st April of each year. The said officer will issue twenty five CT-2 certificates at a time, signing each of the leaf with the official stamp. More certificates can be issued if it is so requested by the exporter on the grounds of large number of procurements. The exporter will fill up the relevant information in CT-2. After making provisional debit in the Running Bond Account, he will indicate the same in the CT-2. One copy of CT-2 will be forwarded to Officer-in charge of the warehouse. One copy will be sent to the consignor and one copy will remain with the exporter. 3.3.3 The consignor will prepare an application for removal in the Form specified in Annexure-IV (hereinafter referred to as ARE-3) and an invoice (under rule 8 taking into account CT-2 certificate) and follow the procedure specified in Circular No. 579/16/2001-CX dated 26.6.2001 issued under rule 20. The serial number of the corresponding CT-2 shall be mentioned on the top of the each copy of ARE-3. Any nominal variations between the provisional debit indicated in the CT-2 and the actual duty involved in the goods removed as indicated in ARE-3, can be ignored. Immediately on receipt of goods, the provisional debit shall be converted into actual debit on the basis of the details mentioned in ARE-3. 3.3.4 The officer-in-charge of the warehouse will countersign application and despatch to the Range Office having jurisdiction over the factory / other approved premise of removal within one working day of receipt of the application. He will make suitable entry in his own record accordingly. 3.3.5 The exporter [warehouse owner] shall maintain private record (Warehousing Register) containing information relating to details of ARE-3 and invoice, date of warehousing certificate, description of goods received including marks and numbers, quantity, value, amount of duty, details of operation in the warehouse and new packages and their marks and number, clearance from the warehouse for export (ARE-1 No., Invoice No., quantity, value, duty) and clearance for home consumption. They shall produce this Register to the Central Excise Officers in-charge of the warehouse whenever required. 3.4 Receipt and storage of goods in warehouse 3.4.1 Receipt of goods will be governed by the procedure specified Circular No. 579/16/2001-CX dated 26.6.2001 issued under rule 20. 3.4.2 Ten percent of the consignments, subject to minimum of two, received in a month will be randomly selected, spread over the entire month, for verification by officer-in-charge after the receipt of the written intimation. 3.4.3 Goods brought under the cover of each ARE-3 shall be stored separately or proper accountable shall be maintained, till these are exported or diverted for home-consumption. 3.5 Packing, re-packing, labeling or re-labeling within the warehouse 3.5.1 The operations of Packing, re-packing, labeling or re-labeling in relation to excisable goods received and stored in the warehouse will be governed by the procedure specified under rule 20. Suitable entries must be made in the Export-Warehouse register. In case of non-reconciliation of quantity, after adjusting any wastage or refuse, the differential quantity shall be treated as unaccounted and action for recovery of duty will be initiated. 3.5.2The exporter may procure packing or labeling material and bring the same into the warehouse under the warehousing procedure itself. No duty paid goods will be permitted to be brought into the warehouse. 3.5.3 Where the process of packing, repacking, labeling or relabelling amounts to manufacture in terms of the provisions of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 , the goods permitted for clearance for home consumption shall be assessed accordingly.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 An SSI Unit exempted from registration under rule 9 of the said rules will also prepare ARE-3 against CT-2 in the same manner as mentioned in Para 5.3 above except that he will use his own invoice. Registration under rule 9 shall not be insisted. The Warehousing Certificate forwarded to the Range Office having jurisdiction over such SSI Unit shall be retained in the office and will be tallied with the details submitted by the SSI Unit in the quarterly statement. The procedure to be followed is based on Board's Circular No. 212/46/96-CX dated 20th May, 1996, which continues to be applicable under the said Rules. The clearances on those ARE-3 in respect of which Warehousing Certificate is not received within ninety days of removal or such extended period as the Commissioner may allow, will be treated as clearances for home-consumption. If the Warehousing Certificate is subsequently produced, the clearances, which were treated as "clearance for home consumption" as aforesaid, shall be expunged.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 For the export of goods from the warehouse, the procedure relating to preparation of application for export (ARE.1), examination and sealing, acceptance of proof of export etc. shall be governed by Notification No. 42/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 and instructions applicable for this notification. 5.2 The requisite copies of application will be filed with the Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner having jurisdiction over the warehouse and with whom the Bond was executed, for acceptance of proof of export and issue of a certificate to this effect. 5.3 The credit in Running Bond Account shall be made by the exporter on the basis of the application (ARE.1) duly endorsed by Customs at the place of export evidencing that the goods have actually been exported. The exporter will submit list of ARE.1 along with the date of export for the goods exported in each month, within six months of the removal from the warehouse and the original copies of the respective ARE.1 duly certified by Customs authorities that the goods have actually been exported [containing Pass for Shipment Order]. The exporter shall be liable to pay duty with interest where such proof of export is not available with him within six months from the date of removal from the warehouse. 5.4 The Superintendent in-charge of the warehouse is empowered to issue certified attested copies of ARE.1 [more than one copies may be required by exporter as one application (ARE.1) may consist of goods of several ARE-3s] and hand over to the exporter for forwarding to the factory whose goods were exported so that such factories can avail other export benefits, such as refund of CENVAT credit accumulated on account of export in terms of the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001This refund will be given only after goods covered on an ARE-3 is entirely exported. In case of any diversion to home-consumption, refund will be reduced on pro-rata basis. For the sake of clarification, it is stated that the removal from the factory of production to export warehouse on ARE-3 is 'removal under bond for export'. Thus, the manufacturer shall not be asked to reverse CENVAT Credit @ 8% of price of the said goods. 5.5 On request from exporter, copies of proof of export may be sent directly, by post to the Range Office having jurisdiction over the factory or handed over to the exporter in sealed cover for delivery to such Range Office. 5.6 Photocopies of the Shipping Bill/ Export Application and Bill of Lading duly attested by the Superintendent in-charge of the Warehouse along with certificate of proof of export should be accepted as valid documents for the purposes of refund of accumulated credit under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 on account of exports without payment of duty. The proof of export received directly or in official sealed cover from the Superintendent in-charge of the warehouse may be used to verify the authenticity. 5.7. Where neither the duplicate copy of ARE.1 nor the original copy of ARE-1 duly attested at the port of export, are made available within the time stipulated period of six months, it shall be presumed that export of goods cleared from warehouse has not taken place. The demand shall be raised by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner having jurisdiction over the warehouse for non-fulfilment of the conditions of bond executed by the exporter.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 Goods can be diverted for home-consumption from the warehouse with the permission of the jurisdictional Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. The clearance shall be effected on invoice prepared under rule 8 on payment of duty, interest and any other charges on TR-6 Challans and after making necessary entries in the export warehouse register maintained by the exporter in the warehouse. Credit will be permitted in the Running Bond Account equivalent to the duty involved in the goods so diverted, which shall not exceed amount of duty debited on the basis of ARE-3 on which such goods were received in the warehouse. If entire quantity is not diverted, calculation shall be done on pro-rata basis. 6.2 Goods can be diverted for home-consumption even after the clearance from the warehouse on ARE.1. For cancellation of documents, provisions of Notification No. 46/2001-CE(NT) dated 26.6.2001 shall be followed. The intimation shall be given to Deputy/Assistant Commissioner having jurisdiction over the warehouse. Credit in Running Bond Account will be permitted in the same manner as mentioned above. 6.3 Where the goods are diverted for home-consumption in full or in part the exporter shall be liable to pay interest @24% per annum on the amount of duty payable on such goods from the date of clearance from the factory of production or any other premises approved, till the date of payment of duty and clearance.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 The officer- in-charge of the warehouse may permit waiver from physical warehousing (i.e. permitting export without physically storing the goods in the warehouse) where exporter so requests in writing provided all the formalities relating to record-keeping shall be completed in usual manner with suitable record in the Warehousing Register: 'warehousing waived'. This permission will be given in exceptional cases where delay occurred due to delayed supply from the factory or longer transit-period or requirement of immediate export or any other genuine reasons, provided the entire consignment is entered for export in the original packing. Such cases of permission granted will be reported to Superintendent-in-charge of the warehouse at the earliest.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 The exporter shall provide adequate office accommodation and furniture for the Officer deployed for examination and supervision, in the warehouse. Where the exporter is willing to bear the cost of the posting of Officers on "cost recovery basis", the Commissioner, depending upon the administrative feasibility, may consider the deployment.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 There is no specific provision in Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules') governing drawl and testing of 'samples' of manufactured goods or inputs to ascertain their correct identity or classification or eligibility of any exemption. However, under various procedures, such as relating to exports, assessment etc. drawl of samples is required.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The samples can be categorized, as follows - (i) Trade samples sent to customers for trial; (ii) Samples for test purposes; (iii) Samples for supply against sale contracts or for enforcement of control measures; (iv) Samples for display at exhibitions, fairs and in show-cases; and (v) Samples for market inquiries by Central Excise Officers. 2.2 Apart from the assessee requiring the samples for cogent reasons, the Central Excise Department may also require drawl and testing of samples and the assessee shall comply with such directions as may be given in this regard. However, there shall not be any drawl and testing of samples in routine manner.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Trade Samples 3.1.1 The manufacturers' generally give such samples to their customers for 'trial and approval'. The removal shall be in the same manner as the removal of goods for home consumption. The manufacturer shall prepare an invoice under rule 11 of the said Rules and record the details in his Daily Stock Account. He shall discharge duty in the manner specified in rule 8 of the said Rules unless the removal of samples are exempted from duty by a notification issued under Section 5A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 . 3.1.2 Samples of certain goods sent to the trade by manufacturers are likely to be returned. In such cases, the procedure specified in rule 16 of the said Rules and the instructions relating thereto shall be followed. 3.2 Samples for test purposes 3.2.1 The samples of this category will generally include - (i) Samples drawn by in-house laboratory for testing quality and adherence to product specifications; (ii) Samples drawn for preservation for investigation of complaints; (iii) Samples drawn for test at other concerns and independent testing agencies; (iv) Samples required to be sent to Government Test centers including the Chemical Examiners for test. 3.2.2 The assessee is required to maintain a proper account of receipts and the utilisation of samples in the test, in the laboratory. The removal shall be in the same manner as the goods are removed for home consumption. The manufacturer shall prepare invoice under rule 11 the said Rules and make issue entries for the goods (samples) in the Daily Stock Account. Appropriate duty shall be paid by the assessee on these samples before their removal for test purposes unless otherwise exempted by a duty exemption notification. 3.3 Samples for other purposes 3.3.1 Where samples are required for the purposes specified at (iii), (iv) and (v) of paragraph 2.1 above, the procedure specified at paragraph 3.2 shall be followed. However, it is clarified that when a manufacturer preserves the samples of their product for some period for investigation of complaints, if any, no duty should be charged on these samples considering that the goods remain within the factory. Duty shall be charged, unless exempted by a notification, once the samples are cleared from the factory. If at any time the manufacturer desires to destroy these samples, procedure specified in rule 21 of the said Rules shall be followed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 Samples should be drawn in reasonable quantity. However, in some cases a specific quantity is asked for which should be supported by requisition order from the Chemical Examiner. An account of all departmental samples drawn and sent to the Chemical Examiner should be maintained by the Range Officer.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 A test memo should always be prepared in triplicate, the original to be sent to the Chemical Examiner, triplicate to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner and duplicate retained on the Range Officer's record.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The samples drawn by the Range staff but not sent for test to laboratories should be preserved for six months from the date of analytical report on the sample tested. In case of any discrepancy being noticed, the samples have to be preserved till the period of Appeal or Revision application is over or till disposal of Appeal/Revision Application. The remnants, which are not required by the concerned assessee, may be destroyed soon after the parties specially inform that they accept the analytical report furnished by the Chief Chemist or after completion of the period of appeal or revision petition is over, as the case may be.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 In respect of samples drawn by the officers of the Central Excise Department for ascertaining the identity of goods/its classification or any other official purposes relating to Central Excise, the cost of samples may be reimbursed on manufacturer's request out of the contingency by the divisional officer. The cost of the containers required for drawl of samples may not be much and if the same cannot be borne by the assessee through persuasion the same should be borne by the Department.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 Except where there are special instructions for particular kind of samples, the representative samples from such or any lot must be drawn in quadruplicate in the presence of the owner/manager of the factory or his representatives. 8.2 The quantities of excisable goods or materials taken for testing should be the minimum necessary for testing and the Commissioner will, in consultation with the Chemical Examiner concerned, specify for each kind of excisable goods or materials the size of samples for this purpose. 8.3 The samples should be sealed with Excise seals and a declaration obtained from the owners (manufacturers) to the effect that the samples drawn are representative of the lot. The assessee, if he so desires, may also be permitted to affix his seal on the samples. 8.4 The four samples drawn for test should be clearly marked as - (a) Original for Chemical Examiner (to be despatched to him along with the declaration and the relative test memorandum under intimation to the Assistant/Deputy Commissioner concerned). (b) Duplicate to be sent to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise (to be forwarded to him for safe custody for further use in case a dispute arises). (c) Triplicate for Range Officer (to be retained for any future reference or to cover loss by post or other emergency). (d) Quadruplicate to be given to the manufacturer (for his own record). 8.5 Before despatch of sample to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise and the Chemical Examiner, the samples should be packed properly, sealed and marked in such a way that they suffer no loss or deterioration in transit or subsequent storage. 8.6 The Chemical Examiner after test, will return the remnant sample, if fit for re-test and not in other cases, together with his test report, to the Assistant Commissioner concerned. The Chemical Examiner will be in position to indicate whether or not a remnant is fit for re-test and the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or other adjudicating authority will in most cases be able to anticipate whether the assessee will demand a re-test or not. The test results should be speedily communicated to the Assessee. 8.7 The Department shall carefully preserve the remnant sample. 8.8 Whenever the assessee is dissatisfied with the test carried out by the Chemical Examiner he can apply to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise concerned, after payment of the prescribed test fees, for a retest within 90 days from the date on which the test result was communicated to the him. 8.9 Where the remnant sample is available in sufficient quantity in its original state, re-test should ordinarily be on such remnant sample. Where such remnant sample was received from the Chemical Examiner but it is not in sufficient quantity or in original state, or where the party concerned desires, for one or the other reasons, a re-test on duplicate or triplicate sample, Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, the adjudicating authority or, as the case may be, the appellate authority should pass an appropriate order for re-test on duplicate or triplicate sample. 8.10 Where an assessee requests for re-test in a laboratory other than a Control Laboratory (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as "outside laboratory") whether on the remnant or the duplicate or triplicate sample, such request may be allowed for testing the sample from an outside Government or Semi-Government laboratory with the prior permission of the Commissioner or the Appellate or the Reversionary authority, as the case may be after Chief Chemist has confirmed that the departmental laboratories do not have the facilities for performing the particular test in question. The request for re-test in outside laboratories will be conditional upon the party concerned meeting the cost of the re-test. 8.11 It is always open to the assessee concerned to get the authenticated sample, in its possession, analysed in any laboratory of his own choice and submit the findings of such laboratory for due consideration on merits of each case, by the appropriate adjudicating/appellate authority. However, the assessee should ensure that the laboratory which analyses the samples indicates clearly in its test report the full particulars of the samples and whether the central excise seals affixed to the samples were intact or not at the time of its receipt by such laboratory. 8.12 The payment of a fee for re-test does not entitle the assessee to a copy of chemical report. The result of any such retest must however be communicated to the owner at the earliest. Where a copy of the test report is to be furnished to the assessee at its request, the Department shall have the option to provide only a concise, edited) form of the Test Report. The editing of the Test Report should be done in consultation with the Chemical Examiner. 8.13 For the purpose of market enquiries regarding the value of excisable goods, samples can be drawn by Central excise Officer on written order of the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, on returnable basis. There is no need to make any issue entries in Daily Stock Account for such samples as the same are to be returned to the factory. The Range Officer should maintain a simple account showing the date of taking the sample, quantity taken and date of return. There should be proper acknowledgement of drawl and return of sample. The officer who draws sample, will also give acknowledgement to the assessee and take acknowledgement when he returns the sample.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Where a finished excisable goods falling in the category of model/proto-type are to be sent out for trail purposes by actually putting them to effective use after conducting certain test to ensure that they meet with certain standard/specified norm, clearance may be allowed on payment of duty. Their subsequent return to the factory may be regulated in terms of rule 21 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 Three sets of samples are drawn at the time of examination or sealing of export goods. Two sets of samples, duly sealed, are handed over by the Central Excise Officer examining the consignment to the exporter or his authorised agent for delivery to the Custom Officer at the point of export. The Central Excise Officer for his record retains the third set of sample. 10.2 The Customs Officer will check the export goods with the sample before allowing export. The samples shall be dealt with in accordance with instructions/standing orders of the Board or the Commissioner of Customs.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Under rule 15 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules'), special central excise procedures have been framed with the view to facilitate the trade in specified goods, viz. Stainless Steel Patta Patties and Aluminium Circles. These procedures deal with all aspects of central excise such as payment of duty, maintenance of records, filing of returns etc.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 By Notification No. 34/2001-Central Excise dated 28.6.2001(effective from 1 st July, 2001) an assessee shall have an option to pay the duty of excise on the basis of the cold rolling machine installed for the manufacture of Stainless steel pattis/pattas, falling under Chapter 72, or Aluminium circles falling under Chapter 76 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) by the process of cold rolling. The rates of duty per cold rolling machine, per month are, as follows:- S.No. Item Rate of Duty per cold rolling machine per month (i) stainless steel pattis or pattas Rs.1,500 (ii) aluminium circles produced from sheets manufactured on cold rolling machines  (a) where the length of the roller is 30" or less Rs. 7,500 (b) where the length of the roller is more than 30" Rs. 10,000 2.2 The rate of duty is fixed subject to the condition that no credit of duty paid on any raw materials, component part or machinery or finished products used for cold rolling of Stainless steel pattis/pattas, or Aluminium circles under CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 shall be taken and further that the specified procedure is followed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The manufacturer shall make an application in the form specified in Appendix-I to the said Notification No. 34/2001-Central Excise dated 28.6.2001to the Superintendent of Central Excise for this purpose and the Superintendent, may grant permission for the period in respect of which the application has been made. 3.2 The application shall be made so as to cover a period of not less than twelve consecutive calendar months, but permission may be granted for a shorter period for reasons to be recorded in writing, by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. 3.3 If at any time during such period the manufacturer fails to avail himself of the procedure contained in this notification, he shall, unless otherwise ordered by the Assistant Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, be precluded from availing himself of such procedure for a period of six months from the date of such failure. 3.4 If the manufacturer desires to avail himself of the procedure even after the expiry of the period for which his application was granted, he shall, before such expiry, make a fresh application to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise and on his failure to do so, he shall, except as provided herein, be precluded from availing himself of such procedure for a period of six months from the date of such expiry. 3.5 An application made by a manufacturer, under erstwhile sub-rule (1) of rule 96ZA of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 , shall be deemed to be an application made under the said Notification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 A manufacturer whose application has been granted shall pay a sum calculated at the rate specified in the said notification, subject to the conditions therein laid down. Such payment shall be in full discharge of his liability for duty leviable on his production of such cold re-rolled Stainless steel pattas/pattis, or Aluminium circles during the period for which the said sum has been paid. However, if there is revision is revision in the rate of duty, the sum payable shall be recalculated on the basis of the revised rate, from the date of revision and liability for duty leviable on the production of the said goods from that date shall not be discharged unless the differential duty is paid. In the case the amount of duty so recalculated is less than the sum paid, the balance shall be refunded to the manufacturer: 4.2 When a manufacturer makes an application for the first time for availing the procedure contained in this notification, the duty liability for the month in which the application is granted shall be calculated pro-rata on the basis of the total number of days in that month and the number of days remaining in the month from the date of such grant. 4.3 The sum payable under the said notification shall be calculated by application of the appropriate rate to the maximum number of cold rolling machines installed by or on behalf of such manufacturer in one or more premises at any time during three calendar months immediately preceding the calendar month in which the application under the said notification is made. 4.4 The sum shall be tendered by the manufacturer along with the application.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 The manufacturer who has been granted the required permission shall make an application in the form specified in Annexure 29 to the said notification to the Superintendent in charge of the factory for permission to remove the Stainless steel pattis/pattas, or Aluminium circles from his premises during the ensuing month, declaring the maximum number of cold rolling machines installed by him or on his behalf, in one or more premises at any time during three calendar months immediately preceding the said calendar month in which such application is made. 5.2 If such application is not made to the Superintendent of Central Excise within the specified time limit, the manufacturer shall, unless, otherwise directed by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, and in exceptional circumstances, be liable to pay duty on his entire production of Stainless steel pattis/pattas, or Aluminium circles during the month or part thereof in respect of which the application was to be made, at the rate prescribed in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) read with any relevant notification or notifications issued under sub-section (1) of section 5A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944). 5.3 The manufacturer shall also intimate the Superintendent of Central Excise in writing of any proposed change in the number of cold rolling machines installed by him or on his behalf, and obtain the written approval of such officer before making any such change.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 During the period in respect of which any manufacturer has been permitted to avail himself of the procedure of the said notification, he shall be exempt from the operation of rule 8 of the said Rules. 6.2 Except in accordance with such terms and conditions as the Central Government may by notification specify in this behalf, no rebate of excise duty shall be paid under rule 18 of the said Rules, in respect of any Stainless steel pattis/pattas, or Aluminium circles exported out of India, out of the stock produced by such manufacturer during such period.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 In the case of a manufacturer who commences production for the first time or who recommences production after having ceased production for a continuous period of not less than three months, and who has been permitted by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise to avail of the special procedure, the amount payable by him for the first month or part thereof, as the case may be, shall be provisionally calculated on the basis of his declaration of the maximum number of cold rolling machines that are or are likely to be installed by him or on his behalf during such period. 7.2 At the expiry of the period, the amount payable shall be recalculated on the basis of the maximum number of cold rolling machines actually installed and if the initial payment falls short of the total liability so determined, the deficiency shall be recovered from the manufacturer and where the total liability is less than the initial deposit, the balance shall be refunded to the manufacturer.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in the said notification, the Additional/Joint Commissioner of Central Excise may, at his discretion, for reasons to be recorded in writing, and subject to such conditions as he may deem fit, apply the provisions contained in the said notification to a manufacturer who has failed to avail himself of the special procedure, or to comply with any condition laid down in this notification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Where a manufacturer who had availed himself of the special procedure contained in the said notification ceases to work ( i.e. for more than one or two shifts only) or reverts to the normal procedure, the duty payable by him in the month during which he has availed the procedure shall be calculated on the basis of the maximum number of cold rolling machines installed during the last month in the prescribed manner and the amount already paid for the month shall be adjusted towards the duty so calculated. If on such adjustment if there is any excess payment it shall be refunded to the manufacturer and any deficiency in duty shall be recovered from him.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 If any manufacturer contravenes any provision of the said notification in respect of any excisable goods, then all such goods shall be liable to confiscation, and the manufacturer shall be liable to penalty under rule 25 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Central Government has specified under rule 15 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules') rate of duty and special procedure for embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs on cotton fabrics, man made fabrics, silk fabrics or woollen fabrics by notification No. 33/2001-(Central Excise) dated 28 th June, 2001. This notification is effective from 1 st July, 2001.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 An assessee shall have the option to pay the duty of excise on the basis of meter length of the machine per shift and fixes a rate of duty of Rs. 45 per meter length of the machine (i.e. the distance between the points provided for the first needle and the last needle of only one roller of the machine) per shift (i.e. a period not exceeding eight hours working in a day, exclusive of rest interval, provided the work of the same kind is carried out by the same set of workers), for embroidery machines utilised for manufacture of the said goods subject to certain conditions.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The conditions to be complied with for availing the special procedure are, as follows - (a) No credit of duty paid on inputs used in the manufacture of the embroidery and capital goods used within the factory of manufacture of such embroidery shall be taken under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 , and (b) The procedure mentioned in the notification is followed.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 A manufacturer of embroidery in the piece, in strips or in motifs (hereinafter referred to as "the embroidery") shall make an application in the form specified in Annexure 30 to the said notification to the Superintendent of Central Excise in this behalf. 4.2 The application shall be made so as to cover a period of not less than six consecutive calendar months, but may be granted for a shorter period, for reasons to be recorded in writing by the Assistant Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, as the case may be. 4.3 If the manufacturer desires to avail himself of the special procedures contained herein on the expiry of the period for which his application was granted, he shall, not later than a week before such expiry, make an application to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise; and on his failure to do so, he shall, except as provided herein, be precluded from availing himself of such procedures for a period of six months from the date of such expiry.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 If, at any time during the period of availment of the special procedure, the manufacturer desires to opt out, he shall give a notice in writing to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise in charge of the factory of his intention at least one week in advance. Once the manufacturer has ceased to avail himself of such special provisions, from any date, he shall be precluded from availing himself of such procedure for a period of six months from that date.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph (1), an application made by a manufacturer before the commencement of this notification under erstwhile sub-rule (1) of rule 96ZH of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 , shall be deemed to be an application made under sub-paragraph (1) and the same shall be deemed to have been granted under sub-paragraph (1) and where such application has not been granted, the Assistant Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner shall dispose of the same as if it is an application under sub-paragraph (1).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 If a manufacturer whose application has been granted pays before the commencement of any shift a sum calculated according to such rate, in the manner and subject to the conditions herein laid down, such payment shall be in full discharge of his liability for the duty leviable on his production of the embroidery during the said shift. 7.2 If there is revision in the rate of duty, the sum payable shall be recalculated on the basis of the revised rates from the date of revision and liability for duty leviable on the production of the embroidery from that date shall not be discharged unless the differential duty is paid, and in case the amount of duty so recalculated is less than the sum paid, the balance shall be refunded to the manufacturer: 7.3 The sum payable shall be calculated by application of the appropriate rate to the meter length of each of the machines intended to be employed by the manufacturer during the shift. 7.4 The sum shall be paid by such manufacturer by debit in the account-current maintained under these provisions before commencement of the shift.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 If the payment of duty is not made in the prescribed manner and within the specified time-limit, the manufacturer shall, unless otherwise directed by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, and in exceptional circumstances, be liable to pay duty on his entire production of the embroidery during the shift or shifts, in respect of which the payment was to be made, at the rate specified in the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986). However, where the period of delay is upto five days, the decision will be taken by the Superintendent of Central Excise.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 The manufacturer shall keep account-current with the Commissioner, of the sums payable by him under the special procedure. Such account-current shall be maintained in triplicate by using indelible pencil and double sided carbon and the assessee shall periodically make credit in such account-current by cash payment into the treasury so as to keep sufficient balance in such account-current to cover the sums payable. 9.2 The manufacturer shall maintain a Daily Stock Account in the form specified in Appendix II to the said notification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 The manufacturer shall file a monthly return in proper form prescribed under rule 12 of the said Rules appending therewith two carbon copies of the Daily Stock Account duly signed. 10.2 The manufacturer shall intimate the Superintendent of Central Excise in writing of any change in the number, meter length and speed of the machines installed by him; and
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 11--> 11.1 During the period in respect of which a manufacturer has been permitted to avail himself of the special procedure under the said notification, he shall be exempt from the operation of the provisions of rule 8 of the said Rules. 11.2 Except in accordance with such terms, conditions and limitations as the Central Government may by notification specify in this behalf, no rebate of excise duty shall be paid under rule 18 of the said Rules, in respect of any embroidery exported out of India out of the stock produced by such manufacturer during such period.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 12--> 12.1 Notwithstanding anything contained in the aforesaid notification, the Additional/Joint Commissioner of Central Excise may, at his discretion and subject to such conditions as he may deem fit, apply the provisions contained in the said notification to a manufacturer who has failed to avail himself of the special procedure, or to comply with any condition, laid down in the said notification.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 13--> 13.1 If any manufacturer contravenes any provision of the said notification in respect of any excisable goods, then all such goods shall be liable to confiscation, and the manufacturer shall be liable to penalty under rule 25 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The scheme of compounded levy of duty on basis of hot air stenters with an independent textile manufacturer has been introduced effect from 1 st May, 2001 by Notifications No. 16/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) and No.21/2001- Central Excise, both dated 30.4.2001. 1.2 The scheme of compounded levy is optional. Thus, an independent textile processor has the option of availing this scheme and paying the duty prescribed thereunder. In the alternative the processor may pay the duty at the specified rate of duty on the basis of the value of the goods produced.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The rate of duty under the compounded levy scheme is, as follows - Value of Processed Textile Fabrics Rate of compounded duty Per stenter per chamber Upto and including Rs. 30 per sq. meter Rs. 2.5 lakhs per month Over Rs. 30 per sq. meter Rs.3 lakhs per month 2.2 The 50% of the compounded duty has to be paid by the 20 th. of the month and the balance 50% by the 5 th of the succeeding month.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The eligibility conditions for availing the scheme are - (i) The scheme does not apply to open air stenter. It applies only to hot air stenters. (ii) The scheme can be availed only if the original value of investment on plant and machinery, duly certified by a Chartered Accountant of Cost Accountant, in the factory of the processor is not more than Rs.3 crore. For this purpose, the higher of the original value of the investment on plant and machinery that was installed as on 1.3.2001 and as installed on 1.5.2001 in the factory of processor is to be taken into account. 3.2 An independent processor, who is eligible for availing of the scheme, has to apply for exercising the option through an application to be submitted to the jurisdictional Commissioner of Central Excise by the 20th May, 2001. However, should he commence business subsequently, he should apply before the commencement of the production. 3.3 Once the option has been exercised for the scheme, and accepted by the Commissioner of Central Excise, it can not be withdrawn during the remaining part of the financial year. 3.4 No abatement if available on account of any reduction in stenter or chambers or on account of closure or absence of use of the same. The duty liability would remain unchanged during the period of option of the scheme i.e. the financial year. However, should all the manufacturing operations in the factory be closed for more than 30 days abatement is permissible. 3.5 In the event that after application and acceptance thereof any enhancement is made in the number of chambers the duty liability would get enhanced for the balance part of the financial year. 3.6 The applicant availing the scheme has to do the stentering in his factory itself. 3.7 Detailed instructions regarding the valuation of processed fabric and other procedure have been issued from F.No.B.4/6/2001-TRU dated 30.4.2001, which will apply, mutatis mutandis, under the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Central Excise levy has been introduced on Readymade Garments falling under Chapter 62 of the First Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 in the Budget, 2001. However, certain items such as clothing accessories have been exempt from the duty. Further, the benefit of the small scale sector duty exemption is available on such goods. 1.2 Notifications No.16/2001-Central Excise (NT), 18/2001-Central Excise (NT) to No.21/2001-Central Excise (NT),and No. 21/2001-Central Excise to No.23/2001-Central Excise, all dated 30.4.2001 are relevant. 1.3 In consideration of the fact that by and large the Readymade Garments, particularly those bearing a brand name, are manufactured on job-work a special procedure has been evolved for collection of duty on the said goods.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The rate of duty on Readymade garments is at the rate of 16% ad valorem. However, for purpose of computation a tariff value has been fixed for the Garments vide Notification No. 20/2001- Central Excise (NT), dated 30.4.2001. The tariff value shall be 60% of the Maximum Retail Sale Price of the Garments.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 In terms of sub-rule (3) of rule 4 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules), in case of Readymade Garments manufactured on job-work, the excise duty shall be paid by the person who gets the goods manufactured on his account from the job-worker. 3.2 The merchant manufacturer is required to get his private store room or warehouse where the inputs required for the Readymade garments are stored before distribution to the job-worker and the finished goods are received registered with the Central Excise department. The duty will be paid when the goods are removed from the store room or warehouse. 3.3 The merchant manufacturer has the option of authorizing the job-worker to pay the duty, in which case the latter would comply with all the provisions of the Central Excise law. 3.4 Benefit of CENVAT credit facility is available on the manufacture of Readymade Garments. 3.5 Where the manufacturer is exporting a substantial part of the production and his domestic clearances do not exceed Rs. 1 Crores he is eligible for a simplified export procedure as contained in this Manual in Section 7. 3.6 Detailed instructions regarding the valuation of processed fabric and other procedure have been issued from F.No.B.4/5/2001-TRU dated 30.4.2001, which will apply, mutatis mutandis, under the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The Board has issued Notification No. 50/2001-Central Excise (N.T.) dated 26.6.2001 whereby under Rule 14 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as the 'said Rules'), procedure for procurement, accounting and disposal of Central Excise Stamps and matters pertaining to production, storage, control, removal and payment of duty on matches have been notified. 1.2 The payment of duty on the matches shall be by way of affixing the said stamps on the goods.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Procedure for procurement of central excise stamps is, as follows - (a) All Central Excise Stamps shall be procured from a district Revenue Treasury or Sub-Treasury. (b) (i) A registered person wishing to obtain Central Excise Stamps for cash shall submit to the treasury a challan in quintuplicate for the amount to be paid, specifying on the reverse the number and class of Central Excise Stamps required, together with their price. The treasury shall accept the amount specified in the challan and shall return the duplicate, triplicate and quintuplicate copies of the receipted challan to the registered person. (ii) The registered person shall present duplicate and quintuplicate copies of the challan to the Inspector or Superintendent in-charge of the factory who, after satisfying himself about the correctness of the amount remitted, shall return the quintuplicate copy to the assessee with an endorsement to the District Revenue Treasury Officer or Sub-Treasury Officer to issue the appropriate number of Central Excise Stamps. The registered person shall present quintuplicate copy with such endorsement to the District Revenue Treasury Officer or Sub-Treasury Officer, who shall thereafter supply the Central Excise Stamps to the registered person. (c) A registered person wishing to obtain Central Excise Stamps on credit shall execute a bond in the Form specified in Annexure 31 with such surety or sufficient security as the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may require. (d) When the provisions of sub-paragraph (c) have been complied with, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise shall, after due inquiry, authorise the issue of Central Excise Stamps on credit to the registered person and shall communicate the same to the District Revenue Treasury Officer or Sub-Treasury Officer concerned and to the Superintendent in charge of the factory with full particulars of bond executed and the extent of credit granted. The number of Central Excise Stamps to be supplied at a time shall not exceed the average out-turn of the factory for a number of days, not exceeding thirty to be fixed by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise. However, the total price of the unused stamps in balance with the registered person and of those indented shall not be more than the security furnished. (e) A registered person authorised to obtain Central Excise Stamps on credit shall for each supply submit to the Superintendent in charge of the factory a requisition in quadruplicate in the Form annexed as Annexure 32. If satisfied that the details stated in the requisition are correct the said officer shall retain the triplicate for his own record and send the original, duplicate and quadruplicate to the District Revenue Treasury Officer or Sub- Treasury Officer concerned, who shall retain the original in his office, issue the number of Central Excise Stamps required, return the duplicate, duly endorsed to the said officer and send the quadruplicate copy to the Chief Accounts Officer of the Commissionerate.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 & The manufacturer shall keep all his Central Excise Stamps, whether procured for cash or on credit, in a secure place within the factory premises, and shall keep them open for inspection at any time by any officer. 3.2 The inspector or Superintendent in charge of the factory may at any time examine the stock of the Central Excise Stamps on any working day and check the balance with that shown in the register and shall record the result in the register. If any Central Excise Stamps procured on credit are missing or unaccounted for, he shall call on the registered person to pay immediately into the Treasury the full price thereof and to produce the treasury challan within a week.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The manufacturer shall maintain an account of quantity and value of - (i) Central Excise Stamps purchased for cash and on credit; (ii) Central Excise Stamps affixed on boxes or booklets; (iii) Central Excise Stamps damaged and handed over to the Inspector or Superintendent in charge of the factory; and (iv) Central Excise Stamps lost in the process or not otherwise accounted for. 4.2 The manufacturer shall submit to the Superintendent in charge of the factory monthly return in the Form annexed as Annexure 33 before the tenth day of the month following that to which the return relates.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 As soon as possible, after matches are finished, they shall, unless intended for export, be put into boxes or booklets which shall then, save as otherwise provided by these procedures, be affixed with Central Excise Stamps and enclosed in packets or other outer coverings as the case may be. 5.2 Every Central Excise Stamp shall be so affixed that - (i) the box or booklet on which the Central Excise Stamp is affixed can not be opened without tearing the Central Excise Stamp; (ii) when it is affixed to a box, the Central Excise Stamp shall cover one side of the inner tray and a part of the rear or bottom or front or top of the outer box, and the Central Excise Stamp itself shall not be covered by either the factory's label or any advertisement label; 5.3 Where the matches are intended for export out of India, the Central Excise Stamps need not be affixed thereto and, unless they are to be exported without payment of duty in accordance with rule 19 of the said Rules, the duty shall be paid by the assessee before removal of each consignment by debit to the account current maintained by him. 5.4 Where the Board is satisfied that by reason of the fact that the necessary Central Excise Stamps are not available or for any other relevant reason it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or special order, allow the duty on matches to be paid, without affixing Central Excise Stamps to such box or booklet, by debit to the account current before the removal of each consignment subject to any condition which may be imposed in the order.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 No packet or case containing boxes or booklets of matches, other than those intended for export out of India and those to which the provisions of the paragraph 4(c) above apply, shall be closed and reckoned as a unit unless a Central Excise Stamp of the appropriate class has been affixed to each box or booklet in the specified manner. 6.2 Each case or packet shall contain only an integral number whether one hundred boxes or booklets of matches or multiples thereof. The boxes or booklets in each case or packet shall contain the same number of matches on the average and shall, except where the matches are exempted from bearing Central Excise Stamps, bear Central Excise Stamps of the same class. 6.3 Every packet, box or booklet, or the manufacturers label affixed thereto shall bear in clearly discernable characters, the name of the factory or a distinguishing mark, which may take the form of a special design whereby the origin of the matches can be traced. Specimens of all such labels shall be submitted to the Superintendent in-charge of the factory duly declaring the ownership of the label before that are brought into use. In case, the label is owned by some other manufacturer, a consent letter from the owner of the label duly declaring the rate of duty applicable to him, should also be filed. 6.4 Each case or packet of matches shall be legibly marked in ink or oil colour with progressive number, commencing with number 1, for each year and in different series for each class of matches, the number of boxes or booklets in hundreds contained in each case or packet and the grade of Central Excise Stamps affixed thereto. 6.5 Every box or booklet of matches, issued for home consumption, shall have on the box or booklet, or on the manufacturers label affixed thereto, a statement in clearly discernable character of the sticks contained in the box or booklet, and of the retail price at which the manufacturer intends that the box or booklet should be sold. However, the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise may, by an order in writing and subject to such limitations and conditions, as may be prescribed by him in the order, relax this requirement.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 If any Central Excise Stamps are torn during examination or inspection taken up by the Inspector or Superintendent of Central Excise, the said officer may order that the containers to which they are affixed shall be returned to the registered person for re-stamping and shall be replaced immediately by an equal number of boxes or booklets of the same class from the finished stock. 7.2 If examination or inspection by the Inspector or Superintendent of Central Excise shows that Central Excise Stamps of insufficient value have been affixed, the said officer may order the boxes or booklets in question to be returned to the factory, where the Central Excise Stamps shall be removed and replaced by others of the proper value.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 All boxes or booklets containing matches intended for export and on which no Central Excise Stamps have been affixed, shall be packed into cases or packets on which shall be pasted labels inscribed " Matches not affixed with Central Excise Stamps for Export" and shall be entered in daily stock account maintained under rule 10 of the said Rules.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 When it is desired to remove matches bearing Central Excise Stamps purchased on credit, the registered person shall, unless he maintains an account current with the Commissioner, pay the price of the Central Excise Stamps and no such matches may be removed until after the price of the Central Excise Stamps has been so paid or has been debited to such account current, if any.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 In accordance with the principles of natural justice the central excise law provides that before any action is taken against an assessee he must be given reasonable opportunity of presenting his case. One such situation would be that relating to the demand of duty not paid, short paid or erroneously refunded. 1.2 As see, a show cause notice is invariable to be issued if the department contemplates any action prejudicial to the assessee. Thus, if on account of an infraction of the provisions of the central excise law it is considered appropriate to penalise the defaulter, it is necessary to first issue a show cause notice. The show cause notice would detail the provisions of law allegedly violated and ask the notice to show cause why action should not be initiated against him. Thus, a show cause notice gives the notice the opportunity to present his case.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2. 1 Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 provides that if excise duty has not been levied or short levied or not paid or short paid, a notice has to be issued demanding the differential duty. This notice will be issued by Commissioner of Central Excise if the amount demanded does not exceeding one crore rupees. Where amount exceeds one crore rupees, prior approval of the Chief Commissioner of Central Excise is required. 2.2 The Board has also empowered the Officers of Director General of Central Excise Intelligence to issue Show-cause notices in accordance with the powers of Central Excise Officers conferred on them under rule 3 and the instruction above. 2.3 In order to provide mechanism for early dispute resolution, it has also been provided in the Act that an assessee may request for waiver of notice, if he deposits the amount of differential duty on his own along with interest in respect of only such cases where such non-levy or short levy or non-payment or short payment is by reason other than suppression of facts, fraud, collusion etc. 2.4 By opting for waiver of issue of notice, the assessee may avoid long drawn process of adjudication and appellate process including interest on the differential duty demanded. It is therefore, advisable that in cases where the assessee is convinced that the Department is correct in demanding duty, he may opt for this facility.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Central Excise law is a self-contained provision. Besides containing the provisions for levy of duty, the law also provides for the adjudication of matters relating to the legal provisions. The adjudication is done by the departmental officers, and in this capacity they act as quasi-judicial officers.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Adjudication of confiscation and penalty has to be done by Officers specified in section 33 of the Central Excise Act, 1944Central Excise Officers have the power to determine duty short paid or not paid erroneously refunded under section 11A of the said Act. For this purposes, the Board has decided the powers of adjudication and determination of duty shall be exercised, based on monetary limit (duty involved in a case) - (A) All cases involving fraud, collusion, any wilful misstatement, suppression of facts, or contravention of Central Excise Act/ Rules made there under-with intent to evade payment of duty and / or where extended period has been invoked in show-cause-notices, (including CENVAT cases, will be adjudicated by:- Central Excise Officers Powers of Adjudication (Amount of duty involved) Commissioners Without limit Additional Commissioners Upto Rs. 20 lakhs Joint Commissioners Upto Rs. 10 lakhs (B) Cases which do not fall under the category (A) above, will be adjudicated as follows:- Central Excise Officers Powers of Adjudication (Amount of duty involved) Commissioners Without limit Additional /Joint Commissioners Above Rs. 2 lakhs and upto Rs. 20 lakhs Deputy/Assistant Commissioners Upto Rs. 2 lakhs (C) Cases related to issues mentioned under first proviso to Section 35B(1) of Central Excise Act, 1944 would be adjudicated by the Addl. Commissioners/ Joint Commissioners without any monetary limit. (D) All cases relating to determination of classification and valuation will be adjudicated by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise without any monetary limit. 2.2 The Board, under section 2(b) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 read with rule 3 also invests certain officers with powers of Commissioners or other officers through out the territory of India, for the purpose of investigation and adjudication.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Interest of duty not paid on time is provided for in the Central Excise statute. It is expected that the interest provision would normally not have to be invoked as the assessee would make the duty payment on time. 1.2 Penalty and confiscation of offending goods i.e. which have violated the provision of the Central Excise law are an outcome of the adjudication proceedings. These are deterrents aimed at cautioning the dishonest taxpayer.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Under the provisions of Section 11AA, interest is charged on the delayed payment of duty. Thus, it is in the interest of an assessee to discharge the duty liability the earliest and not to prolong the dispute only for the sake of delaying payments. The interest will be charged under said Section 11AA, as follows: (a) In the normal case interest will be charged for the period of delay after 3 months of the determination of the duty liability till the date of payment of duty. (b) In the case the duty is not paid on account of fraud, suppression etc. the interest will be charged from the first date of the month following the month in which the duty was not paid. 2.2 There may not be need for any explicit mention of the interest liability in the show-cause notice since the legal provisions are explicit. However, the same may be done as a matter of abundant precaution. Likewise, the adjudicating officer may incorporate the fact about the interest liability in the order confirming the demand.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Penalty is imposed under any of the following provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 or the rules made thereunder:- (i) Section 11AC prescribes a mandatory penalty equal to the duty not levied or paid or short paid or erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, suppression etc. However, in the vent the duty and interest thereon is paid within 30 days of the communication of the order, the penalty shall be 25% of the duty subject to it being paid within the said period of 3o days. (ii) Rule 25 of the said Rules provides for penalty on any producer, manufacturer, registered person of a warehouse or a registered dealer not exceeding the duty on the excisable goods in respect of which any of the specified contravention have been committed, or rupees ten thousand, whichever is greater. The penalty is subject to the provisions of Section 11 AC of the Central Excise Act, 1944The offending goods are also liable to confiscation. The specified contravention are: (a) Removal of any excisable goods in contravention of any of the provisions of the said rules or the notifications issued under the said rules; or (b) Non-accountal of any excisable goods produced or manufactured or stored; or (c) Manufacture, production or storage of any excisable goods without having applied for the registration certificate required under Section 6 of the Central Excise Act ; or (d) Contravention of any of the provisions of the said rules or the notifications issued under the said rules with intent to evade payment of duty. (iii) Under rule 26 of the said Rules It is provided that any person who acquires possession of, or is in any way concerned in transporting, removing, depositing, keeping, concealing, selling or purchasing, or in any other manner deals with, any excisable goods which he knows or has reason to believe are liable to confiscation under the Act or the said Rules, shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding the duty on such goods or rupees ten thousand, whichever is greater. (iv) Rule 27 of the said Rules provides for imposition of a general penalty penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees and with confiscation of the goods in respect of which the offence is committed. This is attracted when no other specific penalty is provided for. 3.2 If penalty is imposed under Section 11AC, penalty under rule 25 will not be imposed. This, however, does not preclude the Department from confiscating the goods, imposing any fine in lieu of confiscation and prosecuting a person. 3.3 Rule 26 of the said Rules also provides that before any order of penalty or confiscation is passed the adjudicating authority shall follow the principles of natural justice. In other words a notice explaining the reasons why penalty should not be imposed or goods confiscated has to be given to the person. Thereafter, reasonable opportunity shall be given to such person to explain or defend his case. The adjudicating Officer shall pass a reasoned order, incorporating the defence arguments given by such person or his authorised representative. 3.4 As per Rule 28 of the said Rules, when any goods are confiscated under these rules, such thing shall thereupon vest in the Central Government. Accordingly, the Central Excise Officer adjudging confiscation shall take and hold possession of the things confiscated, and every Officer of Police, on the requisition of such Central Excise Officer, shall assist him in taking and holding such possession. 3.5 Rule 30 provides that if the owner of the goods, the confiscation of which has been adjudged, exercises his option to pay fine in lieu of confiscation, he may be required to pay such storage charges as may be determined by the adjudicating officer. 3.6 Provisions for disposal of goods confiscated are contained in rule 29 of the said Rules. Goods of which confiscation has been adjudged and in respect of which the option of paying a fine in lieu of confiscation has not been exercised, shall be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of in such manner as the Commissioner may direct.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 As per Section 11B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 the time limitation of application for refund of duty fixed at one year from the relevant date shall not apply when the duty has been paid under protest. 4.2 Any assessee who desires to pay duty under protest, may do so by following the procedure mentioned below: The assessee shall inform the Superintendent or Inspector of Central Excise in writing giving reasons for paying duty under protest and a dated acknowledgement will be given to him. He will mark invoices or monthly/quarterly return indicating the goods on which duty is paid 'under protest'. If it is a lump-sum duty payment in respect of past demand, he may record the fact of duty payment under protest in the Personal Ledger Account [against debits] CENVAT Account [against debits] and the Daily Stock Account. If a case is appealed against by the assessee or where the appeal period for further appeal is available, he may continue to pay duty under protest. However, if decision is not in his favour and he exhausts the appellate remedy or does not appeal within stipulated period, the assessee shall not have ay right to pay duty under protest. 4.3 A letter of protest or a representation for paying duty under protest shall not constitute a claim of refund.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Bond is an instrument by which the obligation to pay money is created expressly. It is also a legal agreement whereby a person undertakes to do or not to do anything subject to conditions stipulated in the agreement. The primary purpose of the bond is to secure due compliance with the rules and procedures laid down under the Excise law. A bond is a collateral security , which the department is securing to ensure payment of appropriate duty in addition to the statutory provisions available . 1.2 As a measure of rationalization and simplification of excise law and procedures the number of bonds have been further reduced. Several bonds, which were in vogue prior to 1 st July, 2001 have since been dispensed with. Care should be taken with regard to bonds, which were executed prior to 1st July, 2001 while discharging the same. These bonds should be discharged only after the completion/performance of the obligation.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Bonds are basically two types, i.e. surety and security. Under a surety bond another person stands as surety to guarantee the performance on the part of obligor. The surety should be for the full value of the bond and the person standing as surety should be solvent to the extent of the bond amount. Under the Contract Act the liability of the surety is co-extensive with that of the principal debtor and hence the department is at liberty to enforce the recovery of the dues either from the obligor or from the surety. 2.2 The following are the types of bonds, which are presently in vogue: (a) B-1 Surety / Security (General Bond) - for export of goods without payment of duty under Rule 19; (b) B-2 Bond Surety / Security(General Bond) - for provisional assessment; (c) B-3 Bond Surety / Security) - to obtain matches Central Excise stamp on credit; (d) B-4 Bond Surety/Security - for provisional release of seized goods (provided in this Manual by instruction); and (e) B-17 Bond (General) Surety / Security - composite bond for EPZ/ 100% EOUs for assessment, export, accounting and disposal of excisable goods obtained free of duty [continuation of the Format as specified under the erstwhile Central Excise Rules, 1944 ].
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 The bond should be executed on the non-judicial stamp paper of appropriate value. The bond amount should be sufficient to cover the duty liability. The bond should be signed by the obligor or by the authorised agent. The surety should be for the full amount and the person standing as surety should be solvent to extent of the amount covered. The security should normally be limited to the 25% of the bond amount. 3.2 In case of exporters, certain specific categories i.e. Super Star Trading House, Star Trading House, Exporters registered with Export Promotion Council & Registered Exporters need not furnish any bank guarantee/cash security while executing export bonds. They may furnish sureties only. This is a modification over the previous instruction contained in Board's Circular No.284/118/96-Cx dated 31.12.96. 3.3 In the case of 100% E.O.Us obtaining indigenous goods without payment of duty under a notification issued under section 5A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 , acceptance of surety bond instead of bank guarantee is permissible. In respect of 100% EOUs & EPZ s units may continue to execute bond in the Format given in Form B-17 under the erstwhile Central Excise Rules, 1944While executing combined B17 Bond security to the extent of 5% of the value of the bond in the form bank guarantee or cash deposit or any other mode of security may be accepted in lieu of surety (Board's letter F.No.305/86/98-FTT dated 19./6/98). Fresh bond may not be taken, where the existing units have already furnished bond in B-17 Form prior to 1.7.2001. The existing bond may be simply re-validated under the new rules. 3.4 The export bonds executed under rule 19 of the said Rules should be accepted within 24 Hours or the next working day and communicated to the exporter by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Maritime Commissioner or any other officer authorised by the Board in this behalf. 3.5 Bonds should be executed in favour of and in the name of the President of India. They should be properly stamped. The prescribed wordings of the bond form must be copied out on a non judicial stamp paper of the appropriate amount (to be locally ascertained), except where arrangement can be made for embossing printed forms or where the State Government rules require otherwise. The bonds must be executed on stamp paper of the respective State Government in which the registered persons business is situated.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 The amount of the bond in forms B-2 should be fixed on the following basis:- (i) The amount of the specific bond in Form B-2 should be sufficient to cover the difference between the duty payable on provisional assessment and the probable duty payable if the highest rate / value applicable such goods has to be applied. (ii) The amount of the general bond in Form B-2(surety)/(Security) should be equal to the difference between the duty payable on provisional assessment and the probable duty payable applying the highest rate / value applicable to such goods for a period of 3 months. If the provisional assessment cannot be completed within the 3 months and longer time is required, say a period of one year, in appropriate cases, differential duty likely to arise during such period shall be the basis/ determination of the bond amount. When the security bond is executed, the amount of security will be generally fixed at 25% of the bond amount. However, in appropriate cases, for special reasons to be recorded, the proper officer under rule 7 of the said Rules may order for a higher security amount. In the event of death or insolvency or insufficiency of the surety / security, the proper officer may demand fresh bond. If the security furnished is found to be inadequate, he may demand additional security also. In the case of provisional assessment, if the assessee fails to make the due adjustment within the period of 15 days after the final assessment made, the proper officer may proceed to enforce the bond or encash the bank guarantee after due notice to the assessee.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 All bonds must bear stamps on the scale prescribed by article 57 of the schedule I to the Indian Stamp Act 1899 , modified as may be, by State Legislation. Commissionerate should circulate to their staff the rate of stamp duty required in each State within Commissionerate for each type of bond. 5.2 Whoever affixes an adhesive stamp to any instrument chargeable with duty which has been executed by any person shall when affixing such stamp cancel the same so that it cannot be used again and whom so ever has executed any instrument on any paper bearing an adhesive stamp shall at the time of execution unless such stamp has been already been cancelled in the manner aforesaid, cancel the same so that it cannot be used again. Any instrument bearing an adhesive stamp, which has not been cancelled so that it cannot be used again, shall so far as such stamp is concerned be deemed to be un-stamped. The person required to cancel an adhesive stamp may cancel it by writing on or cross the stamp with his name or initials or the name or initial of his firm with the true date of his so writing, or in any other effectual manner.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 The Board has decided that every undertaking owned and managed directly through any Ministry, Directorate or Directorates by the Central Government is exempt from the execution of any bond; or a State Government is hereby exempt from furnishing any security or surety for bond, where the execution of such bond, or, as the case may be furnishing of security or surety is required by or under any other provision of the rules made under Central Excise Act, 1944 . 6.2 An undertaking owned or controlled by the Central Government or State Government does not include-any undertaking belonging to corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or State Government and established by or under a Central Provisional or State Act; or any undertaking belonging to Government Company within the meaning of Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (I of 1956).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 The security to be furnished in respect of the bonds will be, as follows: (i) The security furnished should either be cash, Government promissory notes, post office savings, bank deposits, national savings Certificates, National Defence Bonds, National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980 or similar realizable Government papers. Promissory Notes and stock Certificates of the Central Government or a State Government shall be accepted subject to the conditions laid down in clause (ii) of Rule 274 of GFR. (ii) Deposit receipt of bank can also be pledged as securities for Central Excise - Bonds subject to certain specific conditions under Rule 274 (vi) of G.F.R. The conditions inter alia are: (a) The deposit receipt shall be made out in the name of the pledgee or if it is made out in the name of the pledger, the bank shall certify on it that the deposit can be withdrawn only on demand or with the sanction of the pledgee. (b) The depositors shall agree in writing to undertake any risk involved in the investment and make good the depreciation, if any. (c) The depositors shall receive the interest when due, direct from the bank on a letter from the pledgee authorising the bank to pay it to him. (d) The responsibility of the pledgee in connection with the deposit and the interest on it will cease when he issues a final withdrawal order to the depositor and sends an intimation to the Bank that he has done so. (e) Only the larger Scheduled banks are to be considered as recognized banks approved by Government for the purpose of item of Rule 274 of G.F.R. (f) Interest on the securities will, however, continue to accrue and will be realised by the holders on discharge of the bond and return of the securities. (g) Where the same bond and security continue for over one year, arrangements must be made for credit or payment of the interest on such securities to the bonders. (h) On cash securities no interest is payable. In the case of Savings Bank Account, the interest may be paid to the parties on claim preferred by them periodically or can be collected after the amount is returned to them. In respect of other securities, arrangements are to be made for the payment of interest at regular intervals of 6 months.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 Whenever surety bond is executed it is to be ensured that both the obligor and surety sign the bond. Field officers will ensure that surety is financially sound and have been verified from time to time. Whenever bank guarantee is accepted for security, care should be taken to get the guarantee renewed before expiry from time to time, so as to enable the enforcement of liability as and when such need arises. Execution of B17 Bonds is optional and if the assessee does not wish to avail of this facility, he may execute individual bonds prescribed for different purposes. 8.2 A partner or a director of a limited company can also stand as surety in his individual capacity to guarantee the performances of the firm or a company as the case may be. Since, in law, a limited company is a distinct legal entity and the member of the company including directors are distinct from the company, there should be no objection to allow the directors of the limited company to stand as surety for the companies provided they fulfil all the other conditions applicable to sureties. (F. No. 8/10/16/CX II dt 5/8/1960)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 The provisions governing the execution of bonds by banks are, as follows: (i) When the State Bank of India or a scheduled bank gives a guarantee for a registered person with or without deposit of security, the guarantee bond should provide a period of validity and an extra period during which obligations arising during the period of validity to be enforced. The time limit for enforcement of obligation should be at least two years. (ii) Where there is a need for extension of the period of validity of bank guarantee furnished by the bank on behalf of a party in pursuant to an order of an original or appellate authority or any other reasons, it should be done by means of supplementary deed of bank guarantee on a stamp paper.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 Proper preservation of bonds is to be ensured in the interest of the revenue. (i) Bonds must be preserved as long as they are valid and should be returned only after all the obligations under the bond had been discharged. (ii) All officers who filled Central Excise bonds must be careful not to enforce the words "cancelled" on the bonds even after the apparent fulfilment of obligation ; otherwise it is likely to be argues that persons liable under the bond have been their by discharge from the liabilities imposed by the bond. The obligations under the bond are not legally extinguished so long as the bond is not returned to the obligor or is not cancelled on execution of a deed of cancellation.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 11--> 11.1 In respect of surety bonds, periodical verification, preferably on an annual basis will be made by the jurisdictional Central Excise Officers so as to ensure the sureties are financially sound, solvent and alive. The enquiry to verify the financial stability of the sureties will be made by any of the following methods: (i) By reference to the surety's bankers. (ii) By making personal enquiries and ascertaining whether the surety possesses a house or other immovable property, industrial equipment, shop etc. which would cover the bond amount. Alternatively, the sureties may themselves be asked to furnish a list of their property, which may be verified by the Officer. (iii) By reference to Revenue Officer not below the rank of Tahsildar or a Mamalakdar. (iv) The result of enquiry as well as the solvency of the surety should be incorporated in the records of the Department.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 In conventional sense, Audit means scrutiny and verification of documents, events and processes in order to verify facts and, draw conclusions regarding the correctness of recording of facts and the efficiency of a system under study. For Central Excise purposes Audit means scrutiny of the records of assessee and the verification of the actual process of receipt, storage, production and clearance of goods with a view to check whether the assessee is paying the central excise duty correctly and following the central excise procedures. 1.2 Under the conventional /traditional system of central excise audit, audit parties visit assessees unit without much preparation and verify all the statutory records (i.e. those prescribed under the Central Excise law) to check compliance of procedures and also leakage of revenue, if any. Experiences show that such audits do not result in detection of major aberrations. Most of the audit objections pertain to either minor procedural irregularity or duty short payment of small amounts mostly due to human error. Further, this method of auditing does not envisage checking of the internal records of the assessee as well as those records which are maintained by the assessee under the other laws like Income Tax Act, Sales Tax Act, Companies Act etc. 1.3 One of the announcements made during Budget 2000 as a measure of simplification of procedures, was the dispensation of all statutory records under the central excise law. No longer was the assessee required to record the receipt of raw material, production and clearance/sale of finished goods etc. in registers/documents prescribed by the central excise department. As a result, the assesses are now allowed to maintain all their records in whichever form they like (including maintenance of the entire records in electronic form) provided the essential information required for calculation of central excise duty liability can be obtained from such records. Under these circumstances it becomes necessary for the auditors to look into the assessees own (private) records to verify whether the assessee is paying central excise duty correctly and following the laid down procedures. 1.4 Another change brought in recent years is doing away the system of assessment of the returns by the departmental officers. Now the assessee is required to self assess his monthly tax returns (called the E.R.1/E.R.2) before filing the same with the department. The departmental officers only scrutinise this return to check for any apparent mistake made by the assessee. They are not required to carry out detailed verification. Therefore, the entire burden of checking whether the assessee actually paying his taxes correctly, now lies with audit. 1.5 The statutory changes resulting in dispensation of statutory records as well as self assessment of central excise duty by the assessee has led to the conventional/traditional system of audit becoming irrelevant.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Traditional audit will eventually be replaced by Excise Audit 2000 (EA 2000), a new system of audit. This new system was initiated from 1 st December 1999 when it was implemented in case of all assessees paying cash duty of over Rs.5 crores per annum. In September 2000, the Central Board of Excise and Customs made this audit applicable in case of all assessees paying cash duty of over Rs. 1 crore per annum. At present, in addition to audit of such units, those units which pay cash duty of Rs. 10 lakhs or more but less than Rs.1 Crore will be audited once in two years. Not more than 20% of the Units paying cash duty less than Rs.10lakhs are to be audited in a year. It is expected that by April 2002, all assessees will be subjected to EA 2000. 2.2 The essential philosophy of EA 2000 is that this audit is based on the scrutiny of business records of the assessee. This is a more systematic form of audit wherein the auditors are required to gather basic information about the assesee and analyze them to find out vulnerable areas before conducting the actual audit. The audit is therefore more focused and in-depth as compared to the traditional audit. Further, at every stage of audit, the assessee is consulted. This makes EA2000 audit user friendly.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Selection of Assessee 3.1.1 The process of EA 2000 begins with identification of a unit to be audited. Normally, there are about 1000 to 1500 assessees under the jurisdiction of a Central Excise Commissionerate. It is not possible for the audit staff to conduct audits of all the units every year. Therefore, depending upon the manpower availability, about 300 to 400 units are selected for conducting audit during a financial year. Under the conventional system of audit the units were picked up randomly without any scientific basis of selection. Under EA 2000, the selection of the unit is based taking into account in the 'risk-factors'. This means that the assessees who have a bad track record (having past duty evasion cases, major audit objections, past duty dues etc.) are given priority for conducting audit over those having clean track record. 3.2 Desk Review 3.2.1 The auditors are assigned the assessees to be audited at the beginning of the financial year. The auditors are required to gather as much information about the assessee as possible. They can gather information from the departmental records, published documents like balance sheets annual statements etc., and through market Enquirer. Since this can be done without interacting with the assessee, this step called as 'desk-review'. 3.3 Documenting Information 3.3.1 At the stage of 'Desk Review' the auditors may have already identified certain areas, which warrant closer examination. The auditor may also require certain documents or information from the assessee to complete his preliminary investigation. For this he may write letter to the assessee or send him a questionnaire to obtain this information. This step is called 'gathering and documenting assessee information'. 3.4 Touring 3.4.1 The auditor then visits the unit of the assessee to see the actual running of the unit, the systems that are followed for maintaining records in various sections and the system of movement of goods and the related documents within the unit. This step is called 'touring of the premises'. This gives the auditors a general overview about the procedure adopted by the assessee and the possible loopholes through which revenue leakage can take place. 3.5 Audit Plan 3.5.1 Based on his experiences and the information gathered so far about the assessee, the auditor now makes a 'audit plan'. The idea of developing audit plan is to list the areas which, as per the auditor are the vulnerable areas from the revenue point of view. Since number of documents/records maintained by assessee is huge in number, it also necessary that the auditor should select only some of them for the actual verification. The preparation of audit plan helps him to do that. It must be remembered that audit plan is not rigid but a dynamic concept. During the course of audit if the auditor notices certain new facts or new aspects of the planned area of audit, he can always alter the audit plan accordingly, with the approval of his supervisor. Similarly, in case during the actual audit, if the auditor is convinced that any area which was earlier planned for verification does not require in-depth scrutiny, he may alter the plan midway after obtaining approval of the superior officers. Preparation of audit plan is one of the most important steps of EA 2000. A well thought audit plan generally increases the success of audit result manifolds. 3.6 Verification 3.6.1 The most important step of audit is the conduct of actual audit, which in technical parlance is called 'Verification'. The auditors visit the unit of the assessee on a scheduled date (informed to the assessee in advance) and carry out the scrutiny of the records of the assessee as per the audit plan. The auditor is required to compare the documentation of a fact from different documents. For example, the auditor may check the figures of clearance of finished goods showed by the assessee in central excise return with the sales figures of the said goods in Balance Sheet, Sales Tax Returns, Bank statements etc. The auditor may also enquire about the entries which appear vague (say an entry like 'Misc. Income') in various records and documents. The idea behind conduct of verification is to reasonably ensure that no amount, which as per the Central Excise law is chargeable to duty, escapes taxation. The process of verification is always carried out in presence of the assessee so that he can clarify the doubts and provide required information to the auditor. 3.7 Audit Objection and Audit Para 3.7.1 Where the auditor finds instances of short payment of duty or non-observance of Central excise procedures, he is required to discuss the issue with the assessee. After explanation provided by the assessee, if the auditor is satisfied that such non-tax compliance has occurred, he records the same as an 'Audit Objection' or 'Audit Para' of the 'draft audit report' that he would be preparing at the end of the verification process. Auditor is advised not to take formal objections to mere procedural lapses/ infractions/ adoption of wrong procedures, which do not result in any short payment of duty or do not have bearing upon the duty payment. In such cases the auditor is required to discuss the matter with the assessee and advise him to follow the correct procedure in future. Further, while making an audit para, attempt should be made to tabulate the duty short paid by the assessee at the spot and incorporate it in the para itself. However, if this is not possible for the paucity of time or for the want of some information not available at that time, the auditor should make a note of the same in his report. 3.8 Audit Report 3.8.1 At the end of the process of verification the auditor prepares an 'Draft Audit Report' which incorporates all the audit objections/audit paras. An audit report provides (issue or para wise) the issue in brief, the reply or the explanation of the assessee, the reason for the auditor not being satisfied with the reply, the amount of short payment (if tabulated) and the recoveries of the same (if could be made at the spot). The draft audit report is then submitted to the superior officers for review, who examine the sustainability of the objections raised by the auditors. After such review, the audit report becomes final and in cases where the disputed amounts have not already been paid by the assessee at the spot, demand notices are issued by the department for their recoveries.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 EA 2000 is a modern, transparent and interactive method of audit wherein the auditor proceeds with audit fully conversant with the business of the assessee. On his part, the assessee is given full opportunity to explain his stand on any particular matter so that matters are resolved in full appreciation of legal position. EA 2000 is thus a participative audit. 4.2 A requirement of EA 2000 is that the auditors must be thorough in their knowledge of Central Excise law and procedures, notifications, instructions and circulars issued by the Finance Ministry and the judicial decisions on issues relating to central excise laws. To be successful auditor, knowledge about financial bookkeeping, accountancy and proficiency in understanding commonly used commercial books and documents is of great help. Further, being computer literate is an added requirement while auditing an assessee who maintains his accounts in electronic format.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 The provisions for appeal are contained in Chapter VI A of the Central Excise Act, 1944The rules pertaining to Appeals i.e. Central Excise (Appeals) Rules, 2001 (hereinafter referred to as 'Appeal Rules') have been notified w.e.f. 1.7.2001. 1.2 Provisions in the Central Excise Act, 1944 relating to Appeals are -Section 35, 35A, 35B, 35C, 35D, 35E, 35EE, 35F, 35G, 35H, 35L, 35J, 35K, 35L, 35M, 35N, 35O, 35P, 35R, 36. 1.3 These provisions provide for appeals to Commissioner (Appeals), Appellate Tribunal, procedure, orders of appellate tribunal, powers of revisions of Board, revision by Central Government, statements of case to High Court, application to High Court, appeal to the Supreme Court, transfer of certain pending proceedings and transitional provisions.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Under the new Chapter VIA of the Central Excise Act, 1944 both assessee and department has been conferred with a right of two or three stage remedies against the orders passed under Central Excise Act and Rules. For orders passed by officers lower than the rank of Commissioner of Central Excise, the first appeal lies to the Commissioner (Appeals) and there from to the Appellate Tribunal and finally to the Supreme Court. But where the order of the Tribunal does not relate to determination of rate of duty or value of goods, a reference to the High Court lies under Sections 35G & 35H, instead of Appeal to Supreme Court. In cases where the order-in-original is passed by a Commissioner of Central Excise, appeal lies directly to the Appellate Tribunal. 2.3 As per the provisions of Section 35 read with Sections 35B, 35G, 35H and 35L of the Central Excise Act , any person aggrieved by the order passed by the Central Excise Officer, can file an appeal to the following authorities:-  Order passed by Appellate Authority 1 All officers upto & including Additional Commissioner Commissioner (Appeals) 2 Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals) CEGAT except in cases where order relates to:-  a case of loss of goods, where the loss occurs in transit from a factory to a warehouse or to another factory, or from one warehouse to another, or during the course of processing of the goods in a warehouse or in storage, whether in a factory or in a warehouse;  a rebate of duty of excise on goods exported to any country or territory outside India or on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods which are exported to any country or territory outside India;  goods exported outside India (except to Nepal or Bhutan) without payment of duty;  credit of any duty allowed to be utilized towards payment of excise duty on final products under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder and such order is passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) on or after the date appointed under section 109 of the Finance (No.2) Act, 1998]. 3. Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals) Revision application to Central Govt. (in matters relating to baggage, drawback, export without payment of duty, goods short landed, loss of goods in transit). No further Appeal. 4 CEGAT Supreme Court (Classification and Valuation cases) 5 CEGAT High Court (Other than classification and valuation matters) 6 High Court Supreme Court
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 All decisions and orders passed under the Central Excise Act or the rules made thereunder are subject to two departmental appeals except in the case where the Order-in-Original is passed by the Commissioner as an adjudicating authority when only one right of appeal to the Tribunal is conferred. The First Appeal as per the provisions of Section 35 of the Central Excise Act lies to the Commissioner(Appeals) if the order or decision is of an officer lower in rank than the Commissioner of Central Excise. Such an appeal can be filed within sixty days from the date of the communication of decision/ order. This period can be extended by a further period of thirty days by Commissioner (Appeals) on sufficient cause being shown. Thereafter, the Second Appeal against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) can be filed to the Appellate Tribunal except for the type of cases referred to in Sl.No.6 of the chart above. 3.2 As per Rule 3 of Central Excise (Appeals) Rules, 2001 an appeal under sub-section (1) of Section 35 to the Commissioner (Appeals) shall be made in Form No.E.A. 1(in duplicate) & shall be accompanied by a copy of the decision or order appealed against. 3.3 The grounds of appeal and the form of verification as contained in Form No.E.A. 1 shall be signed - (a) In the case of an individual, by the individual himself or where the individual is absent from India, by the individual concerned or by some person duly authorized by him in this behalf; and where the individual is a minor or is mentally incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by his guardian or by any other person competent to act on his behalf. (b) In the case of a Hindu undivided family, by the karta and, where the karta is absent from India or is mentally incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by any other adult member of such family. (c) In the case of a company or local authority, by the principal officer thereof; (d) In the case of a firm, by any partner thereof, not being a minor; (e) In the case of any other association, by any member of the association or the principal officer thereof; and (f) In the case of any other person, by that person or some person competent to act on his behalf. 3.4 As per Rule 4, of Appeal Rules an application under sub-section (4) of Section 35E to the Commissioner(Appeals) shall be made in Form No.E.A.2 & such an application shall be treated as appeal. 3.5 The form of application in Form No.E.A.2 shall be filed in duplicate and accompanied by two copies of the decision or order passed by the adjudicating authority (one of which at least shall be a certified copy) and a copy of the order passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise directing such authority to apply to the Commissioner (Appeals). 3.6 The order of the Commissioner of Central Excise shall be passed, where it is possible to do so, within a period of six months from the date on which it is filed. The appeal shall be filed within a period of sixty days from the date of communication of order.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 4--> 4.1 An appellant can produce any additional evidence before the Commissioner (Appeals). As per rule 5, of the Appeal Rules the appellant shall not be entitled to produce before the Commissioner (Appeals) any evidence, whether oral or documentary, other than the evidence produced by him during the course of the proceedings before the adjudicating authority except in the following circumstances, namely: (a) Where the adjudicating authority has refused to admit evidence which ought to have been admitted; or (b) Where the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from producing the evidence which was called upon to produce by the adjudicating authority; or (c) Where the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from producing before the adjudicating authority any evidence which is relevant to any ground of appeal; or (d) Where the adjudicating authority has made the order appealed against without giving sufficient opportunity to the appellant to adduce evidence relevant to any ground of appeal. 4.2 No evidence shall be admitted under sub-rule (1) unless the Commissioner (Appeals) records in writing the reasons for its admission. 4.3 The Commissioner(Appeals) shall not take any evidence produced under sub-rule(1) unless the adjudicating authority or an officer authorized in this behalf by the said authority has been allowed a reasonable opportunity - (a) to examine the evidence or document or to cross-examine any witness 1produced by the appellant, or (b) to produce any evidence or any witness in rebuttal of the evidence produced by the appellant under sub-rule (1) 4.4 It is also provided that nothing contained in this rule shall affect the power of the Commissioner (Appeals); to direct the production of any document, or the examination of any witness, to enable him to dispose of the appeal.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 5--> 5.1 In response to the long outstanding demand of the trade and industry for establishing an independent machinery to redress the grievances of the Excise and Customs assesses, the Central Government set up the Customs, Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal in the year 1982 to hear and dispose of appeals in Central Excise, Customs and Gold Control matters. 5.2 The Benches of the Tribunal are composed of Judicial and Technical Members. Single member Bench has the jurisdiction to hear appeals involving an amount of duty, fine or penalty not exceeding Rs.50,000/-. 5.3 As per rule 6, of Appeal Rules, an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 35B to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in Form No.E.A.3 and the following shall be observed: (1) A memorandum of cross objections to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (4) of section 35 B shall be made in Form No.E.A.4. (2) Where an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 35B or a memorandum of cross-objections under sub-section (4) of that section is made by any person other than the Commissioner of Central Excise, the grounds of appeal, the grounds of cross-objections and the forms of verification as contained in Form Nos.E.A.3 and E.A. 4, as the case may be respectively shall be signed by the persons specified in sub-rule (2) of rule 3. (3) The form of appeal in Form No.E.A. - 3 and the form of memorandum of cross-objections in Form No.E.A. - 4 shall be filed in quadruplicate and accompanied by an equal number of copies of the order appealed against (one of which at least shall be a certified copy ).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 6--> 6.1 As per rule 7, of the Appeal Rules an application under sub-section (1) of section 35E to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in Form No.E.A.5. The form of application in Form No.E.A. 5 shall be filed in quadruplicate and accompanied by an equal number of copies of the decision or order passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise (one of which at least shall be a certified copy) and a copy of the order passed by the Board directing such Commissioner to apply to the Appellate Tribunal.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 7--> 7.1 As per Section 35 B(2) of Central Excise Act, 1944 , the Commissioner of Central Excise may, if he is of the opinion that an order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 35A is not legal or proper, direct any Central Excise Officer authorized by him in this behalf to appeal on his behalf to the Appellate Tribunal against such order.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 8--> 8.1 The Commissioner of Central Excise or the other party may, within 180 days of the date upon which he is served with notice of an order under section 35C after (not being an order relating, among other things, to the determination of any question having a relation to the rate of duty of excise or to the value of goods for purposes of assessment), by application in the prescribed form, accompanied, where the application is made by the other party, by a fee of two hundred rupees, apply to the High Court to direct the Tribunal to refer to it any question of law arising out of such order and, subject to the other provisions contained in this section. If the High Court so directs, the Appellate Tribunal shall, within one hundred and twenty days of the receipt of such direction, draw up a statement of the case and refer it to the High Court : 8.2 On receipt of notice that an application has been made under sub section (1), the person against whom such application has been made, may notwithstanding that he may not have filed such an application, file, within forty-five days of the receipt of the notice, a memorandum of cross-objections verified in the prescribed manner against any part of the order in relation to which an application for reference has been made and such memorandum shall be disposed of by the High Court as if it were an application presented within the time specified in sub-section (1).
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 9--> 9.1 Sections 35E, 35EA, & 35EE of Central Excise Act provide for review of an order passed by the adjudicating authorities. 9.1.1 Section 35E gives powers to Board or Commissioner of Central Excise to pass certain orders. 9.1.2 Section 35EA deals with powers of revision of Board or Commissioner of Central Excise in certain cases while Section 35EE deals with revision by Central Government.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 10--> 10.1 As per Rule 9 & 10 of the Appeal Rules, the revision application under Section 35 EE shall be in Form E.A. 8 & presented in person to the Under-Secretary Revision Application Unit, Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, New Delhi or sent by registered post addressed to such officer. (1) The revision application sent by registered post shall be deemed to have been submitted to the said Under Secretary on the date on which it is received in the office of such officer. (2) The grounds of revision application and the form of verification as contained in Form EA-8 shall be signed by the person specified in sub-rule (2) of Rule 3. (3) The application shall be filed in duplicate & shall be accompanied by two copies of following documents, i.e. (i) Order referred to in 1st Proviso to Section 35B(1) (ii) Decision or order passed by Central Excise Officer which was the subject matter of the order referred to in rule 9(4)(i)
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 11--> 11.1 Sections 35H of the Central Excise Act, 1944 provides for a reference to the High Court against any order of the Appellate Tribunal provided such order does not relate to the determination of rate of duty or value of goods among other things. But where there are conflicting decisions of the High Courts in relation to the question of law involved, Section 35 H of the Central Excise Act provides for a direct reference to the Supreme Court. 11.2 Provisions relating to appeals, refunds etc. as contained in Central Excise Act, 1944 and rules made thereunder are also applicable to cases under Produce Cess Act, 1966 , and for Handloom Cess leviable under Khadi and other Handloom Industries Development (Additional Excise Duty on Cloth) Act, 1953 . 11.3 As per Rule 8 an application under sub-section (1) of section 35 H requiring the High Court to direct the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law shall be made in Form No.E.A.6 and such application shall be filed in quadruplicate. Further provisions are as below: (1) A memorandum of cross-objections under sub-section (3) of section 35H to the High Court shall be made in Form No.E.A.7 and such memorandum shall be filed in quadruplicate. (2) Where an application under sub-section (1) of section 35H or a memorandum of cross-objections under sub-section (3) of that section is made by any person other than the Commissioner of Central Excise, the application, the memorandum or form of verification, as the case may be, contained in Form No.E.A. 6 or Form No.E.A. 7 shall be signed by the person specified in sub-rule (2) of rule 3.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 12--> 12.1.The Central Excise Act, 1944 , provides a two tier machinery for redressal of grievances against the decision of the Appellate Tribunal. In cases where the decision of the Appellate Tribunal relates to any question having relation with the determination of 'rate of duty' or 'value of goods' amongst other things, the same is directly appellable to the Supreme Court under Section 35L of the Central Excise Act , but where the order of the Appellate Tribunal does not relate to 'rate of duty' or 'value of goods', first a reference to the High Court has to be made under Section 35H and thereafter an appeal, against the judgment of the high Court on a reference, can be made to the Supreme Court provided the High Court certifies it to be a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court. 12.2 Orders appellable to the Supreme Court 12.2.1 Section 35L of Central Excise Act, 1944 , specifies two types of orders which are appellable to the Supreme Court: (i) any judgment delivered by a High Court on a Reference made under Section 35H. (ii) any order of the Appellate Tribunal having relation to the determination of rate of duty or value of goods, among other things. [All Forms specified in this Chapter are in Annexure 33 to 40]
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Provisions of search and seizure are used by the Central Excise Officers to enforce the provision of the Central Excise Law. These provisions are used as an exception when the direct physical intervention becomes necessary. At the same time the search and seizure is to be done in accordance with the laid down law. In this regard reference is to be made to the applicable provisions of other statutes, i.e. Code of Criminal Procedure .
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The provisions relating to search are given in Section 18 of the Act,1944, which provides that all searches should be made in accordance with the provisions of the 								Code of Criminal Procedure							 . 2.2 Rules 22 23 of the 								Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 							 (hereinafter referred to as the said Rules), empower the authorized officer to enter and search any premises, conveyance or other place. 							Further, rule 24 ibid specifically empowers such officer to effect a seizure or detention. 							Moreover, Section 12 of the 								Central Excise Act, 1944							 , empowers the Central Government to apply the provisions of the 								Customs Act							 to the Central Excise also. 							In exercise of such powers the Central Government has issued Notification No.68/63, dated 4.5.1963 modifying and extending the various sections of 								Customs Act, 1962							 to Central Excise matters. 2.3 In terms of the said rules, an officer not below the rank of the Inspector of Central Excise, duly authorized by Commissioner by special or general order, can search at any time, any premises or conveyance where he has reason to believe that excisable goods are manufactured, stored or carried in contravention of the provisions of the Act or rules. 							For a registered premises or for stopping and searching any conveyance in transit no search warrant is required. 							However, in other cases, normally search warrants are issued by the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner authorizing the search. 							The Central Excise Officer is also authorized to stop and search any conveyance as well. 							The search is to be carried out in the presence of two independent witnesses. 2.4 Section 22 deals with vexatious searches, seizure etc. by Central Excise Officers. 							In such case the Central Excise office will be liable to punishment under the law. 							Similar provision is made applicable to any person wilfully and malaciously giving false information leading to vexatious search.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 3--> 3.1 Rule 24 of the said Rules provides for power to detain goods or seize the excisable goods. If a Central Excise Officer, has reason to believe that any goods, which are liable to excise duty but no duty has been paid thereon or the said goods were removed with the intention of evading the duty payable thereon, the Central Excise Officer may detain or seize such goods. 3.2 The power to release seized goods emanates from power to seize itself. The goods seized may be released provisionally under bond in the Format specified under erstwhile Central Excise Rules, 1944 [B-8 bond] along with 25% security or surety by the officer who is normally competent to adjudicate the case. The adjudicating officer will also consider the importance of such goods for evidence, and will release the goods provisionally if the bond is furnished. Wherever necessary, sample may also be drawn. The adjudicating officer, however, will ask the owner or in-charge of the goods to whom the goods were released provisionally to produce the goods any time before the issue of adjudication order, if he is of the view that the goods are liable for confiscation. In case the person to whom goods were released provisionally fails to produce the goods at appointed time, the bond may be enforced for recovering.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Provisions for arrest are contained in Sections 13 and 18 of Central Excise Act, 1944These provisions provide for power to arrest, searches and arrests how to be made, disposal of persons arrested, procedure to be followed. 1.2 Any Central Excise Officer not below the rank of Inspector can arrest any person under Section 13 whom he has reason to believe that he is liable to punishment under the Central Excise ActIn normal circumstances, prior approval of Commissioner will be taken before arresting a person. 1.3 The arrested person shall be produced before the Jurisdictional Magistrate or the Chief Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, within twenty-four hours of the arrest. 1.4 Power to grant bail is normally to be exercised by a Jurisdictional Magistrate.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 Besides the departmental adjudication, prosecution may also be launched under Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 for the offences under Section 9(1) of the Act. As per provisions of Section 9AA prosecution may be launched against any person, Director, Manager, Secretary or other officers of a company or partner/ proprietor of the firm, who is responsible for the conduct of the business of the company/firm and is found guilty of the offences under the Central Excise Act/Rules. 2.2 Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 , provides for prosecution of offenders in a court of law and prescribes a minimum imprisonment of six months. However, in cases where the duty involved is more than one lakh or the offender has been convicted previously under this section, the court can award maximum imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years. 2.3 Prosecution proceedings in a Court of Law are generally initiated after departmental adjudication of an offence has been completed. However, prosecution may be launched even where adjudication is not complete. 2.4 Generally, the adjudicator should indicate whether a case is fit for prosecution, though this is not a necessary pre-condition. 2.5 Confiscation and penalty in departmental adjudication and prosecution in criminal proceedings are independent and do not amount to double jeopardy. 2.6 Prosecutions are launched in cases of serious nature and where sufficient evidence to prove fraudulent intention is available. Under executive instructions the Chief Commissioner of Central Excise or in specified cases the Director General of Central Excise Intelligence, has power to sanction prosecution.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Rule 21 of the Central Excise (No.2) Rules, 2001 provides for remission of duty in certain situations. 1.2 Where it is shown to the satisfaction of the Central Excise Officers specified in Table below that goods have been lost or destroyed by natural causes or by unavoidable accident or are claimed by the manufacturer as unfit for consumption or for marketing, at any time before removal, he may remit the duty payable on such goods as specified in the corresponding entry in the said Table, subject to such conditions as may be imposed by him by order in writing. The competence to supervise destruction of excisable goods claimed by the manufacturer as unfit for consumption or for marketing, at any time before removal has also been specified in column 4 of the said Table. Destruction shall be carried on only after the competent officers have passed the order for remission. Sl. No. Competent Central Excise Officer Amount of duty empowered to remit Monetary limit to supervise destruction 1 Commissioner Without limit, but normally any amount exceeding Rs. 5,000 Not required 2 Additional/Joint Commissioner Rs. 2,500 to Rs. 5,000 Not required 3 Deputy/Assistant Commissioner Rs. 1,000 to Rs. 2,500 Exceeding Rs. 20,000 4 Superintendent Below Rs. 1,000 Rs. 5,000 but not exceeding Rs. 20,000 5 Inspector None Below Rs. 5,000 1.3 The proper officer may not demand duty (remit duty) due on any excisable goods, including 'tea', claimed by the manufacturer as unfit for consumption or marketing provided the goods are destroyed irrecoverably under the supervision of the proper officer, and subject to the procedure, specified hereinafter. 1.4 The procedure to be followed for destruction of goods and remission of duty thereon shall be, as follows: (i) A manufacturer desiring to destroy and seek remission of duty in respect of the excisable goods manufactured in his factory, in terms of proviso to sub-rule (1) of rule 49 on the grounds that the said goods have been rendered unfit for consumption or for marketing, will make an application in duplicate to the Range Officer indicating complete details of the goods and reasons for destruction, along with the proof that the goods have become unfit for consumption or for marketing such as report of chemical test or any other test, conducted by a Government recognised laboratory. (ii) The application will be quickly processed by the Range Office. In case the Range Officer is competent to allow destruction and remission (in terms of para 2.2 above) he will proceed to take necessary action at his level. In case the matter falls within the competency of superior officer, he will forward the application along with his recommendation to the Deputy/Assistant Commissioner within 15 days of receipt. (iii) The Deputy/Assistant Commissioner will scrutinise the application and based upon the information given by the assessee, if found in order, allow destruction of goods and remission of duty, if the case relates to his competency. Otherwise, he will forward the application with his remarks to the superior authority competent to give permission for destruction and remission (Additional/Joint Commissioner or Commissioner, as the case may be) within 3 days. (iv) Where only physical verification is required, the same may be conducted by the remission granting authority (proper officer), as specified above and upon his satisfaction, destruction of goods and remission of duty may be allowed. (v) In case of any doubts, the competent authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, order for drawing of samples and its testing by the Central Revenue Control Laboratory or the Customs House Laboratories or any other Government recognised laboratories where the aforementioned laboratories cannot test the samples. The testing of samples will be done in the manner specified in the Basic Excise Manual as modified by the instructions issued, if any, by the Board in this regard. (vi) Ordinarily the views of the assessees that the goods are rendered unfit for consumption or marketing, should be accepted and necessary permission should be granted within a period of 21 days or earlier, if possible. Where samples are drawn, such permission should be granted within 45 days. (vii) Actual destruction of goods should be supervised by the officers according to the monetary limits specified in column (4) of the Table in para 2.2 above. The date and time for destruction should be fixed by mutual convenience of the proper officer and the assessee and it should be ensure that the same date and time are not fixed for more than one assessee. It should also be ensured that there is no inordinate delay once permission for destruction and remission is granted. (viii) In case of frequent requests for destruction of goods by an assessee, necessary enquiries into the cause thereof should be conducted before according permission for destruction of goods. (ix) The proper officer personally supervising the destruction will check the quantity by physical verification i.e. by weight or by counting or using appropriate method in case of liquid, as the case may be, and the identity of goods by reference to relevant records and the application for destruction. The clearance of goods, within or outside the factory premises, shall be done on an invoice, indicating 'nil' duty. The order of the proper officer permitting destruction and remission, should be quoted on the invoice. (x) As far as possible, destruction should be made inside the factory.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 2--> 2.1 The goods intended and presented before the proper officer for destruction must be destroyed in such a manner that they become irretrievable as excisable commodity. The actual method of destruction will depend upon the nature of the goods to be destroyed. For example, matches, cotton, rayon and woollen fabrics, paper, cigar and cheroots may be destroyed by fire. Electric bulb and batteries may be destroyed by crushing into bits and scraps. Vegetable oils and vegetables products may be destroyed by mixing earth or kerosene and dumping into pits. Whatever method of destruction is adopted, the officer supervising the destruction will satisfy himself that the destroyed goods cannot be marketed. If there is any doubt with regard to the suitability of any particular method for destruction of any goods, the officer destroying the goods will refer the matter to his superior officer for orders. 2.2 The officer supervising the destruction must endorse under his signature the relevant records/ documents such as AR-1, invoices, RG-1, EB-4, RG23A, RG23C or other relevant factory records indicating the description and quantity of the goods destroyed in his presence at which time and on which day. 2.3 Immediately after destruction of the goods is completed, the officer supervising destruction must also send a certificate to his immediate superior, countersigned by the factory manager and the factory officer in the prescribed form. 2.4 Where excisable goods are manufactured out of inputs goods on which CENVAT credit was availed, proportionate credit should be reversed before destruction of such goods. 2.5 There will be no limit on the executive powers of the Commissioners to order remission of duty in such cases. However, it has been decided that as a measure of administrative control and information, where the duty amount exceeds Rs.5 lakhs in a case, the Commissioners will send a report to the Board giving sufficient details of such cases. 2.6 No remission of duty in case of theft should be allowed, since the goods are available for consumption somewhere.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 Wherever an assessee or exporter is required services of Central Excise Officers for supervision in accordance of any procedure specified in this regard by rules or instructions beyond office hours or on Sundays, Saturday or public holidays and where there is no specific posting of Officers in shifts by any Office order, he shall be required to pay Merchant Overtime at the rates specified under the Customs Act, 1961 under Customs (Fees for Rendering Services by Customs Officers) Regulations, 1998 . 1.2 If a manufacturer or exporter requisitions services of Central Excise Officers for supervision and examination of export cargo and stuffing in containers at his premises, such Officers also discharge functions of a "Customs Officers".
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1--> 1.1 In the event the Government dues are not paid the law provides for recovery thereof. For the recovery of dues the provisions of Section 142 of the Customs Act, 1962 have been made applicable to like matters in Central Excise by Notification No. 68/63-Central Excise dated 4.5.1963 issued under Section 12 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 . 1.2 If the stay application is filed by the assessee against the Order-in-Original confirming the duty demand, no coercive action should be taken to realise the dues till the disposal of the stay application by the Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeal). However, the Commissioner (Appeal) must dispose of the stay application within one month of its filing. 1.3 A period of 3 months from the date of communication of the order-in-original/ order-in appeal should be normally be provided for (one month for filing appeal and stay application and two more months for obtaining orders on the stay application), before taking coercive measures to recover the dues. However, iIf a stay application of an assessee is rejected by an appellate authority even before the lapse of the time limit of three months, recovery proceedings should be initiated immediately thereafter. 1.4 In respect of cases decided by Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals), Tribunal, Government of India or High Court, the assessee should be given a maximum period of one month from the date of communication of the Order to pay up the dues before resorting to any coercive action. In case of decision of Supreme Court of India, the assessee should pay the Government dues, if any, forthwith or else the recovery proceedings, shall be initiated within 15 days of the communication of the order.
Central Excise Manual, 2001_Section 1-->  1.1 Rule 16 of the said Rules provides for return of any goods, on which duty has been paid at the time of removal, to the factory for being re-made, refined, re-conditioned or for any other reason. In such cases, the assessee shall state the particulars of such return in his records and shall be entitled to have CENVAT credit of the duty paid as if such goods are received as inputs under the CENVAT Credit Rules, 2001 and utilise this credit according to the said rules. As per this rule the goods should return to the same factory in which they were produced. 1.2 If the goods so returned are subjected to certain process which do not amount to manufacture, the manufacturer shall pay an amount equal to the CENVAT credit taken. 1.3 In any other case [where the returned goods are subjected to process(es) amounting to manufacture] the manufacturer shall pay duty at the rate applicable on the date of removal and on the value determined under Section 4 or Section 4A of the Act, as the case may be. 1.4 In the event the assessee has any difficulty, the Commissioner is empowered to resolve the same and permit the entry of the goods into the factory and the availment of CENVAT credit thereon. For this the Commissioner, either on case to case basis by special order or to be applied to "particular type of case" by general order, impose such conditions as may be necessary for safeguarding interest of revenue. 
