Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009 . BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of October, 2009.
Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 2--> After section 3 of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Special provision with respect to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.-"3A. (1) The Central University of Jammu and Kashmir established under subsection (4) of section 3 shall be known as the Central University of Kashmir and its territorial jurisdiction shall be limited to the Kashmir Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (2) There shall be established a university, which shall be a body corporate, to be known as the Central University of Jammu having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (3) All assets and liabilities of the Central University of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall stand transferred to be the assets and liabilities of the Central University of Jammu. (4) Anything done or any action taken by the University of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be deemed to have been done or taken by the Central University of Jammu. (5) Any suit or legal proceedings instituted or continued by or against the Central University of Jammu and Kashmir in respect of the territory of Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be deemed to have been instituted or continued by or against the Central University of Jammu.".
Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 3--> In the First Schedule to the principal Act, for serial number 5 and the corresponding entries against it, the following serial numbers and entries shall be substituted, namely:- "5. Jammu and Kashmir Central University of Kashmir Kashmir Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir 5A. Jammu and Kashmir Central University of Jammu Jammu Division of the State of Jammu and Kashmir".
Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2009_Section 4--> (1) The Central Universities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Central Universities (Amendment) Ordinance, 2009, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. V. K. BHASIN, Secy. to the Govt. of India 
