Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section Preamble--> An Act to declare and amend the law in force in the Central Provinces. WHEREAS it is expedient to declare and amend certain portions of law in force in the Central Provinces; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875: Local extent.- It extends to the territories now under the administration of the state Government of the Central Provinces; Commencement.- And it shall come into force on the passing thereof.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 2--> On and from the date on which this Act comes into force the following shall be repealed, that is to say- (a) all Bengal Regulations except the Regulations or parts of Regulations hereinafter declared to be in force; (b) all 1 Central Acts (except the Acts mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed) which do not expressly or by necessary implication extend to the said territories or any part thereof, and have not been extended thereto in exercise of a power conferred by a 2 Central Act; (c) all rules, regulations and enactments not being Statutes, Bengal Regulations, 3 Central Acts, or rules or regulations made in exercise of a power conferred by a Statute, Bengal Regulation or 4 Central Act. 5 Substituted by the A O.1950 for " Acts of the Central Legislature ". Substituted , ibid, for " Act of the Central Legislature ". Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "Acts of the Central Legislature". Substituted , ibid., for "Act of the Central Legislature". The proviso as to the law relating to land-revenue and Courts of Wards was Repealed by Act 12 of 1891 .
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 3--> On and from the said date the enactments specified in the schedule hereto annexed shall be deemed to be in force throughout the said territories to the extent mentioned in the third column of the, said schedule. But the powers and duties incident to the operation of the same enactments, so far as such powers and duties are referred to in the fourth column of the said schedule, shall be exercised and performed y the authorities mentioned in that column Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation of any enactment not mentioned in the said schedule.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 4--> Every 1 Central Act which extends, or can by notification be extended, to the territories which were under the administration of the state Government at the time of the passing thereof.shall extend, or may by notification be extended, as the case may be to all the territories now under the administration of the said State Government. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "Act of the Central Legislature
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 5--> In questions regarding inheritance, special property of females, betrothal, marriage, dower, adoption guardianship, minority, bastardy, family relations wills ,legacies, gifts, partitions or any religious usage or institution, the rule of decision shall be the Muhammadan law in cases where the parties are Muhammadans, and the in Hindu law in cases where the parties are Hindus, except in so far a such law has been by legislative enactment altered or abolished, or is opposed to the provisions of this Act: Provided that when among any class or body of persons or among the members of any family any custom prevails which is inconsistent the law applicable between such persons under this section, and which, if not inconsistent with such law, would have been given effect to as legally binding, such custom shall, notwithstanding anything herein contained, be given effect to. The provisions of this section have been repealed in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat ) Application Act, 1937 (26 of 1937); see Section 6 of that Act.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 6--> In cases not provided for by section 5, or by any other law for the time being in force, the Courts shall act according to justice equity and good conscience.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 7--> Implements of husbandry and cattle for agricuItural purposes and implements of trade are exam executed from attachment and sale in execution of decrees of the Civil Courts.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 8--> The said State Government may from time to time make rules consistent with this Act as to the following matters - (a) the maintenance of watch and ward and the establishment of proper system of conservancy and sanitation at fairs and other large public assemblies; (b) the imposition of taxes for the purposes mentioned in clause (c) of this section on persons holding or joining any of the assemblies therein referred to; (d) the custody of judicial records, civil and criminal; 1 2 The words "and the destruction from time to time of such of the said records as it may be deemed unnecessary to keep" Repealed by Act 3 of 1879 . Clause (d) relating to the appointment, duties, punishment, suspension and dismissal of all ministerial officers was Repealed by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 .
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 9--> The State Government may, in making any rule under this Act attach to the breach of it, in addition to any other consequences that would ensue from such breach a punishment, on conviction before a Magistrate, not exceeding one month's imprisonment, or two hundred rupees fine, or both.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 10--> All rules made under this Act shall 1 be published in the 2 Official Gazette and shall thereupon have the force of law. The words "when sanctioned by the G.G.in C".rep.by Act 38 of 1920 , Section 2 and Schedule I. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 for "C.P.Gazette".
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 11--> Sections 184, 185 and 189 of the Code of Civil Procedure2 are hereby repealed. Inserted by Act 2 of 1879 , Section 2. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Schedule I, Order XVIII, rules 8, 9 and 13.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section 12--> -For sections 182, 190 and 191 of the same Code701 the following shall be substituted (namely):- Note of evidence to be taken.- " 182.A note of the essential points of the evidence of each witness shall be made at the time.and in the course of oral examination, by the Judge, in his own language, or English if he is sufficiently acquainted with- that language, and such notes shall be filed with, ancl form part of the record of the case. Judge unable to make note to record reason of his inability.- " 190.If the Judge be prevented from making a note as above required, he shall record the reason of his inability to do so, and shall cause such note to be made in writing from his dictation in open Court, and shall sign the same, and such note shall form part of the record. Power to use note made by Judge dying or removed before conclusion of suit.- " 191.When the Judge making a note of the evidence, or causing one to be made as above required, dies or is removed from the Court before the conclusion of the suit, his successor may , if he thinks fit, deal with such note as if he himself had made it or caused it to be made." Inserted by Act 2 of 1879 , Section 2.
Central Provinces Laws Act, 1875_Section Sch.1-->  THE SCHEDULE (See section 3) SCHEDULE 
