Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915, the Delhi University Act, 1922, the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966, the North-Eastern Hill University Act, 1973 and the University of Hyderabad Act, 1974. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008.
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> In the Banaras Hindu University Act, 1915 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Banaras Hindu University Act), in section 13, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the accounts, together with the auditor's report, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> After section 13 of the Banaras Hindu University Act , the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "13 A. Annual report:-(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the Executive Council and shall be submitted to the Court on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and shall be considered by the Court in its annual meeting. (2) The Court may communicate its comments thereon to the Executive Council. (3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 4--> In the Delhi University Act, 1922 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Delhi 8 of 1922. University Act), section 38 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 5--> In section 39 of the Delhi University Act , after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the accounts, together with the audit report, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 6--> In the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act, 1966 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act), in section 19, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 7--> In section 20 of the Jawaharlal Nehru University Act , after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the accounts, together with the audit report, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 8--> In the North-Eastern Hill University Act, 1973 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the North-Eastern Hill University Act), in section 28, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 9--> In section 29 of the North-Eastern Hill University Act , after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(4) Amendment of section 29:-A copy of the annual accounts together with the report of Comptroller and Auditor-General, shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.".
Central Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 10--> In the University of Hyderabad Act, 1974 , in section 28, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub-section (1), shall also be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.". T. K. VISWANATHAN, Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
