Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section Preamble--> 1 An Act to provide for the Vesting and Administration of Property held in trust for charitable purposes. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the vesting and administration of property held in trust for charitable purposes; It is hereby enacted as follows: This Act has been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas by the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation, 1872 (3 of 1872), Section 3; in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), Section 3 and Schedule ; and in the Angul District by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936) s 3 and Schedule It has also been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941This Act has been amended in its application to Bengal by the Bengal Wakf Act, 1934 (Ben.13 of 1934).This Act shall not apply to any Wakf to which the Muslim Wakfs Act, 1954 (29 of 1954) applies.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890. (2) It extends to the whole of India 1 except the State of Jammu and Kashmir; 2 and (3) It shall come into force on the first day of October, 1890. Subs, by Act 3 of 1951 , Section 3 and Schedule , for "except Part B States". The words " inclusive of British Baluchistan " omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948, w.e.f. 01-04-1951.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 2--> In this Act, "charitable purpose" includes relief of the poor, education, medical relief and the advancement of any other object of general public utility, but does not include a purpose which relates exclusively to religious teaching or worship.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 3--> 1 (1) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the Government by the name of his office to be Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India and the Government of any State may appoint an officer of the Government by the name of his office to be Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for the State (2) Such Treasurer shall, for the purposes of taking, holding and transferring moveable or immoveable property under the authority of this Act, be a corporation sole by the name of the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for 2 India or, as the case may be, the State, and, as such Treasurer, shall have perpetual succession and a corporate seal, and may sue and be sued in his corporate name. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for the original sub-section. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for "The territories subject To the Local Government ".
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 3A--> 1 [In the subsequent provisions of this Act "the appropriate Government " means, as respects a charitable endowment, the objects of which do not extend beyond a single State and are not objects to which the executive authority of the Central Government extends, the Government of the State, and as respects any other charitable endowment the Central Government.] Inserted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 4--> (1) Where any property is held or is to be applied in trust for a charitable purpose, the 1 appropriate Government, if it thinks fit may, on application made as hereinafter mentioned, and subject to the other provisions of this section, order, by 2 notification in the Official Gazette, that the property be vested in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments on such terms as to the application of the property or the income thereof as may be agreed on between the 3 appropriate Government and the person or persons marking the application, and the property shall thereupon so vest accordingly. (2) When any property has vested under this section in a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments, he is entitled to all documents of title relating thereto. 4 (4) An order under this section vesting property in a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments shall not require or be deemed to require him to administer the property, or impose or be deemed to impose upon him the duty of a trustee with respect to the administration thereof. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". For notifications issued under this section in conjunction with Section 5, see different local R.and O. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". Sub-section (3) omitted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 .
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 5--> (1) On application made as hereinafter mentioned, and with the concurrence of the person or persons making the application, the 1 [appropriate Government], if it thinks fit, may settle a scheme for the administration of any property which has been or is to be vested in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments, and may in such scheme appoint, by name or office, a person or persons, not be or including such Treasurer, to administer the property. (2) On application made as hereinafter mentioned, and with the concurrence of the person or persons making the application, the 2 [appropriate Government] may.if it thinks fit, modify any scheme settled under this section or substitute another scheme in its stead. (3) A scheme settled, modified or substituted under this section shall, subject to the other provisions of this section, come into operation on a day to be appointed by the 3 [appropriate Government] in this behalf, and shall remain in force so long as the property to which it relates continues to be vested in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments or until it has been modified or another such scheme has been substituted in its stead. (4) Such a scheme, when it comes into operation, shall supersede any decree or direction relating to the subject-matter thereof in so far as such decree or direction is in any way repugnant thereto, and its validity shall not be questioned in any Court.nor shall any Court give, in contravention of the provisions of the scheme or in any way contrary or in addition thereto, a decree or direction regarding the administration of the property to which the scheme relates: 4 Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as precluding a Court from inquiring whether the Government by which a scheme was made was the appropriate Government. (5) In the settlement of such a scheme effect shall be given to the wishes of the author of the trust so far as they can be ascertained, and, in the opinion of the 5 [appropriate Government], effect can reasonably be given to them. (6) Where a scheme has been settled under this section for the administration of property not already vested in the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments, it shall not come into operation until the property has become so vested. 6 Subs by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". Subs by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". Subs by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". Inserted by the A.O.I937. Subs by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ". A proviso to s 5, applicable only to Bengal, has been added by the Bengal of Act, 1934(Ben.13 of 1934) Section 79
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 6--> (1) The application referred to in the two last foregoing sections must be made,- (a) if the property is already held in trust for a charitable an purpose, then by the person acting in the administration of the trust.or, where there are more persons than one so acting, then by those persons or a majority of them; and (b) if the property is to be applied in trust for such a purpose then by the person or persons proposing so to apply it. (2) For the purposes of this section the executor or administrator of a deceased trustee of property held in trust for a charitable purpose shall be deemed to be a person acting in the administration of the trust1 . A new sub-section (3), application only to Bengal, has been added by the Bengal WakfAct, 1934 (Ben. 13 of 1934), Section 80.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 7--> Repealed by the A.O., 1937.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 8--> (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments shall not, as such Treasurer, act in the administration of any trust whereof any of the property is for the time being vested in him under this Act. (2) Such Treasurer shall keep a separate account of each property for the time being so vested in so far as the property consists of securities for money, and shall apply the property or the income thereof in accordance with the provision made in that behalf in the vesting order under section 4 or in the scheme, if any, under section 5, or in both those documents. (3) In the case of any property so vested other than securities for money, such Treasurer shall, subject to any special order which he may receive from the authority by whose order the property became vested in him, permit the persons acting in the administration of the trust to have the possession, management and control of the property, and the application of the income thereof.as if the property had been vested in them.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 9--> A Treasurer of Charitable Endowments shall cause to be published annually in the Official Gazette, at such time as the 1 appropriate Government may direct, a list of all properties for the time being vested in him under this Act and an abstract of all accounts kept by him under sub-section (2) of the last foregoing section. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " Local Government ".
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 10--> (1) A Treasurer of Charitable Endowments shall always be a sole trustee, and shall not, as such Treasurer, take or, hold any property otherwise than under the provisions of this Act, or subject to those provisions, transfer any property vested in him except in obedience to a decree divesting him of the property, or in compliance with a direction in that behalf issuing from the authority by whose order the property became vested in him. (2) Such a direction may require the Treasurer to sell or otherwise dispose of any property vested in him, and, with the sanction of the authority issuing the direction, to invest the proceeds of the sale or other disposal of the property in any such security for money as is 1 specified in the direction, or in the purchase of immoveable property. (3) When a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments is divested, by a direction of 2 the appropriate Government under this section of any property, it shall vest in the person or persons acting in the administration thereof and be held by him or them on the same trusts as those on which it was held by such Treasurer. Subs by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " mentioned in section 4, sub-section (3) clause (a), (b), (c), (d) or (e)" Substituted by the A O 1937 " for "the Local Government or the Governor-General in Council "
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 11--> If the office held by an officer of the Government who has been appointed to be a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments is abolished or its name is changed, the 1 appropriate Government may appoint the same or another officer of the Government by the name, of his office to be such Treasurer, and thereupon the holder of the latter office shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the successor in office of the holder of the former office. Substituted by the A.O 1937 , for Local Government "
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 12--> - If by reason of any alteration of areas or by reason of the, appointment of a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India or for any State for which such a Treasurer has not previously been, appointed or for any other reason it appears to the Central Government that any property vested in a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments should be vested in another such Treasurer, that Government may direct that the property shall be so vested and thereupon it shall vest in that other Treasurer and his successors as fully and effectually for the purposes of this Act, as if it had been original vested in him under this Act. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for the original section
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 13--> 2 [1] The 3 appropriate Government may4 [by notification in the Official Gazette]make rules 5 consistent with this Act for- (a) prescribing the fees to be paid to the Government in respect of any property vested under this Act in a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments; (b) regulating the cases and the mode in which schemes or any modification thereof are to be published before they are settled or made under section 5; (c ) prescribing the forms in which accounts are to be kept by Treasurers of Charitable Endowments and the mode in which such accounts are to be audited; and (d) generally carrying into effect the purposes of this Act. 6 [(2)Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature. (3)Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be no effect, as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule] Substituted by Act 38 of 1920 , s, 2 and Schedule I Part I for the original section. substitutedby Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 1982, w.e.f. 25-10-1982. Substituted by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Order, 1937 as modified by the Government of India (Adaptation of Indian Laws) Supplementary Order, 1937 , for " L G " inserted by Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 1982 For the Charitable Endowments (Central) Rules, 1942 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , 1942, p.379. inserted by Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 1982, w.e.f. 25-10-1982.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 14--> No suit shall be instituted against the Government in respect of anything done or purporting to be done under this Act, or in respect of any alleged neglect or omission to perform any duty devolving on the Government under this Act, or in respect of the exercise of, or the failure to exercise, any power conferred by this Act on the Government, nor shall any suit be instituted against a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments except for divesting him of property on the ground of its not being subject to a trust for a charitable purpose, or for making him chargeable with or accountable for the loss or misapplication of any property vested in him, or the income thereof, where the loss or misapplication has been occasioned by or through his willful neglect or default.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 15--> Nothing in this Act shall be construed to impair the operation 1 [of any enactment] for the time being in force, respecting the authority of an Advocate General 2 [...] to act with respect to any charity 3 [or of the Official Trustees Act, 1913] respecting the vesting of property in trust for a charitable purpose in an Official Trustee. Substituted by Act 58 of 1960, Section 3 and Second Schedule, for certain words w.e.f. 26-12-1960. The words “at a Presidency” omitted by Act 58 of 1960, Section 3 and Second Schedule w.e.f. 26-12-1960. Substituted by Act 58 of 1960, Section 3 and Second Schedule, for certain words w.e.f. 26-12-1960.
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890_Section 16--> Repealed by the Devolution Act, 1920 (38 of 1920), s.2 and Sch.I, Pt.I. 
