Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Act, 1991.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of October, 1993.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 2--> In the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Act, 1991 (11 of 1991.) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words "and for matters", the words "and to provide for the procedure for transactions of business by the Election Commission and for matters" shall be substituted.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 3--> In section 1 of the principal Act, for the words and brackets "the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service)", the words and brackets "the Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and Transaction of Business)" shall be substituted.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 4--> In section 2 of the principal Act, clause (b) shall be re-lettered as clause (c) and before clause (c) as so re-lettered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- ' (b) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission Referred to in article 324 of the Constitution ;'.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 5--> In section 3 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1),- (i) the brackets and figure "(1)" shall be omitted; (ii) after the words "Chief Election Commissioner", the words "and other Election Commissioners" shall be inserted; (b) in sub-section (2), the brackets, figure and words "(2) There shall be paid to an Election Commissioner a salary which is equal to the salary of a Judge of a High Court:" shall be omitted.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 6--> In section 4 of the principal Act, for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner attains the age of sixty-five years before the expiry of the said term of six years, he shall vacate his office on the date on which he attains the said age:".
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 7--> In section 6 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (2),- (i) after the words "Chief Election Commissioner", the words "or an Election Commissioner" shall be inserted; (ii) for the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (4)", the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (3)" shall be substituted; (b) sub-section (3) shall be omitted; (c) sub-section (4) shall be re-numbered as sub-section (3) and in sub-section (3) as so re-numbered, in clause (b), the words "or as the case may be, sixty-two years," shall be omitted.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 8--> In section 8 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with the words "for the time being, applicable to", and ending with the words "apply to an Election Commissioner", the following shall be substituted, namely:- "for the time being, applicable to a Judge of the Supreme Court under Chapter IV of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 (41 of 1958.) and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply to the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners".
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 9--> The business of the Election Commission shall be transacted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 10--> (1) The Election Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for transaction of its business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners. (2) Save as provided in sub-section (1), all business of the Election Commission shall, as far as possible, be transacted unanimously. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.".
Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993_Section 11--> (1) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Ordinance, 1993 (Ord.32 of 1993.) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
