Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section Preamble--> An Act to prohibit the pledging of the labour of children. WHEREAS it is expedient to prohibit the making of agreements to ledge the labour of children, and the employment of children whose labour has been pledged; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 19331 . 2 (2) It extends to the whole of India3 except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. (3) This section and sections 2 and 3 shall come into force at once, and the remaining sections of this Act shall come into force on the first day of July, 1933. This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, section 2 and Schedule I; Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, section 3 and Schedule I and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (now Lakshadweep) by Reg. 2 of 1970, section 2 and Schedule. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for sub-section (2) Substituted by Act 3 of 1951 , Section 3 and Schedule , for "except Part B States of Jammu and Kashmir"
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- "an agreement to pledge the labour of a child" means an agreement, written or oral, express or implied, where by the parent or guardian of a child, in return for any payment or benefit received or to be received by him, undertakes to cause or allow the services of the child to be utilised in any employment: Provided that an agreement made without detriment to a child, and not made in consideration of any benefit other than reasonable wages to be paid for the child's services, and terminable at not more than a week's notice, is not an agreement within the meaning of this definition; "child" means a person who is under the age of fifteen years; and "guardian" includes any person having legal custody of or control over a child.
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 3--> An agreement to pledge the labour of a child shall be void.
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 4--> Whoever, being the parent or guardian of a child, makes an agreement to pledge the labour of that child, shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 5--> Whoever makes with the parent or guardian of a child an agreement whereby such parent or guardian pledges the labour of the child shall be punished with fine which may extend to two to hundred rupees.
Children (Pledging of Labour) Act, 1933_Section 6--> Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an agreement has been made to pledge the labour of a child, in furtherance of such agreement employs such child, or permits such child to be employed in any premises or place under his control, shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
