Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section Preamble--> An Act to make provision for the certification of cinematograph films for exhibition and for regulating exhibitions by means of cinematographs. BE it enacted by Parliament as follows :-
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Cinematorgraph Act, 1952.1 (2) Parts I, II and IV extend to the whole of India 2 [...] and Part III extends to 3 [the Union territories] only. (3) This Act shall come into force on such date4 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; 5 [Provided that Parts I and II shall come into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir only on such date after the commencement of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973 , as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.] This Act has been extended to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, Section 2 and Sch.; Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, Section 3 and Schedule Parts I and II of the Act shall come into force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir (w.e.f. 01-05-1974), vide G.S.R. 183(E), dated 23rd April, 1974. Part III of the Act enforced in the Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh (w.e.f. 01-10-84), vide S.O. 754(E), dated 29th September, 1984. The words "except the State Jammu and Kashmir" has been omitted by Section 2(1) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973 w.e.f. 28-05-1973. Substituted by Section 2 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959 for the words and letter "Part C States" w.e.f. 12-03-1959. Came into force on 28-07-1952, vide S.R.O. 1066, dated the 10th June, 1952, published in Gazette of India, 1952, Part II, Section 3, p. 945. Proviso added by Section 2(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973 w.e.f. 28-05-1973.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "adult" means a person who has completed his eighteenth year; 1 [(aa) "Appellate Tribunal" means an Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub-section (2) of section 5D;] 2 [(b) "Board" means the Board of Film Certification constituted by the Central Government under section 3;] 3 [(bb) "certificate" means the certificate granted by the Board under section 5A;] (c) "cinematograph" includes any apparatus for the representation of moving pictures or series of pictures; (d) "district magistrate", in relation to a presidency-town, means the commissioner of police; 4 [(da) "Examining Committee", in relation to a firm, means the Examining Committee constituted by special order under section 3B for that film or, as the case may be, the Examining Committee constituted under that section by general order for films of the class to which such film belongs; (db) "export" means taking out of India to a place outside India;] 5 [6 [(dc)] "film" means a cinematograph film;] (e) "place" includes a house, building, tent and any description of transport, whether by sea, land or air; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 7 [(g) "regional officer" means a regional officer appointed by the Central Government under section 5 and includes an additional regional officer and an assistant regional officer; (h) "Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 5D] Inserted by Section 2(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. Substituted by Section 2(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981. w.e.f. 01-06-1983 Inserted by Section 2(aa) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981. 01-06-1983. Inserted by Section 2(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. Inserted by Section 3 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959., (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Clause (dd) was re-lettered as clause (dc) by Section 2(c) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. Inserted by Section 2(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981. w.e.f. 01-06-1983
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 2A--> Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force, or any functionary not in existence, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law in force, or to the corresponding functionary in existence, in that State.] Inserted by Section 3 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973 w.e.f. 28-05-1973.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 3--> (1) For the purpose of sanctioning films for public exhibition, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called the 2 [Board of Film Certification] which shall consist of a Chairman and 3 [not less than twelve and not more than twenty-five] appointed by the Central Government. 4 [Provided that three of the honorary members shall be persons engaged or employed in the film industry.] (2) The Chairman of the Board 5 [shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government, and the other members] shall receive such allowances or fees for attending the meeting of the Board as may be prescribed. (3) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.] Substituted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959., w.e.f. 12-03-1959). The words "board of Film Censors" has been Substituted by Section 3(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981 w.e.f. 01-06-1983. The words "not more than nine" have been Substituted by Section 3(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981. w.e.f. 01-06-1983. Proviso inserted by Section 3(a)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. The words "shall receive such salary and allowance as may be determined by the Central Government, and the other members" has been Substituted by Section 3(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 3A--> (1) For the purpose of enabling the Board to efficiently discharge its functions, and for the examination of films in different languages, under this Act, the Central Government may appoint as many assessors as it thinks fit for such regional centres as may be determined by that Government: Provided that not more than seven assessors shall be appointed in relation to films in any particular language. (2) The assessor shall discharge such functions as are assigned to them by or under this Act and it shall be the duty of every assessor to render such assistance to the Board on any matter in respect of the examination of any film as may be required by the Board. (3) The assessors shall not be entitled to any salary, but shall receive such fees or allowance as may be prescribed. (4) At each regional centre, there shall be as many regional officers as the Central Government may think fit to appoint and rules made in this behalf may provide for the association of regional officers in the examination of films.] Inserted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 3B--> (1) The Board may, by special or general order, constitute- (a) an Examining Committee for the examination under this Act of any film or class of films; and (b) a Revising Committee, for reconsidering, where it is necessary so to do under this Act, the recommendations of any Examining Committee, for or in relation to any film or any class of films. (2) Every Examining Committee shall consist of one whole-time member of the Board and two assessors,and the whole-time member shall be the Chairman of the Committee. (3) Every Revising Committee shall consist of- (a) the Chairman, one whole-time member, and one honorary member, of the Board; or (b) two whole-time members, and one honorary member, of the Board, and the Chairman of the Board or, if he is not a member of the Committee, one of the whole-time members nominated by him, shall be the Chairman of the Committee.] Inserted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 4--> (1) Any person desiring to exhibit any film shall in the prescribed manner make an application to the Board for a certificate in respect thereof, and the Board may, 2 [after the examination of the film as provided in this Act and the rules made thereunder],- (i) sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition; 3 [Provided that, having regard to any material in the film, if the Board is of the opinion that it is necessary to caution that the question as to whether any child below the age of twelve years may be allowed to see such a film should be considered by the parents or guardian of such child, the Board may sanction the film for unrestricted public exhibition with an endorsement to that effect; or] (ii) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to adults; or 4 [(iia) sanction the film for public exhibition restricted to members of any profession or any class of persons, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film; or] 5 [(iii) direct the applicant to carry out such excisions or modifications in the film as it thinks necessary before sanctioning the film for public exhibition under any of the foregoing clauses; or] (iv) refuse to sanction the film for public exhibition. 6 [(1A) Any person, desiring to export any film for exhibition outside India, shall, in the prescribed manner, make an application to the Board for a certificate in respect thereof and the Board may, after the examination of the film as provided in this Act and the rules made thereunder,- (i) sanction the film as a film fit for exhibition outside India; or (ii) direct the applicant to carry out such excisions or modifications in the film as it thinks necessary, before sanctioning the film as a film fit for exhibition outside India; or (iii) refuse to sanction the film as a film fit for exhibition outside India.] (2) No action under 7 [the proviso to clause (I), clause (iii), clause (iia), clause (iii) or clause (iv)] of sub-section (1) 8 [or under clause (ii) or clause (iii) of sub-section (1A)] shall be taken by the Board except after giving an opportunity to the applicant for representing his views in the matter.] Substituted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, w.e.f. 12-03-1959). The words "after examining or having the film examined in the prescribed manner", substituted by Section 5(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The word "or" occurring has been omitted and the following proviso has been added by Section 4(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 4(i)(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Substituted by Section 4(i)(c) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 5(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The words, brackets and figures "clause (ii) (iii) or clause (iv)" substituted by Section 4(2) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 5(c) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 4A--> (1) Every film in respect of which an application is made under section 4 shall be examined in the prescribed manner by the Examining Committee. (2) The Examining Committee shall examine the film having regard to the principles for guidance in certifying films specified in or under section 5B and make such recommendations to the Board as it deems appropriate: Provided that if there is a difference of opinion amongst the members of the Committee each member shall record separately his recommendations and the reasons therefor. (3) The recommendations of the Examining Committee or, as the case may be, the recommendations of each of the members of the Committee, shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to the Board and the Board shall, after making such further examination of the film as it may deem necessary, pass such orders on the application as it deems fit under sections 4 and 5A: Provided that before passing such orders the Board shall refer the film for further examination to the Revising Committee- (a) in a case where there is a difference of opinion between the Chairman of the Examining Committee and the other members thereof in respect of all or any of the recommendations; (b) in any other case, if the applicant represents, when he is given an opportunity for representing his views under sub-section (2) of section 4, that the film shall be so referred.] Inserted by Section 6 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5--> (1) Where any film is referred to a Revising Committee under sub-section (3) of section 4A, the Revising Committee shall examine the film in the prescribed manner having regard to the principles for guidance in certifying films specified in or under section 5B and make its recommendations to the Board: Provided that if there is a difference of opinion amongst the members of the Committee each member shall record separately his recommendations and the reasons therefor. (2) The recommendations of the Revising Committee or, as the case may be, the recommendations of each of the members of the Committee shall be communicated in the prescribed manner to the Board and the Board may pass such orders on the application as it deems fit under sections 4 and 5A.] Substituted by Section 7 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5A--> -2 [(1) If, after examining a film or having it examined in the prescribed manner, the Board considers that- (a) the film is suitable for unrestricted public exhibition, or, as the case may be, for unrestricted public exhibition with an endorsement of the nature mentioned in the proviso to clause (I) of sub-section (1) of section 4, it shall grant to the person applying for a certificate in respect of the film a "U" certificate or, as the case may be, a "UA" certificate; or (b) the film is not suitable for unrestricted public exhibition, but is suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults or, as the case may be, is suitable for public exhibition restricted to members of any profession or any class of persons, it shall grant to the person applying for a certificate in respect of the film an "A" certificate or, as the case may be, a "S" certificate; and cause the film to be so marked in the prescribed manner: Provided that the applicant for the certificate, any distributor or exhibitor or any other person to whom the rights in the film have passed shall not be liable for punishment under any law relating to obscenity in respect of any matter contained in the film for which certificate has been granted under clause (a) or clause (b).] 3 [(1A) If, after the examination, as provided in this Act and the rules made thereunder, of, a film in respect of which an application under sub-section (1A) of section 4 has been made, the Board considers that the film is a film fit for exhibition outside India, it shall grant to the person applying for a certificate in respect of the film, a certificate to that effect and shall cause the film to be so marked in the prescribed manner.] (2) A Certificate granted or an order refusing to grant a certificate in respect of any film shall be published in the Gazette of India. (3) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, a certificate granted by the Board 4 [under sub-section (1) shall be valid throughout India for a period of ten years and a certificate granted by the Board under sub-section (1A) in respect of a film shall be valid for purposes of export of the film for such period as may be prescribed.]] Inserted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Sub-section 1 has been substituted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 8(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The words "under this section shall be valid throughout India for a period of ten years" has been substituted by Section 8(c) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5B--> (1) A film shall not be 2 [certified under this Act] if, in the opinion of the authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of it is against the interest of3 [the sovereignty and integrity of India], the security of the State, friendly relations wt.foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or involves defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite the commission of any offence. 4 [(1A) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), a film shall not be certified as a film fit for exhibition outside India if, in the opinion of the authority competent to grant the certificate, the film or any part of it presents or is likely to present an erroneous, distorted or misleading image of the social, cultural or political institutions of India or any part thereof.] (2) Subject to the provisions contained in5 [sub-section (1) and sub-section (1A)], the Central Government may issue such directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the authority competent to grant certificates under this Act in sanctioning films for public exhibition 6 [or, as the case may be, exhibition outside India].] Inserted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, 12-03-1959). The words "certified for public exhibition" has been substituted by Section 9(a)(1) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Inserted by Section 9(a)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 9(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The word, brackets and figure "sub-section (1)" has been substituted by Section 9(c)(i) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Inserted by Section 9(c)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5C--> (1) Any person applying for a certificate in respect of a film who is aggrieved by any order of the Board- (a) refusing to grant a certificate; or (b) granting only an "A" certificate; or (c) granting only a "S" certificate; or (d) granting only a "UA" certificate; or (e) directing the applicant to carry out any excisions or modifications, may , within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal: Provided that the Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the aforesaid period of thirty days, allow such appeal to be admitted within a further period of thirty days. (2) Every appeal under this section shall be made by a petition in writing and shall be accompanied by a brief statement of the reasons for the order appealed against where such statement has been furnished to the appellant and by such fees, not exceeding rupees one thousand, as may be prescribed. Substituted by Section 7 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5D--> (I) For the purpose of hearing appeals against any order of the Board under section 5C, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Appellate Tribunal. (2) The head office of the Tribunal shall be at New Delhi or at such other place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. (3) Such Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and not more than four other members appointed by the Central Government. (4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman of the Tribunal unless he is a retired Judge of a High Court, or is a person who is qualified to be a Judge of a High Court. (5) The Central Government may appoint such persons who, in its opinion, are qualified to judge the effect of films on the public, to be members of the Tribunal. (6) The Chairman of the Tribunal shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government and the members shall receive such allowances or fees as may be prescribed. (7) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Central Government may appoint a Secretary and such other employees as it may think necessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Tribunal under this Act. (8) The Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed after consultation with the Chairman of the Tribunal. (9) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of and the Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed. (10) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure. (11) The Tribunal may, after making such inquiry into the matter as it considers necessary, and after giving the appellant and the Board an opportunity of being heard in the matter, make such order inrelation to a film as it thinks fit and the Board shall dispose of the matter in conformity with such order.] Inserted by Section 8 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5E--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 6, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend a certificate granted under this Part, for such period as it thinks fit or may revoke such certificate if it is satisfied that- (i) the film in respect of which the certificate was granted, was being exhibited in a form other than the one in which it was certified; or (ii) the film or any part thereof is being exhibited contravention of the provisions of this Part or the rules made thereunder. (2) Where a notification under sub-section (1) has been published, the central Government may require the applicant for certificate or any other person to whom the rights in the film have passed, or both, to deliver up the certificate and all duplicate certificates, if any, granted in respect of the film to the Board or to any person or authority specified in the said notification. (3) No action under this section shall be taken except after giving an opportunity to the person concerned for representing his views in the matter. (4) During the period in which a certificate remains suspended under this section, the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film.] Inserted by Section 8 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 5F--> (1) Where an applicant for a certificate or any other person to whom the rights in the film have passed, is aggrieved by any order of the Central Government under section 5E, he may, within sixty days of the date of publication of the notification in the Official Gazette, make an application to the Central Government for review of the order, setting out in such application the grounds on which he considers such review to be necessary. Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the applicant for a certificate or that other person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an application for review within the aforesaid period of sixty days, allow such application to be filed within a further period of sixty days. (2) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Central Government may, after giving the aggrieved person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, and after making such further inquiry, as it may consider necessary, pass such order as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or reversing its decision and the Board shall dispose of the matter in conformity with such order.] Inserted by Section 8 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 6--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Part, the Central Government 2 [may, of its own motion, at any stage] call for the record of any proceeding in relation to any film which is 3 [pending before the Examining Committee or the Revising Committee or the Board, or has been decided by the Board 4 [or, as the case may be, decided by the Tribunal (but not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending before the Tribunal)](but not including any proceeding in respect of any matter which is pending before or has been decided by an Appellate Tribunal)], and after such inquiry into the matter as it considers necessary, make such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit, and the Board shall dispose of the matter in conformity with such order: Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially affecting any person applying for a certificate or to whom a certificate has been granted, as the case may be, except after giving him an opportunity for representing his views in the matter. 5 [Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be against public interest to disclose;] (2) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on it under sub-section (1), the Central Government may, 6 [by order published] in the Official Gazette, direct that - (a) a film which has been granted a certificate shall be deemed to be an uncertified in the whole or any part of India 7 [or, as the case may be, an uncertified film for exhibition outside India, whether generally or in any particular country or countries outside India]; or (b) a film which has been granted a "U" certificate 8 [or a "UA" certificate or a "S" certificate] shall be deemed to be a film in respect of which an "A" certificate has been granted; or (c) the exhibition 9 [or, as the case may be, export for exhibition] of any film be suspended for such period as may be specified in the direction: Provided that no direction issued under clauses (c) shall remain in force for more than two months from the date of the notification. (3) No action shall be tan under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) except after giving an opportunity to the person concerned for representing his views in the matter. (4) During the peered in which a film remains suspended under clause (c) of sub-section (2), the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film.] 10 [(5) The Central Government may, if satisfied in relation to any film in respect of which an order has been made by an Appellate Tribunal under section 5D that it is necessary so to do in the interests of- (i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or (ii) the security of the State; or (iii) friendly relations with foreign States; or (iv) public order or decency or morality, make such inquiry into the matter as it considers necessary, and pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit, and the Board shall thereupon dispose of the matter in conformity with such order: Provided that no such order shall be made prejudicially affecting any person to whom a certificate has been granted except after giving him an opportunity for representing his views in the matter: Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be against public interest to disclose. (6) The provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4) of this section shall, so far as may be, apply also in relation to every film in respect of which the Central Government may exercise powers under sub-section (5).] Substituted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f.12-03-1959). The words "may at any stage" substituted by Section 9(a)(i) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "pending before, or has been decided by, the Board," has been substituted by Section 11(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. Inserted by Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "by notification" has been substituted by Section 11(b)(i) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. Inserted by Section 11(b)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Inserted by Section 9(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 11(b)(iii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Inserted by Section 11(c) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 6A--> Any person who delivers any certified film to any 2 [distributor, exhibitor or exporter] shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, notify to the 3 [distributor, exhibitor or exporter], as the case may be, the title, the length of the film, the number and the nature of the certificate granted in respect thereof and the conditions, if any, subject to which it has been so granted, and any other particulars respecting the film which may be prescribed. The words "distributor or exhibitor" has been substituted by Section 12 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The words "distributor or exhibitor" has been substituted by Section 12 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The words "distributor or exhibitor" has been substituted by Section 12 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 6B--> Omitted by Section 2 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1984 (w.e.f. 27-08-1984).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7--> 1 [(1) If any person- (a) exhibits or permits to be exhibited in any place- (i) any film other than a film which has been certified by the Board as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition or for public exhibition restricted to adults 2 [or to members of any profession or any class of persons] and which, when exhibited, displays the prescribed mark of the Board and has not been altered or tampered with in any way since such mark was affixed thereto, (ii) any film, which has been certified by the Board as suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults, to any person who is not an adult, 3 [( iia) any film which has been certified by the Board as suitable for public exhibition restricted to any profession or clause of persons, to a person who is not a member of such profession or who is not a member of such class, or;] or 4 [(aa) exports or attempts to export any film which is not certified by the Board as a film fit for exhibition outside India, or] (b) without lawful authority (the burden of proving which shall be on him), alters or tampers with in any way any film after it has been certified, or (c) fails to comply with the provision contained in section 6A or with any order made by the Central Government or by the Board in the exercise of any of the powers or functions conferred on it by this Act or the rules made thereunder, 5 [6 [he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees for each day during which the offence continues: Provided that a person who exhibits or permits to be exhibited in any place a video film in contravention of the provisions of sub-clause (I) of clause ( a ) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months, but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees, but which may extend one lakh rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees for each day during which the offence continues; Provided further that a court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, or a fine of less than twenty thousand rupees;]: 7 [Provided further that] notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 , it shall be lawful for any Metropolitan Magistrate, or any Judicial Magistrate of the first class specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five thousand rupees on any person convicted of any offence punishable under this Part: 8 [Provided also] that no distributor or exhibitor or owner or employee of a cinema house shall be liable to punishment for contravention of any condition of endorsement of caution on a film certified as "UA" under this Part.]] (2) If any person is convicted of an offence punishable under this section committed by him in respect of any film, the convicting court may further direct that the film shall be forfeited to the Government. (3) The exhibition of a film, in respect of which an "A" certificate 9 [or a "S" certificate or a "UA" certificate] has been granted, to children below the age of three years accompanying their parents or guardians shall not be deemed to be an offence within the meaning of this section Substituted by section 4 of the Cinematography (Amendment) Act, 1953, (w.e.f. 16-05-1953). Inserted by Section 11(a)(I)(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 11(a)(I)(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 13 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Substituted by Section 11(a)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for each day during which the offence continues" substituted by Section 7(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1984, (w.e.f. 27-08-1984). The words "Provided that", substituted by Section 7(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1984, (w.e.f. 27-08-1984). The words "provided further", substituted by Section 7(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1984, (w.e.f. 27-08-1984). Inserted by Section 11(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7A--> (1) Where a film in respect of which no certificate has been granted under this Act is exhibited, or a film certified as suitable for public exhibition restricted to adults is exhibited to any person who is not an adult or film is exhibited in contravention of any of the other provisions contained in this Act or of any order made by the Central Government2 [, Tribunal] or the Board in the exercise of any of the powers conferred on it, any police officer may, 3 [Omitted], enter any place in which he has reason to believe that the film has been or is being or is likely to be exhibited, search it and seize the film. 4 [(1A) Where any film which is not certified by the Board as a film fit for exhibition outside India is attempted to be exported, any police officer may, in pursuance of an order made in this behalf by the District Magistrate or any magistrate of the First Class empowered in this behalf by the District Magistrate, enter any place in which he has reason to believe that the film is kept, search it and seize the film.] (2) All searches under this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the 5 [ Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ], relating to searches.] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Inserted by Section 12(a)(i) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "in pursuance of an order made in this behalf by the district magistrate or by any magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the district magistrate", has been omitted by Section 12(a)(ii) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 14 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . The words and figures " Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 ", Substituted by Section 12(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7B--> 2 [(1)]The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct that any power, authority or jurisdiction exercisable by the Board under this Act shall, 3 [in relation to the certification of the films under this Part] and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercisable also by the Chairman or any other member of the Board, and anything done or action taken by the Chairman or other member specified in the order shall be deemed to be a thing done or action taken by the Board.] 4 [(2) The Central Government may, by order and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, authorise the regional officers to issue provisional certificates.] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Section 7B of the principal Act has been renumbered as sub-section (1) by Section 13(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "in relation to such matters", Substituted by Section 13(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 13(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7C--> For the purpose of exercising any of the powers conferred on it by this Act, the Central Government2 [, the Tribunal] or the Board 3 [or an Appellate Tribunal] may require any film to be exhibited before it or before 4 [any person or authority] specified by it in this behalf.] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959. w.e.f. 12-03-1959. Inserted by Section 14(a) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981. w.e.f. 01-06-1983. Inserted by Section 14(b) of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Substituted by Act 49 of 1981, Section 14, for "any person" (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7D--> No act or proceeding of 2 [the Tribunal,] the Board 3 [...] shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of a vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of 4 [the Tribunal,] the Board 5 [...].] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Inserted by Section 15 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Omitted by Section 16 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. . Inserted by Section 15 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Omitted by Section 16 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7E--> All members of 2 [the Tribunal,] the Board 3 [and of every Appellate Tribunal and all assessors] shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Inserted by Section 16 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "and of any advisory panel" substituted by Section 17 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 7F--> No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 2 [the Central Government, the Tribunal, the Board or], 3 [any Examining Committee, any Revising Committee, any Appellate Tribunal or the Registrar of Appellate Tribunals or any other officer of the Central Government or any member of the Board or of any Appellate Tribunal or an assessor], in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.] Inserted by Section 5 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959, (w.e.f. 12-03-1959). Substituted by Section 17 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). The words "advisory panel or any officer or member of the Central Government, Board or advisory panel, as the case may be," substituted by Section 18 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 8--> (1) the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Part. 1 [(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under this section may provide for- (a) the allowances or fees payable to the members of the Board; (b) the terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board; (c) the manner of making an application to the Board for a certificate and the manner in which a film has to be examined by the Board and the fees to be levied therefor; (d) the association of regional officers in the examination of films, the conditions and restrictions subject to which regional officers may be authorised under section 7B to issue provisional certificates and the period of validity of such certificates; (e) the manner in which the Board may consult any advisory panel in respect of any film; (f) the allowances or fees payable to the members of advisory panel; (g) the marking of the films; (h) the allowances or fees payable to the members of the Tribunal; (i) the powers and duties of the secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal; (j) the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of, and the Secretary to, and other employees of, the Tribunal; (k) the fees payable by the appellant to the Tribunal in respect of an appeal; (l) the conditions (including conditions relating to the length of films in general or any class of films, in particular) subject to which any certificate may be granted, or the circumstances in which any certificate shall be refused; (m) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed.] 2 [(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each house of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] Substituted by Section 18 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Substituted by Section 4 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973, (w.e.f. 28-05-1973).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 9--> The Central government may, by order in writing exempt, subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as it may impose, the 1 [exhibition or export of any film] or class of films from any of the provisions of this Part or of any rules made thereunder. Substituted by Section 20 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1974. .
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 10--> Save as otherwise provided in this Part, no person shall give an exhibition by means of a cinematograph elsewhere than in a place licensed under this Part or otherwise than in compliance with any conditions and restrictions imposed by such licence.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 11--> The authority having power to grant licences under this Part (hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority) shall be the district magistrate: Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the whole or any part of a 1 [Union territory], such other authority as it may specify in the notification to be the licensing authority for the purpose of this Part. Substituted by Act of 1960, section 3 and schedule II w.e.f. 26-12-1960. Prior to the amendment the text read as [Part C State]
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 12--> (1) The licensing authority shall not grant a licence under this Part, unless it is satisfied that- (a) the rules made under this Part have been substantially complied with, and (b) adequate precautions have been taken in the place, in respect of which the licence is to be given, to provide for the safety of persons attending exhibitions therein. (2) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section and to the control of the State Government, the licensing authority may grant licences under this Part to such persons as that authority thinks fit and on such terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions as it may determine. (3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of a licensing authority refusing to grant a licence under this Part may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the State Government or to such officer as the State Government may specify in this behalf and the State Government or the officer, as the case may be, may make such order in the case as it or he thinks fit. (4) The Central government may, from time to time, issue directions to licensees generally or to any licensee in particular for the purpose of regulating the exhibition of any film or class of films, so that scientific films, films intended for educational purposes, films dealing with news and current events, documentary films or indigenous films secure an adequate opportunity of being exhibited, and where any such directions have been issued those directions shall be deemed to be additional conditions and restrictions subject to which the licence has been granted.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 13--> (1) The Lieutenant-Governor or, as the case may be, the Chief Commissioner, in respect of the 1 [whole Part C State or any part thereof], and the district magistrate in respect of the district within his jurisdiction, may, if he is of opinion that any film which is being publicly exhibited is likely to cause a breach of the peace, by order, suspend the exhibition of the film and during such suspension the film shall be deemed to be an uncertified film in the State, part of district, as the case may be. (2) Where an order under sub-section (1) has been issued by the Chief commissioner or a district magistrate, as the case may be, a copy thereof, together with a statement of reasons therefor, shall forthwith be forwarded by the person making the same to the Central Government, and the Central Government may either confirm or discharge the order. (3) An order made under this section shall remain in force for a period of two months from the date thereof, but the Central government may, if it is of opinion that the order should continue in force, direct that the period of suspension shall be extended by such further period as it thinks fit. Substituted by Act 58 of 1960, Section 3 and Schedule II, for "whole Part C State or any part thereof" (w.e.f. 26-12-1960).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 14--> If the owner or person in charge of a cinematograph uses the same or allows it to be used, or if the owner or occupier of any place permits that place to be used in contravention of the provisions of this Part or of the rules made thereunder, or of the conditions and restrictions upon or subject to which any licence has been granted under this Part, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing offence, with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day during which the offence continues. STATE AMENDMENT Goa, Daman and Diu After section 14 insert the following section, namely:- "14A. Penalty for resale of tickets and cognizance of offence. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56 of the Indian Easements Act, 1882 (Central Act 5 of 1882), a ticket for admission to a cinematograph exhibition shall not be resold for profit by the purchaser thereof. (2) Whoever re-sells any ticket for admission to a cinematograph exhibition for profit shall be punishable with fine, which shall not be less than two hundred rupees and may extend to five-hundred rupees or in default to single imprisonment, which may extend to three months. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974), an offence under this section shall be deemed to be cognizable within the meaning of that Code." [Vide Goa Act 4 of 1986, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 18-9-1986).]
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 15--> Where the holder of a licence has been convicted of an offence under section 7 or section 14, the licence may be revoked by the licensing authority.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 16--> 1 [(1)]The Central government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules- (a) prescribing the terms, conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to which licences may be granted under this Part; (b) providing for the regulation of cinematograph exhibitions for securing the public safety; (c) prescribing the time within which and the conditions subject to which an appeal under sub-section (3) of section 12 may be preferred. 2 [(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] Section 16 has been renumbered as sub-section (1) by Section 19 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983). Inserted by Section 19 of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981, (w.e.f. 01-06-1983).
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 17--> The Central Government may, by order in writing exempt1 , subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may impose, any cinematograph exhibition or class of cinematograph exhibitions from any of the provisions of this Part or of any rules made thereunder. For such general exemptions, see Gazette of India, 1954, Part II, Section 3, p. 240, Gazette of India, 1955, Part II, Section 3, p. 310.
Cinematograph Act, 1952_Section 18--> The Cinematograph Act, 1918 (II of 1918), is hereby repealed: Provided that in relation to Part A States and Part B States the repeal shall have effect only in so far as the said Act relates to the sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition. 
