Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for allocation of coal mines and vesting of the right, title and interest in and over the land and mine infrastructure together with mining leases to successful bidders and allottees with a view to ensure continuity in coal mining operations and production of coal, and for promoting optimum utilisation of coal resources consistent with the requirement of the country in national interest and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Whereas the Supreme Court vide judgment dated 25th August, 2014 read with its order dated 24th September, 2014 has cancelled the allocation of coal blocks and issued directions with regard to such coal blocks and the Central Government in pursuance of the said directions has to take immediate action to implement the said order; And whereas it is expedient in public interest for the Central Government to take immediate action to allocate coal mines to successful bidders and allottees keeping in view the energy security of the country and to minimise any impact on core sectors such as steel, cement and power utilities, which are vital for the development of the nation; And whereas Parliament is competent to legislate under entry 54 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution for regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of October, 2014.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 2--> It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that Union should take action for the development of Schedule I coal mines and extraction of coal on continuous basis for optimum utilisation.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 3--> (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "additional levy" means, the additional levy as determined by the Supreme Court in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012 as two hundred and ninety-five rupees per metric tonne of coal extracted; (b) "allotment order" means the allotment order issued under section 5; (c) "appointed date" in relation to- (i) Schedule I coal mines excluding Schedule II coal mines, shall be the 24th day of September, 2014 being the date on which the allocation of coal blocks to prior allottees stood cancelled; and (ii) Schedule II coal mines shall be the 1st day of April, 2015 being the date on which the allocation of coal blocks to prior allottees shall stand cancelled, in pursuance of the order of the Supreme Court dated the 24th September, 2014 passed in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012; (d) "bank" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (c) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; (e) "coal mining operations" means any operation undertaken for the purpose of winning coal; (f) "company" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013; (g) "corporation" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (11) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013; (h) "financial institution" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (m) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; (i) "Government company" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013; (j) "mine infrastructure" includes mining infrastructure such as tangible assets used for coal mining operations, being civil works, workshops, immovable coal winning equipment, foundations, embankments, pavements, electrical systems, communication systems, relief centres, site administrative offices, fixed installations, coal handling arrangements, crushing and conveying systems, railway sidings, pits, shafts, inclines, underground transport systems, hauling systems (except movable equipment unless the same is embedded in land for permanent beneficial enjoyment thereof), land demarcated for afforestation and land for rehabilitation and resettlement of persons affected by coal mining operations under the relevant law; (k) "nominated authority" means the authority nominated by the Central Government under section 6; (l) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette; (m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (n) "prior allottee" means prior allottee of Schedule I coal mines as listed therein who had been allotted coal mines between 1993 and 31st day of March, 2011, whose allotments have been cancelled pursuant to the judgment of the Supreme Court dated the 25th August, 2014 and its order dated 24th September, 2014 including those allotments which may have been de-allocated prior to and during the pendency of the Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012. Explanation - In case a mining lease has been executed in favour of a third party, subsequent to such allocation of Scheduled I coal mines, then, the third party shall be deemed to be the prior allottee; (o) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act; (p) "Schedule I coal mines" means,- (i) all the coal mines and coal blocks the allocation of which was cancelled by the judgment dated 25th August, 2014 and its order dated 24th September, 2014 passed in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012, including those allotments which may have been de-allocated prior to and during the pendency of the said Writ Petition; (ii) all the coal bearing land acquired by the prior allottee and lands, in or adjacent to the coal mines used for coal mining operations acquired by the prior allottee; (iii) any existing mine infrastructure as defined in clause (j); (q) "Schedule II coal mines" means the forty-two Schedule I coal mines listed in Schedule II which are the coal mines in relation to which the order of the Supreme Court dated 24th day of September, 2014 was made; (r) "Schedule III coal mines" means the thirty-two Schedule I coal mines listed in Schedule III or any other Schedule I coal mine as may be notified under sub-section (2) of section 7; (s) "secured creditor" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (zd) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; (t) "secured debt" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (ze) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; (u) "security interest" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (zf) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002; (v) "specified end-use" means any of the following end-uses and the expression "specified end-user" shall with its grammatical variations be construed accordingly,- (i) production of iron and steel; (ii) generation of power including the generation of power for captive use; (iii) washing of coal obtained from a mine; (iv) cement; (v) such other end-use as the Central Government may, by notification, specify; (w) "vesting order" means the vesting order issued under section 8. (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 including any rules or regulations made thereunder, shall have the meanings, respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 4--> (1) Subject to the provisions of section 5, Schedule I coal mines shall be allocated by way of public auction in accordance with such rules, and on the payment of such fees which shall not exceed five crore rupees, as may be prescribed. (2) Subject to the provisions in sub-section (3) of this section and section 5, the Central Government may, for the purpose of granting reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any area containing coal, select any of the following companies through auction by competitive bidding, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed- (a) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or any other company incorporated in India; or (b) a company or a joint venture company formed by two or more companies, that carry on coal mining operations in India, in any form either for own consumption, sale or for any other purpose in accordance with the permit, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be, and the State Government shall grant such reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any area containing coal to such company as selected through auction by competitive bidding under this section. (3) Subject to the provisions of section 5, the following persons who fulfil such norms as may be prescribed, shall be eligible to bid in an auction of Schedule II coal mines and Schedule III coal mines and to engage in coal mining operations in the event they are successful bidders, namely:- (a) a company engaged in specified end-use including a company having a coal linkage which has made such investment as may be prescribed. Explanation - A "company with a coal linkage" includes any such company whose application is pending with the Central Government on the date of commencement of this Act; (b) a joint venture company formed by two or more companies having a common specified end-use and are independently eligible to bid in accordance with this Act; (c) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or with any other company having common specified end-use: Provided that nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall apply to this sub-section. (4) A prior allottee shall be eligible to participate in the auction process subject to payment of the additional levy within such period as may be prescribed and if the prior allottee has not paid such levy, then, the prior allottee, its promoter or any of its company of such prior allottee shall not be eligible to bid either by itself or by way of a joint venture. (5) Any prior allottee who is convicted for an offence relating to coal block allocation and sentenced with imprisonment for more than three years, shall not be eligible to participate in the auction.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 5--> (1) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 4, the Central Government may allot a Schedule I coal mine to a Government company or corporation or to a joint venture between two or more Government companies or corporations or to a company which has been awarded a power project on the basis of competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects) from specified Schedule I coal mines by making an allotment order in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed and the State Government shall grant a reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any area containing coal to such company or corporation: Provided that the Government company or corporation may carry on Coal Mining in any form either for its own consumption, sale or for any other purpose in accordance with the permit, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be: Provided further that no company other than a Government company or corporation shall hold more than twenty-six percent of the paid-up share capital in the Government company or corporation or in the joint venture between a Government company or corporation, either directly or through any of its subsidiary company or associate company: Provided also that a joint venture of any two or more Government companies or corporations shall be prohibited from alienating or transferring any interest, except the taking of loans or advances from a bank or financial institution, in the joint venture of whatsoever nature including ownership in favour of a third party. (2) No allotment under sub-section (1) shall be made to a prior allottee, if that allottee has not made the payment of the additional levy within the specified period.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 6--> (1) The Central Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India as the nominated authority who shall act for and on behalf of the Central Government for the purposes of this Act and shall exercise such powers as may be prescribed. (2) The nominated authority may engage any expert having such qualifications and experience and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed to make recommendations to the authority for the conduct of auction and in drawing up of the vesting order or allotment order in relation to Schedule I coal mines. (3) The Central Government shall act through the nominated authority for the following purposes, namely:- (a) conduct the auction process and allotment with the assistance of experts; (b) execution of the vesting order for transfer and vesting of Schedule I coal mines pursuant to the auction; (c) executing the allotment order for any Government company or corporation in pursuance of section 5; (d) recording and mutating incorporeal rights of whatsoever nature including, consents, permissions, permits, approvals, grants, registrations; (e) collection of auction proceeds, adjustment of preferential payments and transfer of amount to the respective State Governments where Schedule I coal mine is located in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (4) The nominated authority shall complete the auction or execute the allotment orders of Schedule I coal mines within such time and in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (5) The Central Government may appoint such other officers and staff as it may think fit to assist the nominated authority. (6) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the nominated authority and such other officers and staff appointed under this section shall be such as may be prescribed. (7) The nominated authority shall be bound by the written direction given by the Central Government on the question of policy.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 7--> (1) The Central Government may before notifying the particulars of auction, classify mines identified from Schedule I coal mines as earmarked for the same class of specified end-uses. (2) The Central Government may in public interest, by notification, modify Schedule III coal mines by adding any other Schedule I coal mine for the purposes of specified end-use.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 8--> (1) The nominated authority shall notify the prior allottees of Schedule I coal mines to enable them to furnish information required for notifying the particulars of Schedule I coal mines to be auctioned in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (2) The information required to be furnished under sub-section (1) shall be furnished within a period of fifteen days from the date of such notice. (3) A successful bidder in an auction conducted on a competitive basis in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, shall be entitled to the vesting of Schedule I coal mine for which it bid, pursuant to a vesting order drawn up in accordance with such rules. (4) The vesting order shall transfer and vest upon the successful bidder, the following, namely:- (a) all the rights, title and interest of the prior allottee, in Schedule I coal mine concerned with the relevant auction; (b) entitlement to a mining lease to be granted by the State Government; (c) any statutory licence, permit, permission, approval or consent required to undertake coal mining operations in Schedule I coal mines if already issued to the prior allottee; (d) rights appurtenant to the approved mining plan of the prior allottee; (e) any right, entitlement or interest not specifically covered under clauses (a) to (d). (5) The nominated authority shall, in consultation with the Central Government, determine the floor price or reserve price in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (6) The successful bidder shall, prior to the issuance and execution of a vesting order, furnish a performance bank guarantee for an amount as notified in relation to Schedule I coal mine auctioned to such bidder within such time, form and manner as may be prescribed. (7) After the issuance of a vesting order under this section and its filing with the Central Government and with the appropriate authority designated by the respective State Governments, the successful bidder shall be entitled to take possession of the Schedule I coal mine without let or hindrance. (8) Upon the execution of the vesting order, the successful bidder of the Schedule I coal mine shall be granted a prospecting licence or a mining lease, as applicable, by the concerned State Government in accordance with the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. (9) A Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or any other company incorporated in India, allotted a Schedule I coal mine shall be granted a prospecting licence or a mining lease, as applicable, by the concerned State Government in accordance with the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. (10) In relation to Schedule II coal mines, the successful bidder which was a prior allottee, shall continue coal mining operations after the appointed date in terms of the approved mining plan, till the mining lease in terms of sub-section (8) is granted, upon the grant of a vesting order and to that extent, the successful bidder shall be deemed to have been granted a mining lease till the execution of the mining lease in terms of the said sub-section. (11) In relation to Schedule II coal mines, the Government company or corporation which was a prior allottee can continue coal mining operations after the appointed date in terms of the approved mining plan, till the mining lease in terms of sub-section (9) is granted, upon execution of the allotment order and to that extent, the allottee shall be deemed to have been granted a mining lease till the execution of the mining lease in terms of the said subsection. (12) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) and sub-sections (4) to (7) (both inclusive) of this section as applicable to a vesting order, shall mutatis mutandis be also applicable to an allotment order.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 9--> The proceeds arising out of land and mine infrastructure in relation to a Schedule I coal mine shall be disbursed maintaining, inter alia, the priority of payments in accordance with the relevant laws and such rules as may be prescribed- (a) payment to secured creditors for any portion of the secured debt in relation to a Schedule I, coal mine which is unpaid as on the date of the vesting order; (b) compensation payable to the prior allottee in respect of the Schedule I coal mine.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 10--> (1) A successful bidder or allottee in respect of Schedule I coal mines, may negotiate with prior allottee to own or utilise such movable property used in coal mining operations on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed to by them. (2) Where a successful bidder or allottee is not vested with any movable property of a Schedule I coal mine, then, he is not bound by any liabilities or obligations arising out of such ownership or contractual rights, obligations or liabilities which shall continue to remain with the prior allottee. (3) In the event that the successful bidder or allottee is unable to satisfactorily negotiate with the prior allottee or any third party who has a contract with the prior allottee for the movable property, it shall be the obligation of the prior allottee or the third party to remove such movable property within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of the vesting order, or the allotment order, as the case may be, and the successful bidder or allottee shall not be liable for any damage to such property. (4) A successful bidder or allottee which has elected not to purchase or transfer or continue to use the movable property referred to in sub-section (1), shall prior to the execution of the vesting order or the allotment order, as the case may be, declare to the nominated authority that he intends to move and store such movable property of the prior allottee or such third party and after the date of the vesting order or the allotment order, as the case may be, the successful bidder or allottee shall be entitled to move and store such movable property, so as not to cause any impediment for coal mining operations. (5) If a prior allottee or such third party which has contracted with the prior allottee for its movable property, fails to remove the movable property which the successful bidder or allottee has elected not to purchase or use in accordance with sub-section (4), then, after the period of seventy-five days from the vesting order or the allotment order, as the case may be, a successful bidder or allottee shall be entitled to dispose of such movable property which may be physically located within Schedule I coal mine, the successful bidder or the allottee, shall, in such event be entitled to appropriate the sale proceeds of such movable property disposed of to pay for any cost incurred by the successful bidder or allottee, for the removal, storage, sale and disposal of such movable property, as a first charge over the sale proceeds of such movable property: Provided that the remaining sale proceeds after appropriation of costs, shall be paid by the successful bidder or allottee to the Central Government towards any compensation that may be payable to the owner of such movable property sold, upon establishment of title to such movable property in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed: Provided further that if a third party contractor to the prior allottee owns such movable property, then, such third party shall be entitled to prove its right to receive compensation from the sale proceeds of the movable property sold as per this sub-section, in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 11--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, a successful bidder or allottee, as the case may be, in respect of Schedule I coal mines, may elect, to adopt and continue such contracts which may be existing with any of the prior allottees in relation to coal mining operations and the same shall constitute a novation for the residual term or residual performance of such contract: Provided that in such an event, the successful bidder or allottee or the prior allottee shall notify the nominated authority to include the vesting of any contracts adopted by the successful bidder. (2) In the event that a successful bidder or allottee elects not to adopt or continue with existing contracts which had been entered into by the prior allottees with third parties, in that case all such contracts which have not been adopted or continued shall cease to be enforceable against the successful bidder or allottee in relation to the Schedule I coal mine and the remedy of such contracting parties shall be against the prior allottees.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 12--> (1) The secured creditors of the prior allottees which had any security interest in any part of the land or mine infrastructure of a Schedule I coal mine shall be entitled to- (a) continue with such facility agreements and security interest with the prior allottee if such prior allottee is a successful bidder or allottee; and (b) in the event that the prior allottee is not a successful bidder or allottee, then the security interest of such secured creditor shall only be satisfied out of the compensation payable to such prior allottee, to the extent determined in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed and the outstanding debt shall be recoverable from the prior allottee. (2) The Central Government shall, taking into consideration the provisions contained in section 9, prescribe the manner in which the secured creditor shall be paid out of the compensation in respect of any prior allottee.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 13--> Any and all alienations of land and mine infrastructure and creation of any encumbrances of whatsoever nature thereon which relate to Schedule I coal mines, made by any prior allottee after the 25th day of August, 2014 shall be void, save and except any registered security interest and charge over the land and mine infrastructure as registered by a bank or a financial institution or any other secured lender.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 14--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no proceedings, orders of attachment, distress, receivership, execution or the like, suits for the recovery of money, enforcement of a security or guarantee (except as otherwise provided for under this Act), prior to the date of commencement of this Act shall lie, or be proceeded further with and no remedies shall be available against the successful bidder, or allottee, as the case may be, or against the land and mine infrastructure in respect of Schedule I coal mines. (2) The proceedings as referred to in sub-section (1), shall continue as a personal remedy against the prior allottee but shall not be maintainable or continued against the land or mine infrastructure of Schedule I coal mine or the successful bidder or allottee, pursuant to this Act. (3) Every liability of any prior allottee in relation to a Schedule I coal mine in respect of any period prior to the vesting order or allotment order, shall be the liability of such prior allottee and shall be enforceable against it and not against the successful bidder or allottee or the Central Government. (4) All unsecured loans shall continue to remain the liability of the prior allottee. (5) The additional levy imposed against the prior allottees of Schedule II coal mines shall continue to remain the liability of such prior allottees and such additional levy shall be collected by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed. (6) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that- (a) no claim for wages, bonus, royalty, rate, rent, taxes, provident fund, pension, gratuity or any other dues in relation to a Schedule I coal mine in respect of any period prior to the date of vesting order or allotment order, as the case may be, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the successful bidder or the allottee, as the case may be; (b) no award, decree, attachment or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to any Schedule I coal mine passed prior to the date of commencement of this Act, in relation to the land and mine infrastructure of Schedule I coal mines, shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the successful bidder or the allottee, as the case may be; (c) no liability for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force, relating to any act or omission prior to the date of vesting order or allotment order, as the case may be, shall be enforceable against the successful bidder or allottee or the Central Government.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 15--> (1) For the purposes of disbursing the amounts payable to the prior allottees of Schedule I coal mines, the Central Government shall appoint an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to be the Commissioner of payments. (2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers and staff as it may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such officers also to exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act. (3) Any officer authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on him directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation. (4) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Commissioner and other officers and staff appointed under this section shall be such as may be prescribed. (5) The Central Government shall, within a period of thirty days from such date as may be notified, pay to the Commissioner for payment to the prior allottee, an amount equal to the compensation determined by the nominated authority. (6) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each Schedule I coal mine in relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 16--> (1) The quantum of compensation for the land in relation to Schedule I coal mines shall be as per the registered sale deeds lodged with the nominated authority in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, together with twelve percent simple interest from the date of such purchase or acquisition, till the date of the execution of the vesting order or the allotment order, as the case may be. (2) The quantum of compensation for the mine infrastructure in relation to Schedule I coal mines shall be determined as per the written down value reflected in the statutorily audited balance sheet of the previous financial year in accordance with such rules and in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) If the successful bidder or allottee is a prior allottee of any of the Schedule I coal mines, then, the compensation payable to such successful bidder or allottee shall be set off or adjusted against the auction sum or the allotment sum payable by such successful bidder or allottee, as the case may be, for any of the Schedule I coal mines. (4) The prior allottee shall not be entitled to compensation till the additional levy has been paid.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 17--> (1) On and from the appointed date, the Central Government or a company owned by the Central Government shall be deemed to have become the lessee or licensee of the State Government in relation to each of the Schedule II coal mines, in respect of which a mining lease or prospecting licence has been granted prior to the date of commencement of this Act, as if a mining lease or prospecting licence in relation to such coal mine had been granted to the Central Government or a company owned by the Central Government and the period of such lease or licence shall be the maximum period for which such lease or licence could have been granted by the State Government under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960, and thereupon all the rights under such mining lease, including surface, underground and other rights shall be deemed to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government or a company owned by the Central Government. (2) On the expiry of the term of any lease or licence, referred to in sub-section (1), such lease or licence shall be renewed, by the State Government, in consultation with the Central Government for the maximum period for which such lease or licence can be renewed under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960. (3) As it is considered expedient and necessary in the public interest and in view of the difficult situation which has arisen, the powers of the State Government, under the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, to prematurely terminate a prospecting licence or mining lease, shall stand suspended, in relation to Schedule I coal mines, for a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act or such other period as may be notified by the Central Government.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 18--> (1) On and from the appointed date, if the auction or allotment of Schedule I coal mines is not complete, the Central Government shall appoint any person as a designated custodian to manage and operate such coal mines as may be notified by the Central Government. (2) The designated custodian shall act for and on behalf of the Central Government in respect of the notified coal mines under sub-section (1) to operate and manage such Schedule I coal mines in such manner as may be notified, till the completion of the auction of such coal mines or allotment under section 4 and section 5 read with section 8, as the case may be.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 19--> (1) The designated custodian appointed under sub-section (1) of section 18, shall be entitled to take control and possession of all lands, in or adjacent to Schedule II coal mines, and used for coal mining operations and the mine infrastructure in relation to Schedule II coal mine, on behalf of the Central Government. (2) The designated custodian may direct the prior allottees or any other persons in charge of the management of the Schedule II coal mines and coal mining operations immediately before the appointed date to provide the requisite manpower, as may be necessary, to ensure continuity in coal mining operations and production of coal. (3) The designated custodian shall receive, to the exclusion of all other persons, any monies due to Schedule II coal mines, notwithstanding cases where such receipt pertains to a transaction made at any time before the appointed date. (4) The designated custodian may call for any information, records and documents in relation to Schedule II coal mines and coal mining operations from any or all such persons who were in charge of the management and operation of such Schedule II coal mines prior to the appointed date, and such persons shall be bound to deliver to the designated custodian all such documents in their custody relating to Schedule II coal mines. (5) The designated custodian may appoint such consultants or experts, as may be necessary, in relation to the management and operation of Schedule II coal mines. (6) The designated custodian shall transfer the management and operation of any Schedule II coal mines to such person in such manner as may be prescribed. (7) The designated custodian shall have rights, liabilities and obligations as a prior allottee or a successful bidder in respect of coal mines entrusted to it under section 18, to be exercised and discharged in such manner as may be prescribed. (8) The designated custodian shall have the power to perform such other functions which may be consequential or incidental to the functions specified under this section. (9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the designated custodian shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 20--> (1) A successful bidder or allottee or coal linkage holder shall, with the prior approval of the Central Government and in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, be entitled to enter into certain agreements or arrangements with other successful bidder or allottee or coal linkage holder, as the case may be, for optimum utilisation of coal mine for the same end-uses in the public interest and to achieve cost efficiencies. (2) A successful bidder or allottee may also use the coal mine from a particular Schedule I coal mine for any of its plants engaged in common specified end-uses, in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 21--> (1) All existing land acquisition proceedings under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, in relation to Schedule I coal mines, shall continue in respect of such areas of land in accordance with the provisions of the said Act. (2) All such areas of land which are not subject matter of land acquisition proceedings, in relation to the coal mines, under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 may be proceeded with by the Central Government in terms of the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957. (3) The State Governments which have initiated land acquisition proceedings under provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 and all such lands which are also subject matter of the said Act in respect of Schedule I coal mines, shall- (a) not transfer any land to the prior allottees which have been acquired under the said Act; (b) continue the land acquisition proceedings till the appointed date; (c) for such Schedule I coal mines which have not vested in the successful bidder or the allottee, as the case may be, by the appointed date, continue the land acquisition proceedings for and on behalf of the Central Government; (d) upon the vesting or the allotment, as the case may be, after the appointed date, continue such land acquisition proceedings on behalf of the successful bidder or the allottee.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 22--> If a prior allottee of Schedule II coal mine fails to deposit the additional levy with the Central Government within the specified time, then, such additional levy shall be realised as the arrears of land revenue.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 23--> If any person- (a) obstructs or causes any impediment in taking possession or in the management and operation of the Schedule I coal mines by the Central Government or the designated custodian; or (b) fails to deliver to the designated custodian any books of account, registers or any other document in his custody relating to Schedule I coal mines and coal mining operations in respect of the management of which the designated custodian has been appointed; or (c) destroys or misuses any mine infrastructure or coal stock; or (d) retains any property of such coal mine or removes or destroys it, he and any officer-in-default of the company shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with the minimum fine of one lakh rupees per day and in the case of continuing failure, with a maximum fine of two lakh rupees for every day during which the failure continues or with both, depending upon the nature of the offence.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 24--> If any person fails to comply, without reasonable cause, with a direction given by the Central Government or nominated authority or the designated custodian, he shall be punishable with a fine of one lakh rupees and in the case of continuing failure with a maximum fine of two lakh rupees for every day during which the failure continues, depending upon the nature of the offence.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 25--> (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 26--> No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act or any rules made thereunder except upon complaint in writing made by a person authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or nominated authority or the designated custodian.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 27--> (1) Any dispute arising out of any action of the Central Government, nominated authority or Commissioner of payment or designated custodian, or any dispute between the successful bidder or allottee and prior allottee arising out of any issue connected with the Act shall be adjudicated by the Tribunal constituted under the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 (2) Where the Central Government is of the opinion that any dispute arising out of any issue connected with the Act exists or is apprehended and the dispute should be adjudicated by the Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1), then, the Central Government may by order in writing, refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with, or relevant to, the dispute, to the Tribunal for adjudication. (3) The Tribunal referred to in sub-section (i) shall, after hearing the parties to the dispute, make an award in writing within a period of ninety days from the institution or reference of the dispute. (4) On and from the commencement of the Act, no court or other authority, except the Supreme Court and a High Court, shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority, in relation to matters connected with the Act.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 28--> No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, nominated authority, commissioner of payment, or designated custodian or any person acting on their behalf, in respect of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 29--> The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 30--> On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 and the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 shall stand amended in the manner provided in Schedule IV.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 31--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the manner of allocation of Schedule I coal mines by way of public auction and details of fees under sub-section (1) of section 4; (b) the terms and conditions for granting reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease and the manner and conditions of competitive bidding under sub-section (2) of section 4; (c) norms to become eligible to bid in an auction and the amount of investment in respect of a company having a coal linkage under sub-section (3) of section 4; (d) the period within which the payment of additional levy by the prior allottee under sub-section (4) of section 4; (e) the allotment order to make allocations to a Government company or corporation under sub-section (1) of section 5; (f) the powers of the nominated authority under sub-section (1) of section 6; (g) the manner of auction or allotment of Schedule I coal mines and execution of the vesting or allotment orders under sub-section (4) of section 6; (h) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the nominated authority and other officers and staff under sub-section (6) of section 6; (i) the manner of notifying the particulars of Schedule I coal mines to be auctioned and furnishing of required information by the prior allottees under sub-section (1) of section 8; (j) the manner of conducting auction and drawing of a vesting order under sub-section (3) of section 8; (k) determination of floor price by the nominated authority under sub-section (5) of section 8; (l) the form and manner of furnishing of bank guarantee and the time within which such furnishing of bank guarantee under sub-section (6) of section 8; (m) the manner of disbursement of priority payments under section 9; (n) the manner of establishing title of movable property by the prior allottee or third party who has a contract with the prior allottee for the movable property under the first proviso to sub-section (5) of section 10; (o) the manner of receiving compensation from the sale proceeds of the movable property under the second proviso to sub-section (5) of section 10; (p) the manner in which the secured creditor paid out of the compensation in respect of any prior allottee under sub-section (2) of section 12; (q) the manner of collection of additional levy by the Central Government from the prior allottees of Schedule II coal mines under sub-section (5) of section 14; (r) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Commissioner of payments and other officers and staff under sub-section (4) of section 15; (s) the manner of determination of compensation payable to prior allottee and the lodging of registered sale deeds with the nominated authority under sub-section (1) of section 16; (t) the method of determination of compensation for mine infrastructure in relation to Schedule I and its reflection in the statutorily audited balance sheet under sub-section (2) of section 16; (u) the manner of transfer of the management and operation of any Schedule II coal mines by the designated custodian under sub-section (6) of section 19; (v) the manner of exercising and discharging the rights, liabilities and obligations by the designated custodian under sub-section (7) of section 19; (w) the manner of providing agreements or arrangements for optimum utilisation of coal mine for specified end-uses under sub-section (1) of section 20; (x) the manner of usage of coal mine by a successful bidder or allottee for any of its plants under sub-section (2) of section 20; (y) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. (3) Every rule made and every notification issued by the Central Government, under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification, or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 32--> (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section 33--> (1) The Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Second Ordinance, 2014 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall, without prejudice to the judgment of the Supreme Court dated 25th August, 2014 and its order dated 24th September, 2014 passed in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 120 of 2012, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section Sch.--> [See section 3(1)(p)] SI. No. Name of Coal Mine/Block Name of Prior Allottee State where Coal Mine/Block Located 1 2 3 4 1 Tadicherla-I Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corpn. Ltd. Telangana 2 Anesttipali Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corpn. Ltd. Telangana 3 Punkula-Chilka Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corpn. Ltd. Telangana 4 Penagaddppa Andhra Pradesh Power Generation Corpn. Ltd. Telangana 5 Namchik Namphuk Arunachal Pradesh Mineral Dev. & Trading Corporation Arunachal Pradesh 6 Sayang AES Chhattisgarh Energy Pvt. Ltd Chhattisgarh 7 Rajgamar Dipside (Deavnara) API Ispat & Powertech Pvt. Ltd., CG Sponge Manufacturers Consortium Coalfield Pvt. Ltd. Chhattisgarh 8 Durgapur-II/ Taraimar Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd. Chhattisgarh 9 Datima Binani Cement Ltd. Chhattisgarh 10 Tara Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 11 Gare-Palma, Sector-I Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 12 Shankarpur Bhatgaon II Extn. Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 13 Sondhia Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 14 Parsa Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board Chhattisgarh 15 Vijay Central Coal India Limited, SKS Ispat & Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 16 Gidhmuri Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board Chhattisgarh 17 Paturia Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board Chhattisgarh 18 Durgapur-II /Sarya DB Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 19 Bhaskarpara Electrotherm (India) Ltd., Grasim Industries Ltd. Chhattisgarh 20 West of Umaria Sainik Finance and Industries Ltd. (Earlier Garuda Clays Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 21 Morga II Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation Chhattisgarh 22 Gare-Palma Sector-III Goa Industrial Development Corporation Chhattisgarh 23 Madanpur South Hindustan Zinc Ltd., Akshya Investment Pvt. Ltd., Chhattisgarh Steel & Power Ltd., Chhattisgarh Electricity Corporation Ltd., MSP Steel & Power Ltd., Chhattisgarh Captive Coal Mining Ltd. (Consortium of five Cos.) Chhattisgarh 24 Nakia l Ispat Godavari Ltd., Ind Agro Synergy Ltd., Shri Nakoda Ispat Ltd., Vandana Global Ltd., Shree Bajrang Power & Ispat Ltd. Chhattisgarh 25 Nakia ll Ispat Godavari, Ind Agro Synergy, Shri Nakoda Ispat, Vandana Global Ltd., Shree Bajrang Power & Ispat Ltd. Chhattisgarh 26 Gare-Palma- IV/4 Jayaswal Neco Ltd. Chhattisgarh 27 Gare-Palma- IV/8 Jayaswal Neco Ltd. Chhattisgarh 28 Gare-Palma-IV/2 Jindal Power Ltd. (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 29 Gare-Palma-IV/3 Jindal Power Ltd. (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 30 Gare-Palma-IV/1 Jindal Strips Limited (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. ) Chhattisgarh 31 Gare-Palma IV/6 Jindal Steel & Power Ltd., Nalwa Sponge Iron Ltd. Chhattisgarh 32 Fatehpur East JLD Yavatmal Energy Ltd., R.K.M. Powergen Pvt. Ltd., Visa Power Ltd., Green Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd., Vandana Vidyut Ltd. Chhattisgarh 33 Morga-I Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 34 Morga-III Madhya Pradesh State Mineral Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 35 Morga-IV Madhya Pradesh State Mineral Corporation Limited Chhattisgarh 36 Gare-Palma Sector-II Maharashtra State Mining Corpn. Ltd. Tamil Nadu State Electricity Board Chhattisgarh 37 Gare-Palma-IV/5 Monet Ispat Ltd. Chhattisgarh 38 Rajgamar Dipside (South of Phulakdih Nala) Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd., Top worth Steel Pvt. Ltd. Chhattisgarh 39 Talaipali National Thermal Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 40 Chotia Prakash Industries Ltd. Chhattisgarh 41 Gare-Palma-IV/7 Raipur Alloys & Steel Ltd. (Now Sarda Energy and Mineral Limited) Chhattisgarh 42 Parsa East Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (RRVUNL) Chhattisgarh 43 Kesla North Rathi Udyog Ltd. Chhattisgarh 44 Kanta Basan Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (RRVUNL) Chhattisgarh 45 Panchbahani Shree Radhe Industries Ltd. Chhattisgarh 46 Fatehpur SKS Ispat and Power Ltd., Prakash Industries Ltd. Chhattisgarh 47 Madanpur (North) Ultratech Ltd., Singhal Enterprise Ltd., Nav Bharat Coalfield Ltd., Vandana Energy & Steel Pvt. Ltd., Prakash Industries Ltd., Anjani Steel Pvt. Ltd., Chhattisgarh Captive Coal Mining Ltd. (Consortium of five Co. ) Chhattisgarh 48 Brinda Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 49 Sasai Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 50 Meral Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 51 Seregarha Arcelor Mittal India Ltd., GVK Power (Govindwal Sahib) Ltd. Jharkhand 52 Patal East Bhushan Power and Steel Ltd. Jharkhand 53 Saria Koiyatand Bihar Rajya Khanij Vikas Nigam (BRKVN) Patna. Jharkhand 54 Macherkunda Bihar Sponge Iron Ltd. Jharkhand 55 Brahmadiha Castron Technologies Ltd. Jharkhand 56 Mahuagarhi Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation Ltd. (CESC), Jas Infrastructure Capital Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 57 Chitarpur Corporate Ispat Alloys Ltd. Jharkhand 58 Saharpur Jamarpani Damodar Valley Corporation Jharkhand 59 Lalgarh (North) Domco Smokeless Fuel Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 60 Parbatpur-Central Electrosteel castings Ltd. Jharkhand 61 Chakla Essar Power Ltd. Jharkhand 62 Ashok Karkatta Central Essar Power Ltd. Jharkhand 63 Jainagar Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation (GMDC) Jharkhand 64 Tokisud North GVK Power (Govindwal Sahib) Ltd. Jharkhand 65 Tubed Hindalco Industries Ltd., Tata Power Company Ltd. Jharkhand 66 Moitra Jayaswal Neco Ltd. Jharkhand 67 North Dhadu Jharkhand Ispat Pvt. Ltd., Pavanjay Steel & Power Ltd., Electrosteel castings Ltd., Adhunik Alloys & Power Ltd. Jharkhand 68 Banhardih Jharkhand State Electricity Board Jharkhand 69 Sugia Closed mine Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Jharkhand 70 Rauta Closed mine Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Jharkhand 71 Burakhap small patch Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Jharkhand 72 Pindra-Debipur- Khaowatand Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Jharkhand 73 Latehar Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Jharkhand 74 Patratu Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Jharkhand 75 Rabodih OCP Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Jharkhand 76 Jogeshwar & Khas Jogeshwar Jharkhand State Mineral Development Corporation Jharkhand 77 Jitpur Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. Jharkhand 78 Amarkonda Murgadangal Jindal Steel and Power Ltd., Gagan Sponge Iron Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 79 Urma Paharitola Jharkhand State Electricity Board, Bihar State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Jharkhand 80 Rohne JSW Steel Ltd., Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd., Jai Balaji Industries Ltd. Jharkhand 81 Gomia Metals and Minerals Trading Corporation Jharkhand 82 Rajhara North (Central & Eastern) Mukund Limited, Vini Iron & Steel Udyog Limited Jharkhand 83 Dumri Nilachal Iron & Power Ltd., Bajrang Ispat Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 84 Kerandari National Thermal Power Ltd. Jharkhand 85 Chhatti Bariatu National Thermal Power Ltd. Jharkhand 86 Chhati Bariatu South National Thermal Power Ltd. Jharkhand 87 Brahmini National Thermal Power Ltd.+ Coal India Limited JV Jharkhand 88 Chichro Patsimal National Thermal Power Ltd.+ Coal India Limited JV Jharkhand 89 Pachwara Central Punjab State Electricity Board Jharkhand 90 Mahal Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Jharkhand 91 Tenughat-Jhirki Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited Jharkhand 92 Bundu Rungta Mines Limited Jharkhand 93 Mednirai Rungta Mines Limited, Kohinoor Steel (P) Ltd. Jharkhand 94 Choritand Tiliaya Rungta Mines Limited, Sunflag Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. Jharkhand 95 Sitanala Steel Authority of India Ltd. Jharkhand 96 Ganeshpur Tata Steel Ltd., Adhunik Thermal Energy Jharkhand 97 Badam Tenughat Vidyut Nigam Limited Jharkhand 98 Rajbar E & D Tenughat Vidyut Nigam Limited Jharkhand 99 Gondulpara Tenughat Vidyut Nigam Limited, Damodar Valley Corporation Jharkhand 100 Kotre-Basantpur Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. (Now Tata Steel Ltd.) Jharkhand 101 Pachmo Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. (Now Tata Steel Ltd.) Jharkhand 102 Lohari Usha Martin Ltd. Jharkhand 103 Kathautia Usha Martin Ltd. Jharkhand 104 Pachwara North West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) Jharkhand 105 Suliyari Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development Corporation Madhya Pradesh 106 Bikram Birla Corporation Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 107 Gotitoria (East) BLA Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 108 Gotitoria (West) BLA Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 109 Mahan Essar Power Ltd., Hindalco Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 110 Mandla North Jaipraskash Associates Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 111 Urtan North Jindal Steel & Power Ltd., Monet Ispat and Energy Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 112 Thesgora-B/ Rudrapuri Kamal Sponge Steel & Power Limited, Revati Cement P. Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 113 Amelia Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Madhya Pradesh 114 Amelia (North) Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Madhya Pradesh 115 Mandla South Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 116 Dongeri Tal-II Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 117 Marki Barka Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 118 Semaria/Piparia Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 119 Bicharpur Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 120 Tandsi-III & Tandsi -III (Extn.) Mideast Integrated Steels Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 121 Sahapur East National Mineral Dev. Corp. Madhya Pradesh 122 Sahapur West National Mineral Dev. Corp. Madhya Pradesh 123 Mara II Mahan NCT of Delhi, Delhi, Haryana Power Generation Corp. Ltd. (HPGCL) Madhya Pradesh 124 Sial Ghoghri Prism Cement Limited Madhya Pradesh 125 Brahampuri Pushp Steel and Mining Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 126 Rawanwara North SKS Ispat Limited Madhya Pradesh 127 Bander AMR Iron & Steels Pvt. Ltd., Century Textiles & Industries Ltd., J.K.Cement Ltd. Maharashtra 128 Marki Mangli-I B.S. Ispat Ltd. Maharashtra 129 Takli-Jena-Bellora (North) & Takli-Jena-Bellora (South) Central Collieries Co. Ltd. and Lloyds Metals & Engineering Ltd. Maharashtra 130 Dahegaon/ Makardhokra-IV IST Steel & Power Ltd., Gujarat Ambuja Cement Ltd., Lafarge India Pvt. Ltd. Maharashtra 131 Gondkhari Maharashtra Seamless Limited, Dhariwal Infrastructure (P) Ltd., Kesoram Industries Ltd. Maharashtra 132 Marki-Zari- Jamani-Adkoli Maharashtra State Mining Corpn. Ltd. Maharashtra 133 Lohara (East) Murli Industries Ltd., Grace Industries Ltd. Maharashtra 134 Khappa & Extn. Sunflag Iron & Steel Ltd., Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd. Maharashtra 135 Lohara West Extn. Adani Power Ltd. Maharashtra 136 Warora West (North) Bhatia International Ltd. Maharashtra 137 Kosar Dongergaon Chaman Metaliks Ltd. Maharashtra 138 Warora (West) Southern Part Fieldmining & Ispat Ltd. Maharashtra 139 Chinora Fieldmining & Ispat Ltd. Maharashtra 140 Majra Gondwana Ispat Ltd. Maharashtra 141 Nerad Malegaon Gupta Metallics & Power Ltd., Gupta Coalfields & Washeries Ltd. Maharashtra 142 Baranj - I Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 143 Baranj - II Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 144 Baranj - III Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 145 Baranj - IV Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 146 Kiloni Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 147 Manora Deep Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 148 Agarzari Maharashtra State Mining Corporation Limited (MSMCL) Maharashtra 149 Warora Maharashtra State Mining Corporation Limited (MSMCL) Maharashtra 150 Bhandak West Shree Baidyanath Ayurved Bhawan Ltd. Maharashtra 151 Marki Mangli-II Shree Veerangana Steel Limited. Maharashtra 152 Marki Mangli-III Shree Veerangana Steel Limited. Maharashtra 153 Marki Mangli-IV Shree Veerangana Steel Limited. Maharashtra 154 Belgaon Sunflag Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. Maharashtra 155 Mandakini B Assam Mineral Dev. Corporation Ltd., Meghalaya Mineral Dev. Corp., Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Odisha Mining Corporation Ltd. Odisha 156 New Patrapara Bhusan Steel & Strips Ltd., Adhunik Metaliks Ltd., Deepak Steel & Power Ltd., Adhunik Corp. Ltd., Odisha Sponge Iron Ltd., SMC Power Generation Ltd., Sree Metaliks Ltd., Visa Steel Ltd. Odisha 157 Bijahan Bhushan Ltd., Shri Mahavir Ferro Alloys Pvt. Limited Odisha 158 Jamkhani Bhushan Ltd. Odisha 159 Naini Gujarat Mineral Development Corporation, Puducherry Industrial Promotion Development and Investment Corporation Limited Odisha 160 Mahanadi Gujarat State Electricity Corporation Limited, Maharashtra State Electricity Board Odisha 161 Machhakata Gujarat State Electricity Corporation Limited, Maharashtra State Electricity Board Odisha 162 Talabira-I Hindalco Industries Ltd. Odisha 163 Ramchandi Promotion Block Jindal Steel & Power Limited Odisha 164 Utkal B 1 Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. Odisha 165 Baitarni West Kerala State Electricity Board, Odisha Hydro Power Corp., Gujarat Power Corporation Ltd. Odisha 166 Talabira II & III Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. (MCL), Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd., Hindalco Industries Ltd. Odisha 167 Utkal-A Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. (MCL), JSW Steels Ltd., Jindal Thermal Power Comp. Ltd., Jindal Stainless Steels Ltd., Shyam DRI Ltd. Odisha 168 Utkal-B2 Monet Ispat Ltd. Odisha 169 Mandakini Monet Ispat Energy Ltd., Jindal Photo Ltd., Tata Power Company Ltd. Odisha 170 Utkal 'E' National Aluminium Corporation Odisha 171 Dulanga National Thermal Power Corporation Odisha 172 Utkal-D Odisha Mining Corporation Odisha 173 Nuagaon Telisahi Odisha Mining Corporation, Andhra Pradesh Mineral Development (APMDC) Odisha 174 Manoharpur Odisha Power Generation Corporation Odisha 175 Dipside Manoharpur Odisha Power Generation Corporation Odisha 176 Radhikapur (West) Rungta Mines Limited, OCL India Ltd., Ocean Ispat Ltd. Odisha 177 Rampia Sterlite Energy Ltd., (IPP), GMR Energy Ltd. (IPP), Arcelor Mittal India Ltd. (CPP), Lanco Group Ltd. (IPP), Navbharat Power Pvt. Ltd. (IPP), Reliance Energy Ltd. (IPP) Odisha 178 Dip Side of Rampia Sterlite Energy Ltd., (IPP), GMR Energy (IPP), Arcelor Mittal India Ltd. (CPP), Lanco Group Ltd. (IPP), Navbharat Power Pvt. Ltd. (IPP), Reliance Energy Ltd. (IPP) Odisha 179 North of Arkhapal Srirampur Strategic Energy Technology Systems Limited (SETSL) Odisha 180 Radhikapur (East) Tata Sponge Iron Ltd, Scaw Industries Ltd., SPS Sponge Iron Ltd. Odisha 181 Chendipada Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidut Utpadan Limited, Chattishgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited, Maharashtra State Power Generation Corporation Ltd. Odisha 182 Chendipada-II Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidut Utpadan Limited, Chattishgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited, Maharashtra State Power Generation Corporation Ltd. Odisha 183 Utkal-C Utkal Coal Ltd. (formerly ICCL) Odisha 184 Biharinath Bankura DRI Mining Manufacturers Co. Pvt. Ltd. West Bengal 185 Andai East Bhushan Steel Ltd., Jai Balaji Industries Ltd., Rashmi Cement Ltd. West Bengal 186 Barjora (North) Damodar Valley Corporation West Bengal 187 Kagra Joydev Damodar Valley Corporation West Bengal 188 Kasta (East) Damodar Valley Corporation West Bengal 189 Gourangdih ABC Himachal EMTA Power Ltd., JSW Steel Ltd. West Bengal 190 Moira-Madhujore Ramsarup Lohh Udyog Ltd., Adhunik Corporation Ltd., Uttam Galva Steels Ltd., Howrah Gases Ltd., Vikas Metal & Power Ltd., ACC Ltd. West Bengal 191 Sarisatolli Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation Ltd. West Bengal 192 Ardhagram Sova Ispat Limited, Jaibalaji Sponge Ltd. West Bengal 193 Tara (West) West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 194 Gangaramchak West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 195 Barjora West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 196 Gangaramchak- Bhadulia West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 197 Tara (East) West Bengal State Electricity Board West Bengal 198 Jaganathpur B West Bengal Mineral Development & Trading Corp. West Bengal 199 Sitarampur West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal 200 Trans Damodar West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal 201 Ichhapur West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal 202 Kulti West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal 203 Jaganathpur A West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal 204 East of Damogoria (Kalyaneshwari) West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section Sch.--> [See section 3(1)(q)] SI. No. Name of Coal Mine/Block Name of Prior Allottee State where Coal Mine/Block Located 1 2 3 4 1 Namchik Namphuk Arunachal Pradesh Mineral Dev. & Trading Corporation Arunachal Pradesh 2 Gare-Palma- IV/4 Jayaswal Neco Ltd. Chhattisgarh 3 Gare-Palma-IV/2 Jindal Power Ltd. (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 4 Gare-Palma-IV/3 Jindal Power Ltd. (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 5 Gare-Palma-IV/1 Jindal Strips Limited (Now Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.) Chhattisgarh 6 Gare-Palma-IV/5 Monet Ispat Ltd. Chhattisgarh 7 Chotia Prakash Industries Ltd. Chhattisgarh 8 Gare-Palma-IV/7 Raipur Alloys & Steel Ltd. (Now Sarda Energy and Mineral Limited) Chhattisgarh 9 Parsa East Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (RRVUNL) Chhattisgarh 10 Kanta Basan Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd. (RRVUNL) Chhattisgarh 11 Parbatpur-Central Electrosteel Castings Ltd. Jharkhand 12 Tokisud North GVK Power (Govindwal Sahib) Ltd. Jharkhand 13 Pachwara Central Punjab State Electricity Board Jharkhand 14 Kathautia Usha Martin Ltd. Jharkhand 15 Pachwara North West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) Jharkhand 16 Gotitoria (East) BLA Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 17 Gotitoria (West) BLA Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 18 Mandla North Jaipraskash Associates Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 19 Amelia (North) Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Madhya Pradesh 20 Bicharpur Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 21 Sial Ghoghri Prism Cement Limited Madhya Pradesh 22 Marki Mangli-I B.S. Ispat Ltd. Maharashtra 23 Baranj - I Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 24 Baranj - II Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 25 Baranj - III Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 26 Baranj - IV Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 27 Kiloni Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 28 Manora Deep Karnataka Power Corp. Ltd. (KPCL) Maharashtra 29 Marki Mangli-II Shree Veerangana Steels Limited. Maharashtra 30 Marki Mangli-III Shree Veerangana Steels Limited. Maharashtra 31 Belgaon Sunflag Iron & Steel Co. Ltd Maharashtra 32 Talabira-I Hindalco Industries Ltd. Odisha 33 Barjora (North) Damodar Valley Corporation West Bengal 34 Kagra Joydev Damodar Valley Corporation West Bengal 35 Sarisatolli Calcutta Electricity Supply Corporation Ltd. West Bengal 36 Ardhagram Sova Ispat Limited, Jai Balaji Sponge Ltd. West Bengal 37 Tara (West) West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 38 Gangaramchak West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 39 Barjora West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 40 Gangaramchak- Bhadulia West Bengal Power Development Corporation Limited (WBPDCL) West Bengal 41 Tara (East) West Bengal State Electricity Board West Bengal 42 Trans Damodar West Bengal Mineral Dev. & Trading Corp. Ltd. West Bengal
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section Sch.--> [See section 3(1)(r)] SI. No. Name of Coal Mine/Block Name of Prior Allottee State where Coal Mine/Block Located 1 2 3 4 1 Durgapur-II/ Taraimar Bharat Aluminium Company Ltd. Chhattisgarh 2 Durgapur-II /Sarya DB Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 3 Gare-Palma Sector-III Goa Industrial Development Corporation Chhattisgarh 4 Gare-Palma IV/8 Jayaswal Neco Ltd. Chhattisgarh 5 Talaipali National Thermal Power Ltd. Chhattisgarh 6 Chatti Bariatu National Thermal Power Ltd. Jharkhand 7 Mahan Essar Power Ltd., Hindalco Industries Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 8 Mandla South Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. Madhya Pradesh 9 Dongeri Tal-II Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Ltd. (MPSMC) Madhya Pradesh 10 Kosar Dongergaon Chaman Metaliks Ltd. Maharashtra 11 Nerad Malegaon Gupta Metallics & Power Ltd., Gupta Coalfields & Washeries Ltd. Maharashtra 12 Marki Mangli-IV Shree Veerangana Steel Limited. Maharashtra 13 Jamkhani Bhushan Ltd. Odisha 14 Utkal B 1 Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. Odisha 15 Utkal-B 2 Monet Ispat Ltd. Odisha 16 Mandakini Monet Ispat Energy Ltd., Jindal Photo Ltd., Tata Power Company Ltd. Odisha 17 Utkal-C Utkal Coal Ltd. (formerly ICCL) Odisha 18 Brinda Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 19 Sasai Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 20 Meral Abhijeet Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 21 Moitra Jayaswal Neco Ltd Jharkhand 22 Jitpur Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. Jharkhand 23 Rohne JSW Steel Ltd., Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd., Jai Balaji Industries Ltd. Jharkhand 24 Dumri Nilachal Iron & Power Ltd., Bajrang Ispat Pvt. Ltd. Jharkhand 25 Kerandari National Thermal Power Ltd. Jharkhand 26 Sitanala Steel Authority of India Ltd. Jharkhand 27 Ganeshpur Tata Steel Ltd., Adhunik Thermal Energy Jharkhand 28 Badam Tenughat Vidyut Nigam Limited Jharkhand 29 Tara Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Ltd. Chhattisgarh 30 Lohari Usha Martin Ltd. Jharkhand 31 Dulanga National Thermal Power Corporation Odisha 32 Manoharpur Odisha Power Generation Corporation Odisha
Coal Mines (Special Provisions) Act, 2015_Section Sch.-->  (See section 28) Part A THE COAL MINES (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1973 (26 of 1973) 1. Amendment of section 1A - In the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (herein referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) of section 1A, after the word and figure "section 3", the word, figure and letter ", section 3A" shall be inserted. 2. Insertion of new section 3A - After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- '3A. Mining operation by company and others - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person being- (a) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or any other company incorporated in India; or (b) a company or a joint venture company formed by two or more companies, may carry on coal mining operations in India, in any form either for own consumption, sale or for any other purpose in accordance with the prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be. (2) The Central Government may, with a view to rationalise such coal mines so as to ensure the coordinated and scientific development and utilisation of coal resources consistent with the growing requirements of the country, from time to time, prescribe- (i) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location; (ii) the minimum size of the coal mine or coal bearing areas; (iii) such other conditions, which in the opinion of that Government may be necessary for the purpose of coal mining operations or mining for sale by a company. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, "company" means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.'. 3. Amendment of section 34 - In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(aa) the coal mines or coal bearing areas and their location, the minimum size of the coal mine or coal bearing areas, and such other conditions which may be necessary for the purpose of coal mining operations including mining for sale by a company under sub-section (2) of section 3A.". Part B THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 1957 (67 of 1957) 1. Substitution of new section for section 11A - In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (herein referred to as the principal Act), for section 11 A, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- '11A. Granting of reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, for the purpose of granting reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any area containing coal or lignite, select any of the following companies through auction by competitive bidding, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, namely:- (a) a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, or any other company incorporated in India; or (b) a company or a joint venture company formed by two or more companies, that carry on coal mining operations in India, in any form either for own consumption, sale or for any other purpose in accordance with the permit, prospecting licence or mining lease, as the case may be. (2) The Central Government may, with a view to rationalise coal and lignite mines referred to in sub-section (1), so as to ensure the coordinated and scientific development and utilisation of resources consistent with the growing requirements of the country, from time to time, prescribe- (i) the details of mines and their location; (ii) the minimum size of such mines; (iii) such other conditions, which in the opinion of that Government may be necessary for the purpose of mining operations or mining for sale by a company. (3) The State Government shall grant such reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence or mining lease in respect of any area containing coal or lignite to such company as selected through auction by competitive bidding or otherwise under this section: Provided that the auction by competitive bidding under this section shall not be applicable to an area containing coal or lignite- (a) where such area is considered for allocation to a Government company or corporation or a joint venture company formed by such company or corporation or between the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be; (b) where such area is considered for allocation to a company or corporation or that has been awarded a power project on the basis of competitive bids for tariff (including Ultra Mega Power Projects). Explanation - For the purposes of this section, "company" means a company as defined in clause (20) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013.'. 2. Amendment of section 13 - In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(d) the terms and conditions of auction by competitive bidding, the details of mines and their location, the minimum size of such mines and such other conditions which may be necessary for the purpose of coal mining operations including mining for sale by a company under sub-section (i) and sub-section (2) of section 11A.". Dr. Sanjay Singh, Secretary to the Government of India. 
