Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section Preamble--> An Act to provide for the taking over, in the public interest, of the management of coal mines, pending nationalisation of such mines with a view to ensuring rational and coordinated development of coal production and for promoting optimum utilisation of the coal resources consistent with the growing requirements of the country, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of January, 1973, except subsection (2) of section 8 which shall come into force at once.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (a)"appointed day" means the 31st day of January, 1973; (b)"coal mine" means a mine in which there exists one or more seams of coal; (c)"company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Act 1 of 1956);and includes a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of that Act; (d)"Custodian", in relation to a coal mine, means the person appointed under section 6 to take over, or carry on, the management of the coal mine; (e)"Government company" has the meaning assigned to it by section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 ; (f)"managing contractor" means the person, or body of persons, who, with the previous consent in writing of the State Government, has entered into an arrangement, contract or understanding, with the owner of the coal mine under which the operations of the mine are substantially controlled by such person or body of persons; (g)"mine" means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on, and includes- (i) all borings and bore holes; (ii) all shafts, whether in the course of being sunk or not; (iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven; (iv) all open cast workings; (v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing into or removal from a mine of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom; (vi) all lands, buildings, works, adits, levels, planes, machinery and equipments, instruments, stores, vehicles, railways, tramways and sidings in, or adjacent to, a mine and used for the purposes of the mine; (vii) all workshops (including buildings, machinery, instruments, stores, equipments of such workshops and the lands on which such workshops stand) in, or adjacent to, a mine and used substantially for the purposes of the mine or a number of mines under the same management; (viii) all coal in stock or in transit belonging to the owner of the mine and all coal under production in a mine; (ix) all power stations in a mine or operated primarily for supplying electricity for the purpose of working the mine or a number of mines under the same management; (x) all lands, buildings and equipments, belonging to the owner of the mine, and in, adjacent to or situated on the surface of, the mine where the washing of coal obtained from the mine or manufacture, therefrom, of coke is carried on; (xi) all lands and buildings [other than those referred to in. subclause (x)] wherever situated and solely used for the location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for the residence of officers and staff, of the mine; (xii) all other assets, movable and immovable, belonging to the owner of a mine, wherever situated, including cash balances, reserve funds and investments in so far as they relate to the mine and also any money lawfully due to him in relation to the mine in respect of any period prior to the appointed day; (h) "mining company" means a company owning a coal mine, and in relation to a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956 , the undertaking of that company in India; (i) "notified order" means an order notified in the Official Gazette; (j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Coal Mines (Conservation, Safety and Development)Act, 1952 , have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in that Act; (k) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act or in the Coal Mines (Conservation, Safety and Development)Act, 1952 (12 of 1952), have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 3--> (1) On and from the appointed day, the management of all coal mines shall vest in the Central Government. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of subsection (i) , the coal mines specified in the Schedule shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to be the coal mines the management of which shall vest, under subsection (1) , in the Central Government: Provided that if, after the appointed day, the existence of any other coal mine comes to the knowledge of the Central Government, whether after an investigation or in pursuance of an intimation given to it under subsection (5) , or otherwise, the Central Government shall, by a notified order, make a declaration about the existence of such mine, and on and from the date of such declaration- (i) the management of such coal mine shall be deemed, for the purposes of this Act, to vest in the Central Government; and (ii) such coal mine shall be deemed to be included in the Schedule, and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall become applicable thereto subject to the modification that for the words "appointed day", wherever they occur, the words, brackets and figures "date of the declaration made by the Central Government under subsection (2) of section 3" shall be substituted. (3) If any error or omission is noticed in the Schedule in relation to the name or address of the owner of a coal mine, the owner of such mine shall, within thirty days from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, bring such error or omission to the notice of the Central Government. (4) If, after the appointed day, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the particulars of a coal mine included, or deemed to be included, in the Schedule or the name and address of the owner of any such coal mine, it may, by notified order, correct such error, omission or misdescription, and on the issue of such notified order the relevant entries in the Schedule shall stand corrected accordingly: Provided that no such correction in relation to the ownership of a coal mine shall be made where such ownership is in dispute. (5) Every person in charge, immediately before the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, of the management of any coal mine, being a coal mine not included or deemed to be included on the said date in the Schedule, shall, within thirty days from the said date, intimate to the Central Government the name and location of such mine and the name and address of the owner thereof. (6) Where there is a dispute with regard to the declaration made by the Coal Board under the Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 , to the effect that a coal mine contains coking coal, the management of such coal mine shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act, vest in the Central Government under this Act and nothing contained in the first mentioned Act shall apply, or be deemed ever to have applied, to the said coal mine.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 4--> Any contract, whether express or implied, providing for the management of any coal mine, made before the appointed day between the owner of such mine and any person in charge of the management of such mine immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed to have terminated on the appointed day.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 5--> (1) Pending the appointment of a Custodian under section 6 for any coal mine, the person in charge of the management of such mine immediately before the appointed day shall, on and from the appointed day, be in charge of the management of such mine for and on behalf of the Central Government; and the management of such mine shall be carried on by such person subject to the provisions contained in subsections (2) and (4) and such directions, if any, as the Central Government may give to him and no other person, including the owner, shall, so long as such management continues, exercise any powers of management in relation to the coal mine or give any direction with regard to such management. (2) No person in charge of the management of a coal mine shall, without the previous approval of the person specified by the Central Government in this behalf in respect of that mine (hereinafter referred to as the "authorised person")- (a)incur any expenditure from the assets pertaining to the coal mine otherwise than for the purpose of making routine payments of salaries or commissions to employees, agents or for the purpose of meeting the routine day to day expenditure; (b)transfer or otherwise dispose of any such assets or create any charge,hypothecation,lien or other incumbrance thereon; (c) invest in any manner any monies forming part of such assets; (d)acquire any immovable property out of the monies forming part of such assets; (e) enter into any contract of service or agency, whether expressly or by implication, for purposes connected wholly or partly with the coal mine or vary the terms and conditions of any such contract subsisting on the appointed day; (f) enter into any other transaction relating to the business of the coal mine or vary the terms of any agreement relating to such business subsisting at the commencement of this Act. (3) The approval of the authorised person may be given either generally in relation to certain classes of transactions relating to the coal mine or specially in relation to any of its transactions. (4) Every person in charge of the management of a coal mine shall deposit all securities and documents, of title to any assets pertaining to such mine in any Scheduled Bank or Nationalised Bank in which the owner or agent had an account immediately before the appointed day or in any branch of the State Bank in the place where the head office or the principal office of the coal mine is situated or where there is no branch of the State Bank in such place, the nearest branch of the State Bank; and no such security or document shall be withdrawn from the Scheduled Bank, the Nationalised Bank or the State Bank, as the case may be, except with the permission of the authorised person: Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall apply to any security or document of title kept in trust with an Official Trustee in pursuance of the articles of association of any mining company unless the Central Government, by notified order, otherwise directs. Explanation-In this subsection, (a)"Scheduled Bank" means a bank included for the time being in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 ; (b)"State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 ; (c)"Nationalised Bank" means a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 . (5) Every person in charge of the management of a coal mine shall deliver forthwith to the person specified in this behalf by the Central Government in respect of that coal mine", the following documents, namely: (a)the minutes book or any other book in India containing all resolutions, up to the appointed day, of the persons in charge of the management of the coal mine before the appointed day; (b)the cheque books relating to the coal mine which are at any office of the coal mine; (c)all registers or other books containing particulars relating to the investment of any monies pertaining to the coal mine including investments on mortgaged properties and all loans granted or advances made. (6) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by subsection (2) and the provisions contained in subsections (2), (4) and (5), any directions issued under subsection (1) may require the persons in charge of the management of a coal mine under this Act to furnish to the Central Government or to the authorised person such returns, statements and other information relating to the coal mine as may be mentioned in the direction. (7) The persons in charge of the management of the coal mine under this Act shall be entitled to such remuneration, whether by way of allowance or salary or perquisites as the Central Government may fix; and any such person may, by giving one month's notice in writing to the Central Government of his intention so to do, relinquish charge of the management of the coal mine.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 6--> (1) The Central Government may, as soon as it is convenient administratively so to do, appoint any person (including a Government company, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) as the Custodian for the purpose of taking over the management of one or more coal mines and the person so appointed shall carry on the management of such mines for and on behalf of the Central Government. (2) (a) The Central Government may also appoint a person (including a Government company, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or incorporated thereafter) as the Custodian General for exercising supervision and control over all the coal mines the management of which is taken over under this Act and on such appointment, every Custodian, appointed under subsection (I) , shall act under the guidance, control and supervision of the Custodian General. (b) The Central Government may also appoint one or more persons as Additional Custodian General or Deputy Custodian General for assisting the Custodian General in the exercise of his powers and duties under this Act and the Custodian General may delegate all or such of his powers, as he may think fit, to the Additional Custodian General or Deputy Custodian General. (c) Every Additional Custodian General or Deputy Custodian General shall exercise the powers delegated to him under the control and supervision of the Custodian General: Provided that where a Government company has been appointed as the Custodian in relation to a coal mine, no Custodian General, Additional Custodian General or Deputy Custodian General shall exercise any powers of supervision or control in regard to such coal mine. (3) On the appointment of a Custodian under subsection (1) , the charge of management of the coal mine shall vest in him and all persons in charge of the management of such mine immediately before such appointment shall cease to be in charge of such management and shall be bound to deliver to the Custodian all assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody relating to the coal mine. (4) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court or anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Official Liquidator or any Receiver appointed by any Court or any other person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession, custody or control any coal mine specified in the Schedule or any part thereof, shall forthwith deliver possession of the mine or such part thereof, as the case may be, to the Custodian. (5) The Official Liquidator, Receiver or any other person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession, custody or control any books, documents or other papers relating to any coal mine specified in the Schedule, shall be liable to account for the said books, documents or other papers to the Central Government and shall deliver them up to the Custodian or to such person as the Custodian may specify in this behalf. (6) The Central Government may authorise the Custodian to exercise such of the powers of the owner, including powers to borrow, as may be necessary for the proper management of the coal mine and the Central Government may also issue such directions to the Custodian as to his powers and duties as it may deem desirable in the circumstances of the case; and no other person, including the owner, shall, so long as such management continues, exercise any powers of management in relation to the coal mine or give any direction with regard to such management. (7) The Custodian may also apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which he shall conduct the management of the coal mine or in relation to any other matter arising in the course of such management. (8) The Custodian shall receive from the funds of the coal mine for the charge of management of which he is appointed under subsection (1) , such remuneration as the Central Government may fix: Provided that where a Government company has been appointed as the Custodian of more than one coal mine, the remuneration of the Custodian shall be received from the funds of each such coal mine in such proportion as may be determined by the Central Government. (9) The Custodian General, and every (i) Additional Custodian General, (ii) Deputy Custodian General, (iii) Custodian, shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government. (10) The Central Government shall receive, to the exclusion of all other persons, any monies due to the coal mine realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that such receipt pertains to a transaction made at any time before the appointed day.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 7--> (1) Every owner of a coal mine shall be given by the Central Government an amount, in cash, for the vesting in it, under section 3, of the management of such mine. (2) For every month during which the management of a coal mine remains vested in the Central Government, the amount referred to in subsection (1)shall be computed at the rate of twenty paise per tonne of coal on the highest monthly production of coal from such mine during any month in the years 1969. 1970, 1971 and 1972: Provided that if in relation to any such coal mine, there was no production of coed during the said years, the amount referred to in subsection (1) shall be computed at the rate of four paise per tonne of such highest monthly coal producing capacity of the coal mine, before the appointed day, as may be assessed and declared by the Coal Board: Provided further that in relation to a coal mine, the operations of which were immediately before the appointed day under the control of a managing contractor, the amount, as computed under this subsection, shall be apportioned between the owner of the coal mine and such managing contractor in such proportions as may be agreed upon by or between the owner and such contractor, and in the event of there being no such agreement, in such proportions as may be determined by the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the head office of the coal mine is situated. (3) For every month during which the management of a coke oven plant, which falls within the definition of coal mine, remains vested in the Central Government under this Act, there shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, in addition to the amount referred to in subsection (1), to the owner of such coke oven plant, an amount computed at the rate of fifty paise per tonne of coke on the highest monthly production of coke from such coke oven plant during any month in the years 1969, 1970, 1971 and 1972. (4)	Out of the amount payable under the foregoing subsections, there shall be deducted by the Central Government, all sums equal to the amount of arrears due. on the appointed day, to the persons employed by the owner of a coal mine- (a)in relation to a provident fund, pension fund, gratuity fund or any other fund established for the welfare of the persons employed by the owner of the coal mine, and (b) as wages. (5)All sums deducted under subsection (4) shall, in accordance with such rules as may be made under this Act, be credited by the central government to the relevant fund or paid by that government to the persons to whom the said sums are due, and on such credit or payment the liability of the owner in respect of the amount of arrears due as aforesaid, shall, to the extent of such credit or payment stand discharge
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 8--> 1 (1)If any person- (a)fails to deliver to the Custodian any assets, books of account, registers or any other document in his custody relating to the coal mine in respect of the management of which the Custodian has been appointed, or (b)retains any property of such coal mine or removes or destroys it, or (c)fails to comply with the provisions contained in subsection (2) or subsection(4)or subsection(5) of section 5, or (d)fails to comply with any directions given under subsection (1), road with subsection (6), of section 5, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. [(2) If any person fails, without any reasonable excuse, to comply with the provisions of subsection (5) of section 3, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine]. It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of January, 1973, except subsection (2) of section 8 which shall come into force at once.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 9--> (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of. and was responsible to. the company for the conduce of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided the nothing contained in this subsection shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation For the purposes of this section: (a)"company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b)"director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 10--> (1) No proceeding for the winding up of a mining company, the management of whose coal mines, has vested in the Central Government under this Act, or for the appointment of a Receiver or for any other order in respect of the business of such company, shall lie in any Court except with the consent of the Central Government. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 , or in any memorandum or articles of association of any mining company or in any instrument, no resolution passed at any meeting of the Board of Directors or of the members of a mining company shall, in so far as it relates to the coal mine owned by such company or any business of such mine, be given effect to unless approved by the Central Government. (3)Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and subject to such exceptions, restrictions and limitations, if any, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the Companies Act, 1956 , shall continue to apply to every mining company in the same manner as they applied to it before the appointed day.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 11--> In computing the period of limitation prescribed by any law for the time being in force for any suit or application against any person by the owner of any coal mine in respect of any matter arising out of any transaction in relation to the coal mine owned by him, the time during which this Act is in force shall be excluded.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 12--> - The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other authority.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 13--> (1) The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that all or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act may also be exercised by any person or persons as may be specified in the order. (2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under subsection (1). the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 14--> -(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Custodian General, Additional Custodian General, Deputy Custodian General, any Custodian or authorised person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the Custodian General, Additional Custodian General, Deputy Custodian General, any Custodian or authorised person for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 15--> (1) Every person with whom the owner or occupier of any coal mine has, before the appointed day, entered into any contract for any service (other than a contract of employment), sale or supply shall, within fifteen days from the date on which this Act receives the assent of the President, intimate to the Central Government the particulars of such contract and if any default is made in giving such intimation, such contract shall, on the expiry of the said period of fifteen days, be voidable at the option of the Central Government. (2) If the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it may think fit, that any contract or agreement between the owner, agent or manager of a coal mine and any other person, in so far as such contract or agreement relates to the coal mine, has been entered into in bad faith, or is detrimental to the interests of the coal mine, it may make an order cancelling or varying (either unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose) such contract or agreement and thereafter the contract or agreement shall have effect accordingly: Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties to the contract or agreement a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (3) Any person aggrieved by an order made under subsection (2) may make an application to the principal Court of civil jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the head office of the coal mine is situated for the variation or reversal of such order and thereupon such Court may confirm, modify or reverse such order.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 16--> If the Custodian is of opinion that any contract, of employment entered into by any owner or agent of a coal mine, at any time before the appointed day, is unduly onerous or if he considers that it is necessary so to do in the interests of the proper management of a coal mine, he may, by giving to the employee concerned one month's notice in writing or the salary or wages for one month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of employment.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 17--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: (a)the manner in which the coal mines shall be managed by the Custodian; (b)the constitution of a Board of management, by whatever name called, tor advising the Custodian General in the management of the coal mines; (c)the form and manner in which accounts of the coal mines shall be maintained; (d)any other matter in relation to which, such rule is required to be, or may be, made. (3) Every rule made by the central government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session in to two or more successive session, and if before the expiry of the session immediately following session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agreeing making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should note be, the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the r ule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 18--> (1)Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any coal mine (a)owned, managed or controlled by Government, or by a Government company or by a corporation which is owned, managed or controlled by Government; (b) owned or managed by a company engaged in the production of iron and steel: Provided that clause (b) shall not extend to such part of the coal mine or production thereof which, in the opinion of the Central Government, is in excess of the requirements for the production of iron and steel by the company owning or managing such coal mine: Provided further that any coal obtained from any such coal mine as is referred to in the foregoing proviso in excess of the requirements for the production of iron and steel by the company owning or managing such coal mine, shall not be sold, delivered, transferred or otherwise disposed of except with the previous approval of the Central Government. (2) Subsection (1) shall not apply where there is any dispute as to the ownership or right of user of Government, Government company or corporation referred to in clause (a) of that subsection, or company referred to in clause (b) of that subsection, with regard to any coal mine or any machinery, equipment, vehicle, railway or tramway which is in such coal mine or is used for the purposes of such coal mine.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 19--> If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by notified order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed day.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section 20--> (1) The Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 1973, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed (including any appointment, declaration or order made thereunder),shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973_Section Sch.1--> The Schedule (See Section 3) Assam Railways and Trading Coal Company Limited, Margherita, Upper Assam. Vaydanji JDave, Post Box 8, Jharia.  ASSAM-MEGHALAYA  Khasi and Jaintia Coalfield 1. Thangji Nath, P.O.Pynursla, Meghaiaya. Assam Trading and Mining Company (Private) Limited,Shillong.Makum Coalfield, Lakhimpur 2. Baragolai, P.O. Margherita. Assam Railways and Trading Coal Company Limited, Margherita,Upper Assam. 3. Ledo,P.O. Ledo, Lakhimpur. Assam Railways and Trading Coal Company Limited, Margherita, Upper Assam. 4. Tipong, P.O. Ledo, Lakhimpur. Assam Railways and Trading Coal Company Limited,Margherita, Upper Assam. Mikir Coalfield 5. Koilajan, P.O. Koilajan, District Dimapur. Koilajan Collieries Limited, P.O. Dimapur, Naga Hills. 6. Seelvata, P.O. Diphu, District Mikir Hills. Hira Padda Dipali Dutta, Shillong. BIHAR  Daltonganj Hutar Coalfield, Palamau 7. Hutar,P.O. Hutar Colliery. Sone Valley Portland Cement Company Limited, P.O. Japla, Palamau. 8. Ra jhara, P.O. Kajhara Colliery. Ram Saran Das and Brothers, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calculta1. East Bokaro Coalfield, Hazaribagh 9. East Bokaro, P.O. Pichri. East Bokaro Colliery Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Pichri. 10. New Selected Dhori, P.O. Bermo. Gopal Narain Singh, Krishna Narain Singh, Govind Narain Singh, Shyam Narain Singh, Girdhar Narain Singh nominated owner Sri Bhuneswar Goswami, P.O. Berme, Hazaribagh. 11. Pare Dhori, P.O. Tantri. Pure Dhori Colliery Company, P.O. Tantri, Hazaribagh. 12. Selected Kargali, P.O. Pichri. Vaydanji JDave, Post Box 8, Jharia. Hura Coalfield (Santhal Pargana) 13. Lalmatia, P.O. Mahagama. Messrs. S.P. Coal Enterprises. P.O. Mahagama (S.P.). 14. Paharpur, P.O. Mahagama. Falchand Ram, Mahagama. 15. Simlong, P.O. Dhamni. N. N.. Bhagat, P.O. Barhait. Jainty Coalfield (Santhal Pargana) 16. Bhowanipur, P.O. Chitra. S. wari Prasad, N. Deo, P.O. Chitra. 17. Central Saharjuri, P.O. Chitra. M.N.Singh and S.S.Singh, P.O. Chitra. 18. Chitra Central, P.O. Chitra. B.N.Mondal and Company, P.O. Chitra. 19. Damagora East and West, P.O. Chitra. N.N.Mondal, Dishergarh, West Bengal. 20. East Damagora, P.O. Kukraha. K.N.Singh, P.O.Saroth. 21. Girija, P.O. Chitra. Sri M.K. Singh, P.O. Chitra. 22. Haripur, P.O. Kukraha. Haripur, P.O. Kukraha. 23. Patrika, P.O. Chitra. Patrika, Sri N.K. Singh, P.O. Chitra. 24. Saharjuri, P.O. kukraha. M.G. Misra, P.O. Kukraha. 25. Tarabad, P.O. T.K. Gram. Sri Durga Jamjuri Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Barakar, Burdwan. 26. Tulsi Dabor, P.O. Chitra. Nalini Kumar Singh, P.O. Chitra. Jharia Coalfield  Ashakuti Phularitand 27. Baramessia, Sikarichuck, P.O. Tundoo. Thakur Rama Avtar Singh P.O. Tundoo. 28. Baherabera Chuk, P.O. Tundoo. Thakur Gupteswar Prasad Singh, P.O. Tundoo. 29. Barwabera, P.O. Nawagarh. B. Trigunait and Brothers, P.O. Nawagarh, Dhanbad. 30. Barora, P.O. Nawagarh. Barora Coal Concern, P.O. Nawagarh. 31. Central Ganeshpur, P.O. Nawagarh. Shyamlal Sunda and Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 32. Central Kendwadih, P.O. Nawagarh. Narsingh Harji, P.O. Nawagarh. 33. Central Kessurgarh, P.O. Nawagarh. Bhairobux Agarwalla, P.O. Nawagarh. 34. Damrakhas, P.O. Nawagarh. Sheikh Brothers and Company, Nawagarh. 35. Damra Pinalgoria, P.O. Nawagarh. Lala Mohinder Paul, P.O. Nawagarh. 36. Diamond Phularitand, P.O. Kharkharee. Shyama Coal Company, P.O. Kharkharee 37. East Benedih, P.O. Nawagarh. East Bengal Coal Concern Private Limited P.O. Nawagarh. 38. East Dharmaband, P.O. Nawagarh. East Dharmaband Colliery Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 39. East Khas Baihardih, P.O. Tundoo. E.K. Baihardih Coal Company, P.O. Tundoo. 40. East Mandra, P.O. Nawagarh. Bharat Coal Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 41. Kendwadih (Mondal), P.O. Nawagarh. B.N. Mondal and Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 42. Khas Muraidih, P.O. Tundoo. U.N. Lala, P.O. Tundoo. 43. Khas Sinidih, P.O. Nawagarh. Gyan Chand Sunda and Company, Jharia. 44. Khodo Valley, P.O. Nawagarh. Jiwanlal Sunda, Joraphatak, P.O. Dhansar. 45. Mandra South Barora, P.O. Katrasgarh. Bijoy Narayan Singh and Jagdeo Prasad Singh, P.O. Kharkharee. 46. Model Muraidih, P.O. Nawagarh. R.K. Pandey, P.O. Nawagarh. 47. New Kendwadih P.O. Nawagarh. K. P. Lalla and Sons, P.O. Nawagarh. 48. New Muraidih, P.O. Kharkharee. Messrs. Kamlendu and Subhendu Banerjee, 42 C, Shyampukur Street, Calcutta. 49. Nath and Khas Muraidih, P.O. Nawagarh. Kaluram Heliwal, P.O. Nawagarh. 50. North Baramossia, P.O. Tundoo. North Baramossia Coal Company, P.O. Dhansar. 51. North Tundoo Khas, Katrasgarh. R.L. Agarwala, P.O. Katrasgarh. 52. Pure Barora, P.O. Nawagarh. N. Sahai, P.O. Nawagarh. 53. Pure Bonedih, P.O.Nawagarh. Doaba Coal Company (Private) Limited, Sunda House, Joraphatak, Dhanbad. 54. Pure Dharmaband, P.O. Katrasgarh. B.N. Jagdeoprasad Singh, P.O. Katrasgarh. 55. Pure Ganeshpur, P.O. Nawagarh. Pure Ganeshpur Colliery Company, P.O. Jharia. 56. Selected Mandra, P.O. Nawagarh. Selected Mandra Colliery Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 57. Selected Muraidih, P.O. Nawagarh. Selected Muraidih Colliery Company, Jiwan Sadan, Dhanbad. 58. South Barora, P.O. Nawagarh. D.P. Lalla and Sons, P.O. Nawagarh. 59. Upper Mandra, P.O. Nawagarh. Upper Mandra Colliery Company, P.O. Nawagarh. 60. West Phularitand, P.O. Nawagarh. West Phularitand Colliery Company, Jiwan Sadan, Dhanbad. Bhuggutdih 61. Bastacolla, P.O. Dhansar. Bastacolla Coal Company Limited, P.O. Dhansar. 62. Dhansar, P.O. Dhansar. Pure Dhansar Coal Company, P.O. Dhansar. 63. Dhansar, NBH, P.O. Dhansar. Dhansar Coal Company (Private)Limited, Dhansar. 64. East Bastacolla, P.O. Dhansar. East Bastacolla Colliery Company, P.O.Jharia. 65. Liberty, P.O. Jharia. Agarwal Mining Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Jharia. 66. Manaitand, P.O. Dhansar. Manaitand Colliery Company, P.O. Dhansar. 67. North Bhuggatdih, P.O. Dhansar. hrimati Narmada Bala Gupta, Sri Dinanath Agarwala and Bansdeo Prasad Agarwala, P.O. Jharia. 68. Victory, P.O. Dhansar. United Mining Company Limited, P.O. Jharia. Busseriya 69. East Busseriya, P.O. Kusunda. East Busseriya Colliery Company (Private; Limited. Shanti Bhawan, Dhanbad. 69. East Busseriya, P.O. Kusunda. East Busseriya Colliery Company (Private; Limited. Shanti Bhawan, Dhanbad. 70. Khas Bansjora, P.O. Bansjora. Khas Bansjora Colliery Company, P.O. Bansjora. 71. Nichitpur, P.O. Bansjora. Nichitpur Coal (Private) Company, 7.Manoharoukur Road, Calutta26. 72. Pure Nichitpur, P.O. Bansjora. Pure Nichitpur Colliery Company, P.O. Bansjora, Dhanbad. Dharmaband 73. Central Bahiardih, P.O. Katrasgarh. K.K. Chandra and Brothers, Post Box No. 13, Katrasgarh. 74. Central Sinidih, P.O. Tundoo. Shrimati Manjula Devi, P.O. Tundoo. 75. East Sinidih, P.O. Tundoo. P. Chanchani and Company Private Limited, P.O. Tundoo. 76. Jogidih, P.O. Tundoo. P.K. Lalla and Brothers, P.O Tundoo. 77. Khas Baihardih, P.O. Tundoo. Baihardih Coal Company, P.O. Tundoo. 78. Majlitand, P.O. Tundoo. Sri Pritish Lalla, P.O. Tundoo. 79. North Sinidih, P.O. Tundoo. Sankarlall Kejrilall, P.O. Jharia. 80. Pure Sinidih, P.O. Tundoo. Thakur Ramavtar Singh, P.O. Tundoo. 81. Pure Suderaidih, P.O. Tundoo. Thakur G.P. Singh, P.O. Tundoo. 82. West Jogidih, P.O. Katrasgarh. Bihar National Coal Company, P.O. Katrasgarh. Golukdih 83. Central Golukdih, P.O. Jharia. Shrimati Jyotsna Devi, Nilachal, P.O. Sitarampur, Burdwan. 84. East Kujama, P.O. Jharia. East Kujama Colliery Company, P.O. Sijua (Dhanbad). 85. New Golukdih, P.O. Govindpur. Biswanath Aggarwalla, P.O. Govindpur (Dhanbad). 86. North Golukdih, P.O. Baliapur. Kishanlall Ranjelall, P.O. Baliapur, Dhanbad. 87. Pure Selected Golukdih, P.O. Jharia. Pure Selected Golukdih Colliery Company, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad. Govindpur 88. Katras New, P.O. Katrasgarh. Shrimati Kashi Bai, P.O. Katrasgarh. 89. Narayanpur, P.O. Katrasgarh. Shrimati Naraini Devi, P.O. Katrasgarh. 90. North Akashkinari, P.O. Katrasgarh. Khimji Dossa and Company, Katrasgarh. 91. North Dharmaband, P.O. Katrasgarh. Kunverji Kalyanji, Katrasgarh. 92. North Tentuliya, P.O. Katrasgarh. Debram Ramji, Katrasgarh. 93. West Katras, P.O. Katrasgarh. Messrs. N. K. Bose and Company, West Katras Colliery Company, P.O. Katrasgarh. 94. West Koiludih, P.O. Katrasgarh. West Koijudih Colliery Company, Katrasgarh. Jealgora 95. Basudev 'A' (Narayanpur Seam), P.O. Khas Jeenagora. A.B. Jugdutt and Company, Jharia. Jharia 96. Bora Colliery, P.O. Jharia. Bera Colliery Company, P.O. Jharia. 97. Central Dobari, P.O. Jharia. Shrimati Jayanti Devi, Jharia. 98. Kuya and Khas Kuya, P.O. Jharia. Kuya Collier;' Company (Private) Limited, Jharia. 99. North Dobari, P.O. Jharia. Sahana Coal Company, Jharia. 100. North and West Ghanuadih, P.O. Jharia. North and West Ghanuadih Colliery Company, Jharia. 101 Pure BhuggaTdih, P.O. Jharia Pure BhuggaTdih Colliery Company, Jharia. KaTras 102 CenTral Keshalpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Moolji N. Cholia, KaTrasgarh 103 East Keshalpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Shri Baijnath Choudhury and Others, KaTrasgarh 104 Ideal Keshalpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Ideal Keshalpur Colliery Company, KaTrasgarh 105 Khas KaTrasgarh, P.O. KaTrasgarh Mustafi and Company, P.O. KaTrasbazar, Dhanbad 106 New KaTras, P.O. KaTrasgarh New KaTras Coal Company, KaTrasgarh 107 New Salanpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Madhu Lachman and Sons, KaTrasgarh 108 North Keshalpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh North Keshalpur Colliery Company (Private)Limited, P.O.KaTrasgarh 109 Pure Salanpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh G.V.Modi(Receiver),Jharia 110 Selected Govindpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Selected Govindpur Coal Concern, KaTrasgarh 111 Selected Keshalpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh Selected Keshalpur Colliery Company, KaTrasgarh 112 West and Sowaria Salanpur, P.O. KaTrasgarh M.P. and D.D. Agarwalla, Dhanbad Bazar, Dhanbad 113 West Ramkanali, P.O. KaTrasgarh West Ramkanali Colliery Company, KaTrasgarh.Kusunda 114 Bright Kusunda, P.O. Dhansar Brisht Kusunda Colliery Company, P.O. Dhansar 115 CenTral Godhur, P.O. Kusunda CenTral Godhur Colliery Company, Kusunda 116 East Kendwadih, P.O. Dhansar East Kendwadih Coal Company Limited, Kusunda 117 Aggarwalla Godhur, P.O. Kusunda Aggarwalla Godhur Coal Company, P.O. Kusunda, Dhanbad 118 Khas Godhur, P.O. Kusunda Khas Godhur Coal Company, Kusunda 119 Khas Kusunda, P.O. Kusunda Khas Kusunda Coal Company (Private) Limited, 40, STrand Road, Calcutta1 120 North Godhur, P.O. Kusunda North Godhur Colliery Company, Kusunda 121 Selected Godhur, P.O. Kusunda Selected Godhur Coal Company, Kusunda 122 Sri Godhur, P.O. Kusunda Katasaria Coal Company (Private) Limited Jharia. Loyabad 123 North Loyabad, P.O. Bansjora North Loyabad Coal Company, P.O. Bansjora 124 South Loyabad, P.O. Bansjora South Loyabad Coal Company, P.O. Bansjora. Madhuband 125 CenTral Jayaramdih, P.O. Nawagarh Paul Brothers, P.O. Nawagarh, Dhanbad 126 Joyramdih, P.O. Nudkhurkee Joyramdih Coal Company, P.O. Nudkhurkee, DisTrict Dhanbad 127 Karmatand, P.O. Karmatand Sri Ram Coal Company, P.O. Karmatand 128 Khas Joyramdih, P.O. Nawagarh Khas Joyramdih Colliery Company, P.O. Nawagarh 129 Khas Matigora, P.O. Nudkhurkee Khas Matigora Colliery Company, P.O. Nudkhurkee 130 Model Joyramdih, P.O. Nawagarh Paul Brothers, P.O. Nawagarh, Dhanbad 131 North Kessurgarh, P.O. Nudkhurkee Nandalall Shaha and Others, P.O. Nawagarh 132 Nudkhurkee, P.O. Nudkhurkee, M. B. Roy and Brothers, P.O. Nudkhurkee 133 Pinalgoria, P.O. Nawagarh East Kessurgarh Colliery Company, P.O. Nawagarh 134 Pure Damoda, P.O. Nudkhurkee Pandit Rambhaju Upadhyaya and Company, P.O. Nudkhurkee 135 Pure Jyoramdih, P.O. Nudkhurkee Pure Joyramdih Colliery Company, P.O. Nudkhurkee, Dhanbad 136 Ramgarh Jharia, P.O. Karmatand Ramgarh Jharia Colliery Company, P.O. Karmatand, Dhanbad 137 West Joyramdih, P.O. Nudkhurkee A. K. Chandra, P.O. Nudkhurkee.Mohuda 138 East Lohapati, P.O. Ramnagargarh East Muralidih Coal Company Private Limited, P.O. Jharia.Patherdih 139 Bright Tasra, P.O. Sindri Seth Jharumal, P.O. Sindri, Dhanbad 140 CenTral Tasra, P.O. Sindri CenTral Tasra Coal Compan.y, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 141 National Tasra, P.O. Sindri Kailashram Khanna, P.O. Sindri, Dhanbad 142 Selected Sudamdih, P.O. Sindri Institute Selected Sudamdih Colliery Company, P.O. Sindri Institute, Dhanbad.Sijua 143 CenTral Angarpathra, P.O. Sijua CenTral Angarpathra Colliery Company, P.O. Sijua, Dhanbad 144 CenTral Bansjora, P.O. Sijua Khas Sijua Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 145 Chandore, P.O. KaTrasgarh R. N. Singh and Others, P.O. KaTrasgarh 146 Chandore, P.O. Sijua D. P. Agarwalla, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 147 East Totulmari, P.O. Sijua East Tetulmari Colliery Company Limited, P.O. Sijua 148 Kalisthan Angarpathra, P.O. KaTrasgarh Kalisthan Angarpathra Coal Company, P.O. KaTrasgarh, Dhanbad 149 Khas Sijua, P.O. Sijua Khas Sijua Coal Company Private Limited, P.O. Jharia 150 Model Angarpathra, P.O. Sijua B. L. Agarwalla, P.O. Govindpur, Dhanbad 151 New Angarpathra, P.O. KaTrasgarh New Angarpathra Colliery Company, P.O. KaTrasgarh 152 New Pandedih, P.O. Sijua New Pandedih Colliery Company, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 153 North and North East Angarpathra, P.O. KaTrasgarh North Angarpathra Coal Company, P.O. KaTrasgarh, DisTrict Dhanbad 154 North Tetulmari, P.O. Sijua North Tetulmari Colliery Company, P.O. Sijua, Dhanbad 155 Pure Selected Bansjora, P.O. Sijua H. C. Bhutani, P.O. Sijua, Dhanbad 156 Pure Selected Tetulmari, P.O. Sijua Pure Selected Tetulmari Colliery.Company Limited, Sijua 157 West Angarpathra, P.O. KaTrasgarh West Angarpathra Colliery Company Limited, P.O. KaTrasgarh 158 West Chandore. P.O. Sijua West Chandore Colliery Company, P.O. Jharia 159 West Mudidih, P.O. Sijua Waliram Taneja Mines Private Limited, P.O. Sijua, Dhanbad 160 Basudev 'A',P.O. Khas Jeenagora R.P. Jugdutta and Comp;ny, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 161 CenTral Sulunga, P.O. Khas Jeenagora Purushottampur Collieries (Private) Limited, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 162 Golden Jeenagora, P.O. Khas Jeenagora Salunga Collieries (Private) Limited, Anand Bhavan, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 163 Pure Golukdih, P.O. Jharia Pure Golukdih Coal Company, P.O. Jharia 164 Royal Tisra, P.O. Jharia Royal Tisra Colliery Company. P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad: 165 Bergo, P.O. Danro (S.P.) Khudiram Seal, P.O. Danro (S.P.) 166 Chatkam,P.O. Damni (S.P.) H. N. Bhagat, P.O. Barhait (S.P.) 167 Chilgo, P.O. Amra Para (S.P.) Messrs. Paul Brothers, P.O. Jamtara (S.P.) 168 Churi Jilwari, P.O. Godda (S.P.) Fulchand Ram, P.O. Godda (S.P.).Mugma Coalfield (East) 169 East Badjna, P.O. Nirshachatti S. N. Chanda and Brothers, P.O. Nirshachatti 170 East Kapasara, P.O. Mugma Bangaluxmi Coal Company, P.O. Mugma, Dhanbad 171 East Kumardhubi, P.O. Chirkunda Sri Lakshmi Naryan Trust, P.O. Jharia, Dhanbad 172 East Rajpura, P.O. Mugma Rajpura Coal Company, P.O. Mugma 173 East Shampur, P.O. Kumardhubi Oriental Coal Company, P.O. Kumardhubi 174 Edgarcoor (Durgamata), P.O. Chirkunda Durgamata Coal Company, P.O. Chirkunda, Dhanbad 175 Edgarcoor, P.O. Kumardhubi Shrimati Sankarben Patel, P.O. Kumardhubi, Dhanbad 176 Kalimata, P.O. Mugma G. L. Dubey, P.O. Mugma 177 Kapasara, P.O. Mugma Bihar Coal Syndicate Private Limited, P.O. Mugma, Dhanbad 178 Khas Kalimati, P.O. Kumardhubi Khas Kalimati Coal Company, Kumardhubi, Dhanbad 179 Khas Nirsa, P.O. Nirshachati Mahatta Brothers, 19, British India STreet, Calcutta1 180 Khoodia, P.O. Nirshachati Khoodia Coal Company, P.O. Nirshachati.Receiver, Onkarmal Agarwala, P.O. Barakar, Burdwan 181 Merah, P.O. Chirkunda Raghunath Agarwalla, P.O. Chirkunda 182 Navadanga, P.O. Nirshachati K. G. Saiji and Sons, P.O. Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan 183 Nirsa Khas, P.O. Nirshachati Nirsa Khas Colliery (Private) Limited, P.O. Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan 184 Oriental, P.O. Kumardhubi Oriental Coal Company, P.O. Kumardhubi 185 Pure Laikdih, P.O. Nirshachati Pure Laikdih Colliery (Private) Limited, 26A, Fern Road, Calcutta19 186 Pure Mandman, P.O. Mugma East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4, Clive Row, Calcutta1 187 Pure Rajpura, P.O. Kumardhubi Shrimati Sanker Ben Patel, P.O. Kumardhubi, Dhanbad 188 Pure Shampur, P.O. Nirshachati D. Mondal and Company, P.O. Nirshachati 189 Rajpura, P.O. Mugma R. K. Coal Company, Barakar, West Bengal 190 Reliance, P.O. Kumardhubi Reliance Coal Company, P.O. Kumardhubi, Dhanbad 191 Satyanarayan, P.O. Kumardhubi Rurmal Agarwal, P.O. Satyanarayan Colliery Kumardhubi 192 Shampur, P.O. Nirshachati Khas Shampur Coal Company, P.O. Nirshachati 193 Shampur,P.O. Nirshachati The Kamala Coal Company. P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad 194 South Harma, P.O. Mugma Guljarilal Agarwala, P.O. Jharia 195 Sri Durgamata, P.O. Mugma J. N. Gorai and Others, Chirkunda, 196 Sri Gopinathpur, P.O. Nirshachati Shrimati Mahamaya Devi, Nirshachati 197 Sri Lakhmimata, P.O. Chirkunda J. K. Gorai and Company, Mugma 198 Sudarshan Shampur, P.O. Nirshachati K. L. Bhambri and Company, Nirshachati Dhanbad 199 Upper Mehtadih, P.O. Nirshachati East India Coal Company, 4, Clive Row, Calcutta1 200 West Barakar, P.O. Kumardhubi Dinendra Nath Das, P.O. Kumardhubi 201. West Chanch. P.O. Nirshachati. West Chanch Coal Company, P.O. Barakar. 202 West Laikdih, P.O. Mugma. West Laikdih Coal Company, 152, B. K. Paul Avenue, Calcutta5. 203 West Rajpura, P.O. Mugma. Kalyaneswari Coal Company, P.O. Mugma. South 204 Dahibari, P.O. Mugma. Dahibari Coal Company, P.O. Mugma. 205 East Palasia, P.O. Mugma. K. K. Goswami, P.O. Mugma. 206. Jamdahi Basantimata, P.O. Mugma. Jamdohi Coal Company, P.O. Mugma. 207. Palasia, P.O. Mugma. K. K. Goswami, P.O. Mugma. 208 Ramkrishna, P.O. Chirkunda. P. N. Mukherjee, Chirkunda. 209. Sri Raghunathji, P.O. Chirkunda. Sri Raghunathji Coal Company, P.O. Chirkunda. West 210. Badjna, P.O. Nirshachati. Oriental Coal Company Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta1. 211. Chapapur, P.O. Nirshachati. B. N. Dutta and Others, Nirshachati. 212. Jamburya (Selected Jhamburya), P.O. Nirshachati. East Indian Coal Company Limited, 4, Clive Row, Calcutta1. 213. Khas Badjna, P.O. Nirshachati. Western Bengal Coalfields and Administrative Office, P.O. Moira Colliery, Burdwan. 214. Lower Badjna, P.O. Nirshachati. Associated Laikdih Colliery Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. 215. North Badjna, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. North Badjna Coal Company, P.O. Ranaghat, District Nadia. 216. North Laikdih, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. North Laikdih Coal Company, Nirshachati, 22, Strand Road, Calcutta1. 217. Pure Hariajam, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. East Indian Coal Company, 4, Clive Row, Calcutta1. 218. Pure Singhpur, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. Satyapal Kapoor, Kapoor Nivas, Dhanbad. 219. Selected Fatka, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. Srikrishna Colliery Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Kumardhubi, Dhanbad. 220. South Badjna, P.O. Nirshachati, Dhanbad. South Badjna Coal Company, P.O. Nirshachati. North Karanpura Coalfield 221. Churi, P.O. Ray, District Ranchi. United Karanpura Colliery Company (Private) Limited, 91, Stephen House, Calcutta. 222 Dakra Buk Buka, P.O. Khalari. United Karanpura Colliery Company (Private) Limited, Stephen House, Calcutta. 223. Damodar Valley, P.O. Hindegir. B. K. Bhaduri and Sons, 10, Purulia Road, Ranchi. 224. Hindegir, P.O. Hindegir. Hindegir Mining Corporation Limited, Hirapur, Dhanbad. 225. Karanpura Dewarkhand, P.O. Khalari. Karanpura Dewarkhand Colliery Company (Private) Limited.F. 3, Gillanders House, Calcutta. 226. Karkata, P.O. Khalari. Ajit Prasad Singhdeo and Others,82, Stephen House, Calcutta1. 227. Manki, P.O. Ray. National Cement Mines and Industries,82,Stephen House, Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta. 228. Ray, P.O. Ray. N. C. M. I. Limited, 2, Stephen House, Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta. 229. South Karanpura, P.O. Hindegir. Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner's Compound, Ranchi. 230. West Tumang, P.O. Macluskiegunj. Chauhan Brothers, Old Commissioner's Compound, Ranchi. RamgarhHazaribagh Coalfield 231. Mael, P.O. Chitarpur. Rajballav Singh Chitarpur, District Hazaribagh. 232. Rauta, P.O. Ramgarh Cantonment. Receiver, State of Bihar, through Sri S. K. Sinha, I.A.S., O.S.D., Department of Mines and Geology, Government of Bihar, Patna. 233. Suggia, P.O. Chitarpur. Suggia Coal Company, Chitarpur. South Karanpura Coalfield 234. Central Saunda, P.O. Saunda. United Collieries Limited, 5, Royal Exchange Place, Calcutta1. 235. Karanpura, P.O. Patratu. Associated Karanpura Colliery (Private) Limited, .18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1. 236. Khas Karanpura, P.O. Patratu. Khas Karanpura Collieries Limited,71, Ganesh Chandra Avenue, Calcutta. 237. Lapanga, P.O. Bhadaminagar. Hindustan Coal Company, Bhadaminagar, Hazaribagh. 238. Religara, P.O. Religera. The Karanpura Collieries Limited, Chartered Bank Buildings, Calcutta1. 239. Saunda 'D' (Bird's), P.O. Bhurkunda. Karanpura Collieries Limited, Chartered Bank Buildings, Calcutta1. 240. Sirka, P.O. Argada. South Karanpura Coal Company Limited, Chartered Bank Buildings, Calcutta1. 241. Ara, P.O. Kuju. North Ramgarh Colliery Company (Private) Limited, 8, Deodar Street, Calcutta. 242. Hessagara, P.O. Kuju. Hessagara Coal Company, P.O. Kuju. 243. Jharkhand, P.O. Ghatutand. Under dispute. 244. Kedla, P.O. Ghatutand. Under dispute. 245. Kuju, P.O. Kuju. Kuju Collieries Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Kuju. 246. Laiyo, P.O. Daneya. North Bokaro Coal Company, P.O. Danea, Hazaribagh. 247. Model Dhori, P.O. Chainpur. Model Dhori Colliery Company, Hazaribagh.163 248 Morpa, P.O. Kuju. A. K. Roy and R. P. Choudhury, P.O. Kuju. 249 Pindra, P.O. Kuju. Pindra Coal Company, Ramnaryan Jai's Compound, Ranchi. 250. Sarubera, P.O. Kuju. North Rarngarh Coal Company(Private) Limited, 8, Deodar Street, CalCutta19. 251. Semra, P.O. Mandu. B. M. Roy,Burrabazar, Hazaribagh. 252. Toera, P.O. Kuju. M. N. Chatterjee, Kuju,Hazaribagh. 253. Topa, P.O. Kuju.Topa Coal Company, Kuju. Receiver M. H. Chatterjee and S. K. Banerjee, Kuju, Hazaribagh. MADHYA PRADESH, Central India Coalfields 254 Chirimiri, P.O. Chirimiri. Chirimiri Colliery Company (Private) Limited, 18/22, Sheik Memon Street,, Bombay2. 255. New Chirimiri (Ponri Hill), P.O. Chirimiri. Dadabhoy's New Chirimiri N. Ponri Hill Colliery Company Private Limited, Post Box No.85, Nagpur1. 256. North Chirimiri, P.O. Gelhapani. United Collieries Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta. 257. North Jhagrakhand, P.O.Jhagrakhand Colliery. Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private) Limited, 15, Gariahat Road, Calcutta19. 258. Pure Chirimiri, P.O. Chirimiri. K. N. Dhody. 259. Rajnagar, P.O. Rajnagar Colliery. Messrs. Dalchand Bahadur Singh, 15, Gariahat Road, Calcutta19. 260. Ramnagar, P.O. Ramnagar Colliery. Vindhya Collieries (Private) Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1. 261. South Jhagrakhand, P.O. Jhagrakhand Colliery. Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private) Limited,15, Gariahat Road, Calcutta19. 2C2. West Chirimiri, P.O. Chirimiri. Indra Singh and Sons Private Limited, 7, Wellesly Place, Calcutta1. 263. West Jhagrakhand, P.O. West Jhagrakhand Colliery.Jhagrakhand Collieries (Private) Limited, 15, Gariahat Road, Calcutta19.  PenchKanhan Valley Coalfields 264. Ambara, P.O. Junnerdeo. N. H. Ojha and Company (Private) Limited, F3, Gillander House, 8, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1. 265. Barkui, P.O. Parasea. Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta1. 266. Barkuhi West, P.O. Parasea. J. A. Trivedi and Brothers, Post Box No. 1, Balaghat, District Chhindwara. 267. Bhamori. P.O. Parasea. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square, Calcutta1.   164 268. Chandamata, P.O. Parasea. Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta1. 269. Damua, P.O. Damua Colliery, Junnerdeo. Under dispute. 270. Datla West, P.O. Junnerdeo. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square East, Calcutta1. 271. Dhao, P.O. Dhao Colliery. Durga Prosad, Junnerdeo, Chhindwara. 272. East Dongarchickli, P.O. Parasea. Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square, Calcutta1. 273. Eklehra, P.O. Parasea. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square East, Calutta1. 274. Ghorawari, P.O. Ghorawarikhurd. J. Trivedi and Brothers, P.O. Balaghat. 275. Kalichapar, P.O. Kalichapar. Under dispute. 276. Newton Chickli, P.O. Parasea. Newton Chickli Collieries (Private) Limited, P.O. Parasea. 277 North Chandamata, P.O. Parasea. Pench Valley Coal Company Limited, Hongkong House, 31, Dalhousie Square, Calcutta1. 278. Rakhikol, P.O. Rakhikol. S. C. Kambata (Private) Limited, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay20. 279. Rawanwara, P.O. Parasea. Amalgamated Coalfields Limited, P.O. Parasea, Chhindwara. 280. Rawanwara Khas, P.O. Parasea. Oriental Coal Company Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta1. 281. Sial Ghogri, P.O. Junnerdeo. Sial Ghogri Group, Nelson Square, Nagpur. 282. Sukri, P.O. Parasea. The Jamai Majri Coal Company Limited, P.O. Parasea, Chhindwara. Raigarh Coalfield 283. Baroud, P.O. Ghorghoda. P. R. Gupta and Others, P.O. and District Raigarh (M.P.). 284. Domnara, P.O. Kharsia. K. N. Poddar, North Ambaghari Road, Nagpur. Sohagpur and Johilla Coalfield 285. Amlai, P.O. Dhanpuri. Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall Street, Calcutta1. 286. Bhadra, P.O. Kotma. Rewa Mining Company Limited, P.O. Kotma. 287. Birsingpur, P.O. Birsingpur Pali. Johilla Coalfields Limited, P.O. Birsingpur Pali, District Sahdol. 288. Burhar No. 1, P.O. Dhanpuri. Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall Street, Calcutta1. 289. Burhar No. 3, P.O. Dhanpuri. Rewa Coalfields Limited, 4, Bankshall Street, Calcutta1. 290. Kotma, P.O. Kotma Colliery. Associated Cement Company Limited, 121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay20. 291. Nowrazahad, P.O. Nowrazabad. Associated Cement Company Limited, 121, Maharshi Karve Road, Bombay20. 292. Rungta, P.O. Rungta Colliery. Mahabir Prasad Rungta and Partners, F.O. Rungta Colliery, District Shadol. ORISSA  1b Valley Coalfield 293. Hingir Rampur, P.O. Rampur Colliery, District Sambalpur. Hingir Rampur Coal Company Limited, Post Box No. 109, Home Street, Fort, Bombay. 294. Ib River, P.O. Brajrajnagar, District Sambalpur. Chandmal Indrakumar Karnani, 3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta1. 295. Orient,P.O. Brajrajnagar,District Sambalpur. Western Bengal Coalfields Limited. Admn. OfficeMoira Colliery, District Burdwan. MAHARASHTRA - Kamptee Coalfield 296. Kamptee, P.O. Kamptee. Oriental Coal Company Limited, C/o 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta1. Wardha Valley Coalfields 297. Ballarpur, P.O. Ballarpur. Ballarpur Collieries Company, Post Box No. 11, Biseswar House, Lajpat Rai Marg, Nagpur. 298. Chanda Rayatwari, P.O. Chanda. R. B. Seth and Sri Ram Durga Prasad, P.O. Tumsar, District Bhandara. 299. Ghughus, P.O. Maneckpur. Ballarpur Collieries Company Post Box No. 11, Biseswar House, Nagpur. 300. Hindusthan Lalpeth, P.O. Chanda. Perfect Pottery Company Limited, Hanumantal, Jubbalpore (M.P.). 300 Hindusthan Lalpeth, P.O. Chanda. Perfect Pottery Company Limited, Hanumantal, Jubbalpore (M.P.). 301 New Majri,P.O. Shivaji Nagar. Shetia Mining and Manufacturing Corporation, 4, Bakul Bagan Road, Calcutta25. 302 Sasti, P.O. Ballarpur. Ballarpur Collieries Company Limited, Temple Road, Post Box No. 11, NagpurWEST BENGAL Kasta Coalfield 303 Tewari's Beldangakhas, P.O. Churulia Messrs. S. C. Tewari and Others, P.O. Parsundi, District Birbhum 304 Jorekuri,P.O. Churulia Jorekuri Coal Company Private Limited, Post Box No. 55, Dhanbad 305 Kasta Bengal, P.O. Churulia Kasta Coalfields Limited. 3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta1 306 Palasthali. P.O. Churulia Palasthali Coal Concern(Private) Limited, 53, Mechua Bazar Road, Chinsura, District Hooghly 307 Parjapur, P.O. Kalipahari Sri Shewsiamal Agarwala, P.O. Saithia, District Birbhum 166 Raneegunj Coalfield Bishergarh 308 Barmondia 3 and 4 Pits, P.O. Kanayapur New Beerbhoom Coal Company Limited, . 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 309 Bhamuria, P.O. Bhamuria, District Purulia Naturia Coal Company Private Limited, P.O. Bhamuria, District Purulia 310 Burradhemo, P.O. Sitarampur, West Bengal North Dhemo Coal Company Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta1 311 Chinakuri No. 1 and 2 Pits, P.O. Sunderchak Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 312 Chinakuri No. 3 Pit, P.O. Sunderchak, Burdwan Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta 313 Deoli (Mondal's) P.O. Dishergarh B. N. Mondal and Company, P.O. Dishergarh, District Burdwan 314 Dhemo Main, P.O. Sitarampur, West Bengal Dhemo Main Collieries and Industries Limited, 36, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta16 315 Hirakhun, P.O. Neturiya Durga Devi Singhania, P.O. Neturiya, District Purulia, West Bengal 316 Manoharbahl. P.O. Asansol Chandramal Indrakumar (Private) Limited, 3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta1 317 Parhelia, P.O. Neturiya Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 318 Patmohana, P.O. Patmohana (Sitarampur) Messrs. Patmohana and Bharat Chak Collieries Private Limited, P.O. Sitarampur, District Burdwan 319 Poidih, P.O. Sunderchak Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 320 Ramjibanpur Nag's, P.O. Sitarampur Ramjibanpur Coal Company Limited, 4. Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta19 321 Ranipur, P.O. Dishergarh, Burdwan Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta16 322 Sanctoria, P.O. Dishergarh Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 323 Seetalpur, P.O. Dishergarh Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 324 Sodepur 9 and 10 Pits, P.O. Sunderchak Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 325 South Joyramdanga, P.O. Asansol Dishergarh Coal Company Limited, 3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta1 Kajora 326 Babisole, P.O. Ondal Bharat Mining Corporation Limited, 91. Stephen House, 5th Floor, Calcutta1 327 Belbaid, P.O. Toposi Belbaid Collieries Limited, P.O. Raneegunj, Burdwan 328 Chowki Danga, P.O. Toposi Birbhum Mining (Private) Limited, 7, Monoharpukur Road, Calcutta 329 East Jambad, P.O. Kajoragram Amalgamated Jambad Syndicate (Private) Limited,33, Biplabi Rashbehari Bose Road, Calcutta1 330 East Kajora, P.O. Ondal Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing Company limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 331 Jambad Selected, P.O. Kajoragram Devji Gelabhai and Others, P.O. Kajoragram, Burdwan 332 Jaipuria Kajora, P.O. Ondal Swadeshi Mining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 333 Mukherjee Jote Janaki, P.O. ToposiC. R. Mukherjee, Netaji Subhas Road, Raneegunj, Burdwan 334 Joto Janaki Khas, P.O. Toposi Banerjee Sanatan, P.O. Toposi, Burdwan 335 Kajora and Western Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram K. C. Palchoudhury, P.O. Kajoragram, Burdwan 336 Prosonno Dutta's Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram P. C. Dutta and Sons, 71A, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 337 Kajora (Guzdar), P.O. Kajoragram The Guzdar Kajora Coal Mines Limited, P.O. Kajoragram 338 Kajora Selected, P.O. Ranigunj Kajora Selected Colliery Company Limited 135, Canning Street, Calcutta1 339 Khas Kajora Coal Company Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 340 Khas Searsole, P.O. Searsole Rajbari Kumar K. N. Maliah, P.O. Searsole Rajbari 341 Krishnanagar, P.O. Toposi Parasia Collieries Limited, 25, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 342 Kunustoria, P.O. Toposi Bengal Coal Comany Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 343 Lachipur, P.O. Kajoragram Katras Jhareeah Coal Company, 8, Clive Row. Calcutta1 344 Lower Kenda, P.O. Kajoragram Khas Kenda Colliery (Private) Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta1 345 Madhujore, P.O. Kajoragram Madhujore Coal Company Private Limited, 135. Canning Street, Calcutta1 346 Mahabir, P.O. Ranigunj Mahabir Collieries Limited,173; Mahatma Gandhi Road, Calcutta 347 Moira, P.O. Moira Colliery, Ondal Western Bengal Coalfields Limited,9/1, R.' N. Mukherjee Road,  Calcutta1 343 New Kenda, P.O. Toposi New Birbhum Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1 349 North Jambad, P.O. Kajoragram North Jambad Coal Company, P.O. Kajoragram, Burdwan 350 North Searsole, P.O. Searsole Rajbair Searsole Mining Industries (Private) Limited, P.O. Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan 351 Parascole, P.O. Kajoragram Parascole Coal Company, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 352 Parasia, P.O. Kajoragram Parasia Collieries Company, 25, Netaji Subhas Road, ' Calcutta1 353 Proper Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram Sri Nimbarak, Proper Kajora Coal Company (Private) Limited,135, Biplabi Rashbehari Bose Road, Calcutta1 354 Pure Bansra, P.O. Ranigunj Pure Kustore Colliery Company Limited, 8, Lyons Range, Calcutta1 355 Pure Jambad, P.O. Kajoragram Pure Jambad Collieries (Private) Limited,135, Canning Street, Calcutta1 356 Pure Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram East Barakar Coal Company (Private) Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 357 Pure Kenda, P.O. Ukhra Pure Kenda Coal Company, P.O. Ukhra, Burdwan 353 Pure Searsole,P.O. Searsole Rajbari Kumari Rani II. Devi,P.O. Searsole Rajbari, Burdwan 359 Real Jambad. P.O. Bahula Oriental Coal Company (Private) Limited, 25, Brabourne Road, Calcutta1 360 Real Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram Real Kajora Colliery Trust,.. 24, Strand Road, Calcutta1 361 Searsole, P.O. Ranigunj Searsole Coal Company Limited,22, Chittaranjan Avenue Calcutta13 362 Singaran, P.O. Toposi Singaran Coal Syndicate Limited, 237/P/1A, Maniktalla Main Road, Calcutta 363 Sitaldasji Slected, P.O. Searsole Rajbari Sitaldasji Selected Colliery, P.O. Searsole Rajbari, District Burdwan 364 South Jambad, P.O. Kajoragram South Jambad Coal Company (Private)Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta1 365 South Parasia, P.O. Kajoragram South Parasia Collieries (Private) Limited, 25, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 366 Toposi, P.O. Toposi Associated Nandi Collieries Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 367 Western Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram Western Kajora Collieries (Private) Limited. 178, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Calcutta.Pandaveswar 368 Ajoy Bank, P.O. Nutandanga Ajoy Coal Company (Private) Limited, 34A, Sardar Sankar Road, Calcutta29 369 Bankola, P.O. Ukhra Burrakar Coal Company Limited, Chartered Bank Buildings, Calcutta1 370 Central and Lower Jambad, P.O. Bahula East Bahula Collieries Company (Private) Limited. 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1 371 Chora Pits, (1. Chora10 pit P.O. Bahula. 2. Chora 7 and 9 pits) Chora Coal Company, 3, Synagogue Street, Calcutta1 372 Darula, P.O. Pandaveswar East Satgram Coal Company Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta 1 373 East Sitalpur, P.O. Ukhra East Barrakar Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Ukhra 374 Goenka Kajora, P.O. Kajoragram Goenka Coal Company, S. B. Goenka, P.O. Ukhra, District Burdwan 375 Gurugopinath, P.O. Ukhra Gnananda Industries (Private) Limited, P.O. Ukhra, District Burdwan 376 Haripur, P.O. Bahula Selected Earabani Coal Company Private Limited, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta 1 377 Jambad Kajora. P.O. Siduli Jambad Kajora Colliery Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Siduli, District Burdwan 378 Kottadih, P.O.' Kottadih Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta 379 Kumardihi, P.O. Ukhra Kumardihi Coal Company, P.O. Ukhra, District Burdwan 380. Kumarkhala, P.O. Bahula. Kumarkhala Collieries Company P.O. Bahula. 381. Nag's Kajora Jambad, P.O. Ukhra. Shrimati Ashalata Nag and Others, 4, Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta. 382. North Chora, P.O. Bahula. Sri B. M. Dutta, North Chora Colliery Company, P.O. Bahula, District Burdwan. 383. Pansuli, P.O. Nutandanga. Krishna Valley Selected Coal Company, P.O. Nutandanga. 384. Pure Samla, P.O. Nutandanga. Pure Samla Coal Company (Private) Limited, Sun Distributors and Mining Company Limited, 14, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta-1. 385. Pure Sitalpur, P.O. Ukhra. Pure Sitalpur Coal Concern Limited, 23 B, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. 386. Samla Baidyanathpur, P.O. Pandaveswar. Ashoke Minerals and Company, P.O. Pandaveswar, District Burdwan. 387. Samla Chhattrisanda, P.O. Pandaveswar. Swedeshi Mining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta 1. 388. Samla Dalurband, P.O. Pandaveswar. Samla Dalurband Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Jharia, District Dhanbad. 389. Samla Manderbani, P.O. Pandaveswar. Western Bengal Coalfields Limited, 9/1. R. N. Mukherjee Road, Calcutta 1. 390. Samla Kendra, P.O. Pandaveswar. Swedeshi Mining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. 391. Samla Pandaveswar, P.O. Pandaveswar. Swedeshi Alining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. 392. Samla Ramnagar, P.O. Pandaveswar. Swedeshi Mining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 33, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. 393. Sarpi Kajora, P.O. Ukhra. Sarpi Kajora Coal Mines (Private) Limited, 33, Canning Street, Calcutta 1. 394. Selected Kajora Jambad. P.O. Bahula. Selected Kajora Jambad Collieries, P.O. Ukhra. 395. Selected Samla, P.O. Pandaveswar. Selected Dahurband Coal Company (Private) Limited, 137, Cotton Street, Calcutta 7. 396. Siduli, P.O. Ukhra. Siduli Colliery Company, P.O. Ukhra, District Burdwan. 397. Sitalpur, P.O. Siduli. Sitalpur Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Siduli, District Burdwan. 398. South Adjai, P.O. Gogla. Gopal Collieries Limited, 174, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Calcutta. 399. Sunkarpur, P.O. Ukhra. Ukhra Minerals (Private) Limited, P.O. Ukhra, District Burdwan. 400. Victory Group, P.O. Nutandanga. Coal Products (Private) Limited, 3, Bankshall Street, Calcutta1. 401. Visheshari Khandra, P.O. Ukhra. N. H. Ojha and Company, Gillanders House, 18, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta. Satgram 402. Ardhagram Khas, P.O. Ardhagram. Messrs. R. K. Agarwalla and Sons (Private) Limited Lalbazar, P.O. Jharia, District Dhanbad. 171 403. Central Satgram, P.O. Jaykaynagar. Harsookdas Baikissendas, 22, Burtolla Street, Calcutta7. 404. Chalbalpur, P.O. Jaykaynagar. K. L. Selected Coal Concern, P.O. Jaykaynagar. 405. Chapui Khas, P.O. Kalapahari. Sahu Minerals Properties Limited, A3, Prithviraj Road, Jaipur. 406. Damoda, P.O. Ranigunj. Damodar Coal Company Private Limited, P.O.Ranigunj, District Burdwan. 407. East Jamehari, P.O. Ranigunj. Harsookdas Balkissendas,22, Burtolla Street, Calcutta7. 408. East Nimcha, P.O. Jaykaynagar. East Laikdih Colliery Company Limited, P.O. Jaykaynagar, District Burdwan. 409. East Satgram, P.O. Jaykaynagar. East Satgram Coal Company (Private) Limited, 135, Canning Street, Calcutta1. 410. Jaykaynagar, P.O. Jaykaynagar. Aluminium Corporation of India Limited, P.O. Jaykaynagar, District Burdwan. 411. Khas Chalbalpur, P.O. Jaykaynagar. Rani H. Devi and Rani K. Devi, Searsole Rajbari, District Burdwan, West Bengal. 412. Mithapur, P.O. Searsole Rajbari. Nirmal Kumar Geaulechha, 7/2, Babulal Lane, Calcutta7. 413. Modern Satgram, P.O. Ranigunj. West Bengal Mining Company, P.O. Ranigunj. 414. New Jameharikhas, P.O. Jaykaynagar. New Jameharikhas Colliery (Private) Limited, P.O. Searsole Rajbari, District Burdwan. 415. New Satgram, P.O. Devehandnagar. Shethia Mining and Manufacturing Company Limited, 4, Bakul Bagan Road, "Monoharmahal" Calcutta25. 416. Nimcha, P.O. Ranigunj. Nimcha Coal Company (Private) Limited, 1/1, Rowland Road, Calcutta20. 417. North Brook, P.O. Jaykaynagar. Bimal Kanti Roy, P.O. Jaykaynagar. 418. Ratibati, P.O. Kalipahari. West Bengal Mining Company, P.O.Kalipahari, District Burdwan. 419. Satgram (Nageswar), P.O. Searsole Rajbari. Nageswar Coal Company ,Kargali Colliery, P.O. Bermao, District Hazaribagh. 420. Selected Searsole, P.O. Ranigunj. Puranmal, Jagannath, P.O. Ranigunj. 421. Sri Amritnagar Selected, P.O. Ranigunj. Sriniwas and Sons, Ranigunj. Sripur 422. Adjoy Second, Charanpur. (Merged with Girimint Colliery since 1/6/1970.) Bengal Coal Company Limited, 0. Clive Row, Calcutta1. 423. Banksimulia, 7 and 8 Pits, P.O. Charanpur. Bengal Coal Company Limited, 3,Clive Row, Calcutta1. 424. Bhanora, P.O. Charanpur. Equitable Coal Company Limited,1/2, Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta16. 425. Bhanora South, P.O. Charanpur. (Merged with Bhanora Colliery.)Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta16. 426. Bright's. Rana, P.O. Charanpur. D. Bright and Company (Private) Limited. P.O. Charanpur, District Burdwan. 427. Central Jamuria, P.O. Nandi. B. D.Gorach, Nuruddin Road, P.O. Asansol, District Burdwan. 428. Damra, P.O.Kalipahari. Katras Jherriah Coal Company, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1. 429. East Baraboni, P.O. Charanpur. East Baraboni Coal Company (Private)Limited, 4.Mandevilla Gardens, Calcutta19. 430. East Jamuria, P.O. Toposi. East Jamuria Coal Company;(Private) Limited, P.O. Toposi, District Burdwan. 431. Ghusick, P.O. Kalipahari. Coal and Mineral Syndicate;36, Strand Road, Calcutta1. 432. Ghusick, P.O. Kalipahari. Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, P.O. Kalipahari, District Burdwan. 433. Girimint, P.O. Charanpur. Bengal Coal Company Limited, 8,Clave Row,Calcutta 1 434. Jamuria A and B Pits, P.O. Nandi. Equitable Coal Company Limited, 1/2, Lord Sinha Road, Calcutta16. 435. Kalipahari, P.O. Kalipahari. Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, P.O. Kalipahari, District Burdwan. 436. Kuardih.P.O. Kalipahari. Kuardih Coal Company (Private) Limited, 41, Chowringhee Road, Calcutta16. 437. Muslia.P.O. Kalipahari. Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, P.O. Kalipahari, District Burdwan. 438. New Ghusick, Kalipahari. West Ghusick Coal Company Limited,10, Netaji Subhas Road, Calcutta1. 439. North Charanpur, P.O. Charanpur. B. N. Ganguly, Ushagram, P.O.Asansol, Burdwan. 440. North Ghusick, P.O. Majihara. Shri Ganesh Coal Company, P.O. Majihara, Burdwan. 441. Radhamadhabpur, P.O. Kalipahari. Ghusick and Muslia Collieries Limited, P.O. Kalipahari, Burdwan 442. Rana No. 6 Pit, P.O. Kalipahari. Lodna Colliery Company(1920) Limited, 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta1. 443. Socbpore, P.O. Charanpur. Katras Jharria Coal Company Limited, 8, Clive Row, Calcutta1. 444. Sripur Incline, P.O. Kalipahari. Lodna Colliery Company (1920)Limited,6 Lyons Range, Calcutta1. 445. Sripur,1, 2 and 3 Pits, Kalipahari. Lodna Colliery Company (1920)Limited, 6 Lyons Range, Calcutta1. 446. Sripur,4, 5 and 6 Pits, Kalipahari. Lodna Colliery Company (1920) Limited 6, Lyons Range, Calcutta1. Salanpur 447. Benodi Katta, P.O. Samdi. Jiwanlall Collieries Private Limited,' P.O. Samdi. 448. Bhagran, P.O. Salanpur. The South Bhagran Coal Company, P.O. Samdi, Burdwan. 449. BonJemihari, P.O.Salanpur. BonJemihari Anthracite Coal Company, P.O.Salanpur, Burdwan. 450. Chatoria, P.O. Salanpur. East Chaptoria Coal Company Private Limited, 22, Canning Street, Calcutta1. 451. Dabor, P.O. Somdi. H. Roy and T. Roy, Dabor Colliery Private Limited. P.O. Samdi, Burdwan. 452. Damagoria Amdiha, P.O. Somdi. Damagoria Amdiha, P.O. Salanpur. 453. Desharmohan, P.O. Churulia. C. L. Poddar and Others, P.O. Churulia. 454. East Ramnagar, P.O. Salanpur. D.R.Sabhlok through constituted Attorney, B. L. Satnalika, P.O. Salanpur, Burdwan. 455. Gourangdih, P.O. Panuria. Gourangdih Colliery Company Limited, P.O. Panuria, District Burdwan. 456. Gourangdih Begunia, P.O. Jamgram. Jamgram Coal Company Private Limited, P.O. Jamgram, District Burdwan. 457. Khas Baraboni, P.O. Raghunath Chak. A. K. Collieries Company, 34A, Sardar Sankar Road, Calcutta29. 458. Khas Mohanpur, P.O.Samdi. Late Ramgoti Hazra, P.O. Kajoragram,. Burdwan. 459. Mohanpur, P.O. Samdi. Messrs S. N. Chaudhuri and Company, Kartar Niwas,    Burnpur Road, P.O. Asansol. 460. New Damagoria, P.O. Salanpur. New Damagoria Coal Company (Private) Limited, P.O. Salanpur. Burdwan. 461. North East Salanpur, P.O. Samdi. A. R. Acharyya, P.O. Heamatpur, Burdwan. 462. North West Salanpur, P.O. Samdi. A. N. Mukherjee and Others, P.O. Samdi. Burdwan. 403. Samdi Sangramgarh, P.O. Samdi. B. Hazra and Company, P.O. Samdi. 464. West Barboni, P.O. Raghunath Chak. Modern Coal Trading Company(Private) Limited, P.O.Raghunath Chak, Burdwan. 
