Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called theConstitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992. (2) It shall come into force on 1 such date as the CentralGovernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 24-4-1993 (S.O. 267(E), dated 24-4-1993)
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> After Part VIII of the Constitution ,the following Part shall be inserted, namely:- `PART IX THE PANCHAYATS243. Definitions:- In this Part, unless the context otherwiserequires,:- (a) "district" means a district in a State; (b) "Gram Sabha" means a body consisting of persons registered inthe electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area ofPanchayat at the village level; (c) "Intermediate level" means a level between the village anddistrict levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification to be the intermediate level for the purposes of thisPart; (d) "Panchayat" means an institution (by whatever name called) ofself-government constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas; (e) "Panchayat area" means the territorial area of a Panchayat; (f) "population" means the population as ascertained at the lastpreceding census of which the relevant figures have been published; (g) "village" means a village specified by the Governor by publicnotification to be a village for the purposes of this Part andincludes a group of villages so specified.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> Article 243A - Gram Sabha A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> Article 243B - Constitution of Panchayats (1) There shall be constituted inevery State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and districtlevels in accordance with the provisions of this Part. (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the in-termediate level may not be constituted in a State having a populationnot exceeding twenty lakhs.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 5--> Article 243C - Composition of Panchayats (1) Subject to the provisions ofthis Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisionswith respect to the composition of Pancayats: Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial areaof a Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayatto be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the samethroughout the State. (2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen bydirect election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat areaand; for this purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided intoterritorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between thepopulation of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to itshall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayatarea. (3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the re-presentation- (a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in thePanchayats at the intermediate level or, in the case of a State nothaving Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Pancayats at thedistrict level; (b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level,in the Panchayats at the district level; (c) of the members of the House of the People and the members of theLegislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies whichcomprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than thevillage level, in such Panchayat; (d) of the members of the Council of States and the members of theLegislative Council of the State, where they are registered aselectors within:- (i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at theintermediate level; (ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at thedistrict level. (4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayatwhether or not chosen by direct election from territorialconstituencies in the Panchayat area shall have the right to vote inthe meetings of the Panchayats. (5) The Chairperson of - (a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manneras the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and (b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall beelected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 6--> Article 243D - Reservation of seats (1) Seats shall be reserved for- (a) the Scheduled Castes; and (b) the Scheduled Tribes, in every Panchayat and the number of seats of reserved shall bear, asnearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats tobe filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population ofthe Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribesin that Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area andsuch seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies ina Panchayat. (2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reservedunder clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to theScheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes. (3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reservedfor women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes)of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in everyPanchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allottedby rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat. (4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the villageor any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, theScheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of aState may, by law, provide: Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for theScheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at eachlevel in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the sameproportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats ateach level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State orof the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population ofthe State: Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number ofoffices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall bereserved for women: Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clauseshall be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level. (5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and thereservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation forwomen) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expirationof the period specified in article 334. (6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State frommaking any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat oroffices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour ofbackward class of citizens.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 7--> Article 243E - Duration of Panchayats, etc (1) Every Panchayat, unlesssooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shallcontinue for five years from the date appointed for its first meetingand no longer. (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have theeffect of causing dissolution of a Panchayat at any level, which isfunctioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration ofits duration specified in clause (1). (3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed- (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date ofits dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which thedissolved Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, itshall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause forconstituting the Panchayat for such period. (4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat beforethe expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainderof the period for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continuedunder clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 8--> Article 243F - Disqualifications for membership (1) A person shall bedisqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of aPanchayat- (a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being inforce for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the Stateconcerned: Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he isless than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age oftwenty-one years; (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by theLegislature of the State. (2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat hasbecome subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause(1), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authorityand in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 9--> Article 243G - Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats Subjectto the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a Statemay, by law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority asmay be necessary to enable them to function as institutions ofself-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolutionof powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriatelevel, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, withrespect to- (a) the preparation of plans for economic development and socialjustice; (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and socialjustice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to thematters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 10--> Article 243H - Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of the Panchayats TheLegislature of a State may, by law,:- (a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subjectto such limits; (b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviedand collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject tosuch conditions and limits; (c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from theConsolidated Fund of the State; and (d) provide for Constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneysreceived, respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also forthe withdrawal of such moneys therefrom, as may be specified in the law.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 11--> Article 243-I - Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial position (1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as may be within one year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifthyear, constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial positionof the Panchayats and to make recommendations to the Governor as to- (a) the principles which should govern- (i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the netproceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State,which may be divided between them under this Part and the allocationbetween the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares ofsuch proceeds; (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which maybe assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayat; (iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fundof the State; (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of thePanchayats; (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by theGovernor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for thecomposition of the commission, the qualifications which shall berequisite for appointment as members thereof and the manner in whichthey shall be selected. (3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have suchpowers in the performance of their functions as the Legislature of theState may, by law, confer on them. (4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by theCommission under this article together with an explanatory memorandumas to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature ofthe State.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 12--> Article 243J - Audit of accounts of Panchayats The Legislature of a Statemay, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance ofaccounts by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 13--> Article 243K - Elections to the Panchayats (1) The superintendence, directionand control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conductof, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a StateElection Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to beappointed by the Governor. (2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of aState, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the StateElection Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule de-termine: Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removedfrom his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as aJudge of a High Court and the conditions of service of the State Elec-tion Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after hisappointment. (3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the StateElection Commission, make available to the State Election Commissionsuch staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions con-ferred on the State Election Commission by clause (1). (4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature ofa State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Panchayats.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 14--> Article 243L - Application to Union territories The provisions of this Partshall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their applicationto a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governorof a State were references to the Administrator of the Union territoryappointed under article 239 and references to the Legislature or theLegislative Assembly of a State were references, in relation to aUnion territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that LegislativeAssembly: Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct thatthe provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or partthereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specifyin the notification.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 15--> Article 243M - Part not to apply to certain areas (1) Nothing in this Partshall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and thetribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244. (2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to- (a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram; (b) the Hill Areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councilsexist under any law for the time being in force. (3) Nothing in this Part:- (a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall apply to thehill areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengalfor which Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for thetime being in force; (b) shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of theDarjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under such law. (4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,- (a) the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause(2) may, by law, extend this Part to that State, except the areas, ifany, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of thatState passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the totalmembership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirdsof the members of that House present and voting; (b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to theScheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subjectto such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law,and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of thisConstitution for the purposes of article 368.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 16--> Article 243N - Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats Notwithstandinganything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to Panchayatsin force in a State immediately before the commencement of theConstitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which isinconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be inforce until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or othercompetent authority or until the expiration of one year from suchcommencement, whichever is earlier: Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before suchcommencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration,unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by theLegislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having aLegislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 17--> Article 243-O - Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,- (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation ofconstituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question in any court; (b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.'. In the Constitution, after sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shall beinserted, namely:- "(bb) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a Stateto supplement the resources of the Panchayats in the State on thebasis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of theState;".
Constitution (Seventy-Third Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 18-->  In the Constitution, the following Schedule shall be added, namely:- "ELEVENTH SCHEDULE (Article 243G) 1. Agriculture, including agricultural extension. 2. Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, landconsolidation and soil conservation. 3. Minor irrigation, water management and watershed development. 4. Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry. 5. Fisheries. 6. Social forestry and farm forestry. 7. Minor forest produce. 8. Small scale industries, including food processing industries. 9. Khadi, village and cottage industries. 10. Rural housing. 11. Drinking water. 12. Fuel and fodder. 13. Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of communication. 14. Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity. 15. Non-conventional energy sources. 16. Poverty alleviation programme. 17. Education, including primary and secondary schools. 18. Technical training and vocational education. 19. Adult and non-formal education. 20. Libraries. 21. Cultural activities. 22. Markets and fairs. 23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries. 24. Family welfare. 25. Women and child development. 26. Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded. 27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. 28. Public distribution system. 29. Maintenance of community assets.". 
