Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Constitution of India. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962.
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 2--> In article 81 of the Constitution , in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), for the words "twenty members", the words "twenty-five members" shall be substituted.
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 3--> In the First Schedule to the Constitution , under the heading "II. THE UNION TERRITORIES", after entry 8, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:- "9. Pondicherry The territories which immediately before the sixteenth day of August, 1962, were comprised in the French Establishments in India known as Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam.".
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 4--> After article 239 of the Constitution , the following article shall be inserted, namely:- "239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or bothfor certain Union territories.-(1) Parliament may by law create forany of the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura,Goa, Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry:- (a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, tofunction as a Legislature for the Union territory, or (b) a Council of Ministers,or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, asmay be specified in the law. (2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemedto be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article368 notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or hasthe effect of amending this Constitution.".
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 5--> In article 240 of the Constitution , in clause (1),:- 1 (a) after entry (d), the following entry shall be inserted, namely:- "(e) Pondicherry:"; (b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:- "Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function as a Legislature for the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu or Pondicherry, the President shall not make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the Legislature.". clause (a) of section 5 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of August, 1962.
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 6--> In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution , in the Table,:- (a) after entry 20, the entry "21. Pondicherry ........1" shall be inserted; (b) for the figures "225", the figures "226" shall be substituted.
Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962_Section 7--> Section 3 and clause (a) of section 5 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of August, 1962. 
