Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Constitution of India.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called theConstitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956. (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of November, 1956.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 2--> (1) In article 1 of the Constitution ,- (a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted,namely:- "(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified inthe First Schedule."; and (b) in clause (3), for sub-clause (b), the following sub-clause shallbe substituted, namely:- "(b) the Union territories specified in the First Schedule; and". (2) For the First Schedule to the Constitution as amended by the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 , and the Bihar and West Bengal(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 , the following Schedule shall besubstituted, namely:- I. THE STATES Name Territories 1. Andhra Pradesh..... The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 and the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 2. Assam..............The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal Areas, but excluding the territories specified in the Schedule to the Assam (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 . 3. Bihar.............. The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province, but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 . 4. Bombay............ The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 8 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 5. Kerala ...........The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 5 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 6. Madhya Pradesh....The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 7. Madras............ The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Madras or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territories specified in section 4 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 , but excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 and sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 and the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 8. Mysore............ The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 9. Orissa............ The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province. 10. Punjab........... The territories specified in section 11 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 11. Rajasthan........ The territories specified in section 10 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 . 12. Uttar Pradesh.. The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province known as the United Provinces or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province. 13. West Bengal..... The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were either comprised in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 , and also the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 . 14. Jammu and Kashmir ........ The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Indian State of Jammu and Kashmir. II. THE UNION TERRITORIES Name Extent 1. Delhi............. The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the Chief Commissioner's Province of Delhi. 2. HimachalPradesh ...........The territories which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were being administered as if they were Chief Com- missioner's Provinces under the names of Himachal Pradesh and Bilaspur. 3. Manipur............ The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Com- missioner's Province under the name of Manipur. 4. Tripura............The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was being administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner's Province under the name of Tripura. 5. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands.........The territory which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution was compri- sed in the Chief Commissioner's Province of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 6. The Laccadive, Amindivi Islands...........The territory specified in section 6 of the Minicoy and States Reorganisation Act, 1956 .".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 3--> (1) In article 80 ofthe Constitution ,- (a) in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), after the word "States", thewords "and of the Union territories" shall be added; (b) in clause (2), after the words "of the States", the words "and ofthe Union territories" shall be inserted; (c) in clause (4), the words and letters "specified in Part A or PartB of the First Schedule" shall be omitted; and (d) in clause (5), for the words and letter "States specified in Partof the First Schedule", the words "Union territories" shall besubstituted. (2) For the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution as amended by the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 , and the Bihar and West Bengal(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 , the following Schedule shall besubstituted, namely:- "FOURTH SCHEDULE Articles 4(1) and 80(2) ALLOCATION OF SEATS IN THE COUNCIL OF STATES To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of thefollowing table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specifiedin the second column thereof opposite to that State or that Unionterritory, as the case may be. TABLE 1.Andhra Pradesh 18 2. Assam 7 3. Bihar. 22 4. Bombay 27 5. Kerala 9 6. Madhya Pradesh. 16 7. Madras 17 8. Mysore 12 9. Orissa 10 10. Punjab 11 11. Rajasthan 10 12. Uttar Pradesh 34 13. West Bengal 16 14. Jammu and Kashmir 4 15. Delhi 3 17. Himachal Pradesh 2 18. Manipur 1 18. Tripura 1 Total 220"
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 4--> For articles81 and 82 of the Constitution , the following articles shall besubstituted, namely:- "81. Composition of the House of the People.-(1) Subject to theprovisions of article 331, the House of the People shall consist of- (a) not more than five hundred members chosen by direct election fromterritorial constituencies in the States, and (b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories,chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide. (2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),- (a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in theHouse of the People in such manner that the ratio between that numberand the population of the State is, so far as practicable, the samefor all States; and (b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies insuch manner that the ratio between the population of each constitu-ency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable,the same throughout the State. (3) In this article, the expression "population" means the populationas ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevantfigures have been published. 82.Readjustment after each census - Upon the completion of eachcensus, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to theStates and the division of each State into territorial constituenciesshall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as Parliamentmay by law determine: Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in theHouse of the People until the dissolution of the then existingHouse.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 5--> In article 131 of the Constitution , forthe proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:- "Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a disputearising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad orother similar instrument which, having been entered into or executedbefore the commencement of this Constitution , continues in operationafter such commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdictionshall not extend to such a dispute.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 6--> To article 153 of the Constitution , thefollowing proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the appointmentof the same person as Governor for two or more States.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 7--> In article 158 of the Constitution ,after clause (3), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or moreStates, the emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall beallocated among the States in such proportion as the President may byorder determine.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 8--> (1) in clause (1) of article 168 of the Constitution , in sub-clause (a), after the word "Madras", the word"Mysore" shall be inserted. (2) In the said sub-clause, as from such date as the President may, bypublic notification, appoint, after the word "Bombay", the words"Madhya Pradesh" shall be inserted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 9--> For article 170 ofthe Constitution , the following article shall be subsituted, namely:- "170. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.-(1) Subject to theprovisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of each Stateshall consist of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty,members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies inthe State. (2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided intoterritorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between thepopulation of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to itshall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State. Explanation.-In this clause, the expression "population" means thepopulation as ascertained at the last preceding census of which therelevant figures have been published. (3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats inthe Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each Stateinto territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authorityand in such manner as Parliament may by law determine: Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in theLegislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existingAssembly.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 10--> In clause (1) of article 171 of the Constitution , for the word "one-fourth", the word "one-third" shall besubstituted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 11--> In article 216 of the Constitution , theproviso shall be omitted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 12--> In article 217 of the Constitution , inclause (1), for the words "shall hold office until he attains the ageof sixty years", the following words and figures shall be substituted,namely:- "shall hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, asprovided in article 224, and in any other case, until he attains theage of sixty years".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 13--> For article 220 ofthe Constitution , the following article shall be substituted, namely:- "220. Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.-Noperson who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has heldoffice as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in anycourt or before any authority in India except the Supreme Court andthe other High Courts. Explanation.-In this article, the expression "High Court" does notinclude a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the FirstSchedule as it existed before the commencement of the Constitution(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 14--> In article 222 of the Constitution ,- (a) in clause (1), the words "within the territory of India" shall beomitted; and (b) clause (2) shall be omitted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 15--> For article 224 ofthe Constitution , the following article shall be substituted, namely:- "224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.-(1) If by reasonof any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reasonof arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that thenumber of the Judges of that Court should be for the time beingincreased, the President may appoint duly qualified persons to beadditional Judges of the Court for such period not exceeding two yearsas he may specify. (2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is byreason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the dutiesof his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, thePresident may appoint a duly qualified person to act as a Judge ofthat Court until the permanent Judge has resumed his duties. (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a HighCourt shall hold office after attaining the age of sixty years.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 16--> Forarticles 230, 231 and 232 of articles the Constitution , the followingshall be substituted, namely:- "230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.-(1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court to,or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory. (2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relationto a Union territory,- (a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering theLegislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish thatjurisdiction; and (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation toany rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory,be construed as a reference to the President. 231.Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions ofthis Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High Court fortwo or more States or for two or more States and a Union territory. (2) In relation to any such High Court,- (a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall,be construed as a reference to the Governors of all the States inrelation to which the High Court exercises jurisdiction; (b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation toany rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts, be construed as areference to the Governor of the State in which the subordinate courtsare situate; and (c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall beconstrued as a reference to the State in which the High Court has itsprincipal seat: Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, thereferences in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public ServiceCommission,. Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall beconstrued respectively as references to the President, Union PublicService Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund of India.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 17--> In Part VIII of the Constitution ,- (a) for the heading "THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE", theheading "THE UNION TERRITORIES" shall be substituted; and (b) for articles 239 and 240, the following articles shall besubstituted namely:- "239. Administration of Union territories.-(1) Save as otherwiseprovided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall beadministered by the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit,through an administrator to be appointed by him with such designa-tion as he may specify. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President mayappoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoiningUnion territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shallexercise his functions as such administrator independently of hisCouncil of Ministers. 240. Power of President to make regulations for certain Unionterritories.- (1) The President may make regulations for the peace,progress and good government of the Union territory of- (a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; (b) the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands. (2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made byParliament or any existing law which is for the time being ap-plicable to the Union territory and, when promulgated by thePresident, shall have the same force and effect as an Act ofParliament which applies to that territory.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 18--> After article 258 of the Constitution , the following article shall be inserted, namely:- "258A Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.-Not-withstanding anything in this Constitution , the Governor of a Statemay, with the consent of the Government of India, entrust eitherconditionally or unconditionally to that Government or to its officersfunctions in relation to any matter to which the executive power ofthe State extends.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 19--> After article 290 of the Constitution , the following article shall be inserted, namely:- "290A. Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.-A sum of forty-sixlakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of,the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the Travan-core Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousandrupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund ofthe State of Madras every year to the Devaswom Fund established inthat State for the maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in theterritories transferred to that State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-Cochin.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 20--> For article 298 ofthe Constitution , the following article shall be substituted, namely:- "298. Power to carry on trade, etc.-The executive power of the Unionand of each State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade orbusiness and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property andthe making of contracts for any purpose: Provided that- (a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as suchtrade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to whichParliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation bythe State; and (b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as suchtrade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which theState Legislature may make laws, be subject to legislation by Parlia-ment.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 21--> After article 350 of the Constitution , the following articles shall be inserted, namely:- "350A. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primarystage.-It shall be the endeavour of every State and of every localauthority within the State to provide adequate facilities forinstruction in the mother-tongue at the primary stage of education tochildren belonging to linguistic minority groups; and the Presidentmay issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary orproper for securing the provision of such facilities. 350B.Special Officer for linguistic minorities-(1) There shall be aSpecial Officer for linguistic minorities to be appointed by thePresident. (2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate allmatters relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic minoritiesunder this Constitution and report to the President upon those mattersat such intervals as the President may direct, and the President shallcause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament, andsent to the Governments of the States concerned.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 22--> For article 371 ofthe Constitution , the following article shall be substituted, namely:- "371. Special provision with respect to the States of AndharaPradesh, Punjab and Bombay.-(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution , the President may, by order made with respect to theState of Andhra Pradesh or Punjab, provide for the constitution andfunctions of regional committees of the Legislative Assembly of theState, for the modifications to be made in the rules of business ofthe Government and in the rules of procedure of the LegislativeAssembly of the State and for any special responsibility of theGovernor in order to secure the proper functioning of the regionalcommittees. (2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution , the President mayby order made with respect to the State of Bombay, provide for anyspecial responsibility of the Governor for- (a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha,Marathwada. the rest of Maharashtra, Saurashtra, Kutch and the restof Gujarat with the provision that a report on the working of each ofthese boards will be placed each year before the State LegislativeAssembly; (b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditureover the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as awhole; and (c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate facilities fortechnical education and vocational training, and adequateopportunities for employment in services under the control of theState Government, in respect of all the said areas, subject to therequirements of the State as a whole.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 23--> After article 372 of the Constitution , the following article shall be inserted, namely:- "372A. Power of the President to adapt laws.-(1) For the purposes ofbringing the provisions of any law in force in India or in any partthereof, immediately before the commencement of the Constitution(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of thisConstitution as amended by that Act, the President may by order madebefore the 1st day of November, 1957, make such adaptations andmodifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, asmay be necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as fromsuch date as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to theadaptations and modifications so made, and any such adaptation ormodification shall not be questioned in any court of law. (2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competentlegislature or other competent authority from repealing or amendingany law adapted or modified by the President under the said clause.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 24--> After article 378 of the Constitution , the following article shall be inserted, namely:- "378A. Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh LegislativeAssembly.- Notwithstanding anything contained in article 172, theLegislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh as constitutedunder the provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the State ReorganisationAct, 1956 , shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period offive years from the date referred to in the said section 29 and nolonger and the expiration of the said period shall operate as adissolution of that Legislative Assembly.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 25--> In the Second Schedule to the Constitution ,- (a) in the heading of Part D, the words and letter "in States in PartA of the First Schedule" shall be omitted; (b) in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 9, for the words "shall bereduced by the amount of that pension", the following shall besubstituted, namely:- "shall be reduced- (a) by the amount of that pension, and (b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portionof the pension due to him in respect of such previous service thecommuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension,and (c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuityin respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of thatgratuity"; and (c) in paragraph 10- (i) for sub-paragraph (1), the following sub-paragraph shall besubstituted, namely:- "(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of High Courts, in respect oftime spent on actual service, salary at the following rates permensem, that is to say,- The Chief Justice .. 4,000 rupees Any other Judge .. 3,500 rupees: Provided that if a Judge of a High Court at the time of hisappointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability orwound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Governmentof India or any of its predecessor Governments or under the Governmentof a State or any of its predecessor Governments, his salary inrespect of service in the High Court shall be reduced- (a) by the amount of that pension, and (b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portionof the pension due to him in respect of such previous service thecommuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension,and (c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuityin respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of thatgratuity."; and (ii) for sub-paragraphs (3) and (4), the following sub-paragraph shallbe substituted, namely:- "(3) Any person who, immediately before the commencement of theConstitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956 was holding office as theChief Justice of the High Court of a State specified in Part B of theFirst Schedule and has on such commencement become the Chief Justiceof the High Court of a State specified in the said Schedule as amendedby the said Act, shall, if he was immediately before such commencementdrawing any amount as allowance in addition to his salary, be entitledto receive in respect of time spent on actual service as such ChiefJustice, the same amount as allowance in addition to the salaryspecified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 26--> In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution , entry 33 of the Union List and entry 36 of the StateList shall be omitted and for entry 42 of the Concurrent List, thefollowing entry shall be substituted, namely:- "42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property.".
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 27--> In each of the following provisions of the Constitution , namely:- (i) entry 67 of the Union List, (ii) entry 12 of the State List, (iii) entry 40 of the Concurrent List, and (iv) article 49, for the words "declared by Parliament by law", the words "declared byor under law made by Parliament" shall be substituted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 28--> In the Seventh Schedule tothe Constitution , in entry 24 of the State List, for the word andfigures "entry 52", the words and figures "entries 7 and 52" shall besubstituted.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section 29--> (1)The consequential and minor amendments and repeals directed in theSchedule shall be made in the Constitution and in the Constitution(Removal of Difficulties) Order, No. VIII, made under article 392 ofthe Constitution . (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of article 243 of the Constitution bythe said Schedule, all regulations made by the President under thatarticle and in force immediately before the commencement of this Actshall continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by acompetent Legislature or other competent authority.
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956_Section Sch.1-->  THE SCHEDULE (See section 29) CONSEQUENTIAL AND MINOR AMENDMENTS AND REPEALS IN THE Constitution Article 3.-In the proviso, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of theFirst Schedule.". Article 16.-In clause (3), for "under any State specified in the FirstSchedule or any local or other authority within its territory anyrequirement as to residence within that State" substitute- "under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, aState or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within thatState or Union territory". Article 31A.-In sub-clause (a) of clause (2), for "Travancore-Cochin"substitute "Kerala". Article 58.-In the Explanation, omit "or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh". Article 66.-In the Explanation, omit "or Rajpramukh or Uprajpramukh". Article 72.-In clause (3), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 73.-In the proviso to clause (1) omit "specified in Part A orPart B of the First Schedule". Article 101.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B of theFirst Schedule", and for "such a State" substitute "a State". Article 112.-In sub-clause (d) (iii) of clause (3), for "a Provincecorresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule",substitute "a Governor's Province of the Dominion of India". Article 143.-In clause (2), omit "clause (i) of" and for "said clause"substitute "said proviso". Article 151.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Part VI.-In the heading, omit "IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE". Article 152.-For "means a State specified in Part A of the FirstSchedule" substitute "does not include the State of Jammu andKashmir". Article 214.-Omit "(1)" and clauses (2) and (3). Article 217.-In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), omit "in any Statespecified in the First Schedule". Article 219.-Omit "in a State." Article 229.-In the proviso to clause (1) and in the proviso to clause(2), omit "in which the High Court has its principal seat". Omit Part VII. Article 241.-(a) In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of theFirst Schedule" substitute "Union territory", and for "such State"substitute "such territory". (b) For clauses (3) and (4), substitute- "(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to theprovisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue ofpowers conferred on that Legislature by or under this Constitution ,every High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before thecommencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, inrelation to any Union territory shall continue to exercise suchjurisdiction in relation to that territory after such commencement. (4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power of Parliament toextend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, orfrom, any Union territory or part thereof.". Omit article 242. Omit Part IX. Article 244.-Omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule". Article 246.-In clauses (2) and (3), omit "specified in Part A or PartB of the First Schedule" and in clause (4), for "in Part A or Part Bof the First Schedule" substitute "in a State". Article 254.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B ofthe First Schedule". Article 255.-Omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule". Omit article 259. Article 264.-For article 264, substitute- `264. Interpretation.-In this Part, "Finance Commission" means aFinance Commission constituted under article 280.'. Article 267.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 268.-In clause (1), for "State specified in Part C of theFirst Schedule", substitute "Union territory". Article 269.-In clause (2), for "States specified in Part C of theFirst Schedule" substitute "Union territories". Article 270.In clauses (2) and (3), for "States specified in Part Cof the First Schedule" substitute "Union territories". Omit article 278. Article 280.-In clause (3), omit sub-clause (c) and re-lettersub-clause (d) as sub-clause (c). Article 283.-in clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 291.-Omit "(1)" and clause (2). Article 299.-In clause (1), omit "or the Rajpramukh", and in clause(2), omit "nor the Rajpramukh". Article 304.-In clause (a) after "other States", insert "or the Unionterritories". Omit article 306. Article 308.-For "means a State specified in Part A or Part B of theFirst Schedule", substitute "does not include the State of Jammu andKashmir". Article 309.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 310.-In clause (1), omit "or, as the case may be, theRajpramukh", and in clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or theRajpramukh". Article 311.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 315.-In clause (4), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 316.-In clauses (1) and (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 317.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 318.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 320.-In clause (3), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or Rajpramukh,as the case may be", and in clause (5), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 323.-In clause (2), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or Rajpramukh,as the case may be". Article 324.-In clause (6), omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 330.-In clause (2), after "State" wherever it occurs, insert"or Union territory". Article 332.-In clause (1), omit "specified in Part A or Part B of theFirst Schedule". Article 333.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 337.-Omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule". Article 339.-In clause (1), omit "specified in Part A and Part B ofthe First Schedule" and in clause (2), for "any such State" substitute"a State". Article 341.-In clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Unionterritory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule", omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State" insert "orUnion territory, as the case may be". Article 342.-In clause (1), after "any State" insert "or Unionterritory", omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule", omit "or Rajpramukh" and after "that State" insert "orUnion territory, as the case may be. Article 348.-Omit "or Rajpramukh". Article 356.-In clause (1), omit "or Rajpramukh" and "or Rajpramukh,as the case may be". Article 361.-In clauses (2), (3) and (4), omit "or Rajpramukh" andin clause (4), omit "or the Rajpramukh". Article 362.-Omit "clause (1) of". Article 366.-Omit clause (21), and for clause (30), substitute- "(30) `Union territory' means any Union territory specified in theFirst Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within theterritory of India but not specified in that Schedule.". Article 367.-In clause (2), omit "specified in Part A or Part B ofthe First Schedule" and "or Rajpramukh". Article 368.-Omit "specified in Parts A and B of the FirstSchedule". Omit articles 379 to 391, both inclusive. Second Schedule.-(a) In the heading of Part A and in paragraph 1,omit "specified in Part A of the First Schedule"; (b) in paragraph 2, omit "so specified"; (c) in paragraph 3, for "such States" substitute "the States"; (d) omit Part B; (e) in the heading of Part C, omit "of a State in Part A of the FirstSchedule" and for "any such State" substitute "a State"; (f) in paragraph 8, omit "of a State specified in Part A of the FirstSchedule", and for "such State" substitute "a State". Fifth Schedule.-(1) In paragraph 1, omit "means a State specified inPart A or Part B of the First Schedule but"; (b) in paragraph 3, omit "or Rajpramukh"; (c) in paragraph 4, in sub-paragraph (2), omit "or Rajpramukh, as thecase may be" and in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or Rajpramukh"; (d) in paragraph 5, in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) omit "or Rajpramukh,as the case may be", in sub-paragraph (3), omit "or Rajpramukh" and insub-paragraph (5), omit "or the Rajpramukh". Sixth Schedule.-In paragraph 18, in sub-paragraph (2), for "Part IX"substitute "article 240", and for "territory specified in Part D ofthe First Schedule" substitute "Union territory specified in thatarticle". Seventh Schedule.-In List I,- (a) in entry 32, omit "specified in Part A or Part B of the FirstSchedule"; and (b) for entry 79, substitute,- "79. extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and ex-clusion of the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Unionterritory.". CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS IN THE CONSTITUTION (REMOVAL OF DIFFICULTIES) ORDER No. VIII. In the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order NO. VIII, forsub-paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) of paragraph 2, substitute- `(1) In article 81,- (a) in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), after the words "Unionterritories", the words, letter and figures" and the tribal areasspecified in Part B of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the SixthSchedule" shall be inserted; and (b) to clause (2), the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that the constituencies into which the State of Assam isdivided shall not comprise the tribal areas specified in Part B of theTable appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.". (2) In clause (2) of article 170, after the words "throughout theState", the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- "Provided that the constituencies into which the State of Assam isdivided shall not comprise the tribal areas specified in Part B of theTable appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule.".' 
