Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Constitution of India. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called theConstitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. (2) It shall come into force on such date 681 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 2--> After Part IX of the Constitution, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:-
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243P--> In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "Committee" means a Committee constituted under article 243S; (b) "district" means a district in a State; (c) "Metropolitan area" means an area having a population of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas, specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan area forthe purposes of this Part; (d) "Municipal area" means the territorial area of a Municipality asis notified by the Governor; (e) "Municipality" means an institution of self-government constituted under article 243Q; (f) "Panchayat" means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B; (g) "population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243Q--> (1) There shall be constituted in every State,- (a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area; (b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and (c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in accordance with the provisions of this Part: Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constitutedin such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal services being provided orproposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public notification,specify to be an industrial township. (2) In this article, "a transitional area", "a smaller urban area" or"a larger urban area" means such area as the Governor may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243R--> (1) Save as provided in clause(2), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosenby direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal area shall bedivided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide- (a) for the representation in a Municipality of:- (i) persons having special knowledge or experience in Municipal administration; (ii) the members of the House of the People and the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area; (iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within the Municipal area; (iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under clause (5)of article 243S: Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not havethe right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality; (b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243S--> (1)There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or morewards, within the territorial area of a Municipality having apopulation of three lakhs or more. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision withrespect to:- (a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee; (b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall befilled. (3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee. (4) Where a Wards Committee consists of:- (a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality;or (b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee, shall be the Chairperson of that Committee. (5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards Committees.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243T--> (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipally and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in theMunicipal area bears to the total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality. (2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes. (3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes)of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality. (4) The officers of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women insuch manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. (5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation forwomen) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expirationof the period specified in article 334. (6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality oroffices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backwardclass of citizens.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243U--> (1) Every Municipality,unless sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force,shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer: Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard before its dissolution. (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level, which is functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified in clause (1). (3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,- (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1); (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued is less than six months,it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this clause forconstituting the Municipality for such period. (4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243V--> (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Municipality:- (a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being inforce for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the Stateconcerned: Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years; (b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the Legislature of the State. (2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause(1), the question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243W--> Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow- (a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to- (i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; (ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule; (b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243X--> The Legislature of a State may, by law,:- (a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits; (b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject tosuch conditions and limits; (c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; and (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom. as may be specified in the law.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243Y--> (1) The Finance Commission constitutedunder article 243-I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor as to:- (a) the principles which should govern:- (i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds; (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities; (iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State; (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the Municipalities; (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities. (2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243Z--> The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZA--> (1) The superintendence,direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election Commission referred to in article 243K. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with, elections to the Municipalities.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZB--> The provisions of this Part shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly: Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZC--> (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244. (2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under any law for the time being in force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal. (3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, bylaw, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZD--> (1) There shall be constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalitiies in the district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to- (a) the composition of the District Planning Committees; (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district; (c) the functions relating to district planning which may be assigned to such Committees; (d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall bechosen. (3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan,:- (a) have regard to:- (i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; (ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise; (b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may,by order, specify. (4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZE--> (I) There shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole. (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision withrespect to:- (a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees; (b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled: Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected membersof the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population ofthe Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area; (c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of India and the Government of the State and of such organisations and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the functions assigned to such Committees; (d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Committees; (e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees shall be chosen. (3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft development plan,:- (a) have regard to- (i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area; (ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities and the Panchayats, including co-ordinated spatial planning of the area,sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation; (iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the Government of the State; (iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India and of the Government of the State and other available resources whether financial or otherwise; (b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may,by order, specify. (4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government of the State.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZF--> Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992,which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature orother competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier: Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration,unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that State.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 243ZG--> Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,:- (a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in question in any court; (b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question exceptby an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.'.
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 3--> In clause (3) of article 280 of the Constitution , sub-clause (c) shall be relettered as sub-clause (d) and before sub-clause (d) as so relettered, the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Municipalities in the State on thebasis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State;".
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992_Section 4--> After the Eleventh Schedule to the Constitution, the following Schedule shall be added, namely:- "TWELFTH SCHEDULE (Article 243W) 1. Urban planning including town planning. 2. Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. 3. Planning for economic and social development. 4. Roads and bridges. 5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 6. Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste manage- ment. 7. Fire services. 8. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects. 9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicapped and mentally retarded. 10. Slum improvement and upgradation. 11. Urban poverty alleviation. 12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds. 13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. 14. Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematoriums. 15. Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. 16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences. 18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.' 
