Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> The following Act of the Coorg, Legislature, assented by the President of India and is published for general information. To provide for the management of temple funds in the State of Coorg be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Coorg in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Coorg and applies to the temples and institutions named in the schedule and to such other temples or institutions as the Chief Commissioner may by notification in the Coorg Gazette from time to time specify. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Chief Commissioner may by notification appoint in the Coorg Gazette. Received the assent of the President on 4th May, 1956
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires - (a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner of the State of Coorg. (b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner appointed under Section 39. (c) "Committee" means the Committee constituted under Section 3. (d) "Person having interest" means every person having a right of attendance or having been in the habit of attending at the performance of the worship or service or having the right or being in the habit of parting in the benefit of and distribution of gifts, at any temples or institutions to which this Act applies. (e) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. (f) "Temple Funds" means the Coorg Temple Funds constituted under this Act in respect of the temples and institutions to which this Act applies.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 3--> The Chief Commissioner shall as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act by notification in the Coorg Gazette constitute a Committee for the management of the temple funds.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 4--> (1) The Committee shall consist of such member or members as may be appointed by the Chief Commissioner, not being less than nine or more than twelve. (2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section the term of office of a member of the Committee shall be three years from the date on which the appointment is notified in the Coorg Gazette. (3) The person shall be disqualified for being appointed as or for being a member of a Committee - (a) If he does not process the Hindu religion; (b) If he had applied or applies to be or has been or is adjudicated an insolvent; (c) If he is of unsound mind, a deaf nuts or suffering from contagious leprosy; (d) If he is an office holder or a servant attached to or a person in respect of any emolument or perquisite from any of the said temples or institutions, or if he is being to Joint Hindu Family a member of which is such office holder or servant or a person in respect of any such emolument or perquisite. (e) If he has been at once by a Criminal Court to imprisonment for a period of more than six months for any offence other than the offence not involving moral turpitude such sentence not having been cancelled or reduced to a period of six months or less, or the offence not having been pardons provided that the Chief Commissioner may direct that such sentences shall not be create as disqualification; (f) If he is less than 25 years of age; and (g) If he is able to read and write Kannada; (h) An out going member shall if otherwise qualified, be eligible for re-appointment as a member of the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 5--> A member of the Committee wishing to resign his office shall forward a written communication to that effect through the President of the Committee to the Chief Commissioner and the member shall be deemed to have vacated his office on the acceptance of his resignation by the Chief Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 6--> The Commissioner shall be a body corporate by the name of the Coorg temple funds Committee shall have perpectual succession and a common seal with power to acquire and hold property both moveable and immoveable to transfer to any property, both held by it, and to contract and to do all other things necessary for the purpose of its constitution, and may sue and be sued in its corporate name: Provided the Committee shall not transfer any immoveable property except in pursuance of a resolution passed at special meeting and approved by the Chief Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 7--> (1) There shall be a President and Vice-President of the Committee. (2) The President and a Vice-President shall be elected by the members of the Committee from amongst them in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) The election of the President and Vice-President shall not be valid until it has been confirmed by the Chief Commissioner and has been notified in the Coorg Gazette. (4) The President and Vice-President shall hold office till expiry of their term of office as members of the Committee: Provided that the President shall notwithstanding the expiration of his term as member continue to hold office until his successor is elected and enters upon his office.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 8--> The Chief Commissioner may at any time, remove the President and Vice-President or any member of the Committee if he refused to act or become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned Section 4, if he without an excuse sufficient in the opinion of the Chief Commissioner, absents himself for more than 3 consecutive months from the meeting of the Committee or of a sub-Committee of which he is member or if he, continues in office is in the opinion of the Chief Commissioner, undesirable in the interest of the public or the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 9--> (1) A meeting of the Committee shall be either ordinary or special. (2) Any business may be transacted at an ordinary meeting unless it is required by or under this Act to be transacted at a special meeting. (3) The President in the absence or during the vacancy of his office the Vice-President may whenever he thinks fit and shall on requisition made in writing either an ordinary or special meeting at any other time.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 10--> (1) At every meeting of the Committee the President if present, shall preside as Chairman. (2) If, when any meeting is held, the office of the President is vacant or the President is absent from the meeting and the Vice-President present the Vice-President shall preside as Chairman. (3) In any, case not provided for by sub-section (1) or (2) the members present shall elect one of their member to be Chairman of the meeting.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 11--> (1) The Committee shall meet for the transactions of business at least once in every month at such time and place as may from time to time be fixed by bye-laws made in this behalf. (2) The President or in his absence or during the vacancy of his office the Vice-President may whenever he thinks fit and shall on a requisition made in writing by not less than one-third of the members of the Committee, convence either an ordinary or special meeting at any other time.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 12--> (1) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a special meeting of the Committee shall be 1/2 of the members of Committee. (2) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at an ordinary meeting of the Committee shall be such members or proportion of the members of the Committee as may from time to time, be fixed by bye-laws made but shall not be less than three: Provided that, if any ordinary or special meeting of the Committee a quorum is not present the Chairman shall adjourn the meeting to such other day as he thinks fit and the business which would have been brought before the original meeting if there had been a quorum present shall be brought before and transacted at the adjourned meeting, whether there is a quorum present thereat or not.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 13--> All questions brought before any meeting of the Committee, shall be decided by a majority of the votes of members present and in the case or a equality of votes, the Chairman of the meeting shall have a second or casting vote.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 14--> (1) Minutes of the proceedings at each meeting of the Committee shall be recorded in a book for the purpose shall be signed by the Chairman of the meeting or at the next ensuring meeting. It shall be published in the manner prescribed and shall at all reasonable time without charges be open to the inspection of any person having interest. (2) A copy of every resolution passed by the Committee at a meeting shall within 7 days from the date of the meeting be forwarded to the Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 15--> In case of emergency the President or in his absence or during the vacancy of his office the Vice-President may direct the execution of any work or the doing of any Act which the Committee is empowered to execute or do and the immediate execution or doing of which is in his opinion necessary for the efficient management of the said temple or institutions and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such act shall be paid from the temple fund provided that - (a) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of which the Committee; and (b) every direction given under this section be reported to the next following meeting of the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 16--> No act of the Committee shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of a defect in its Constitution or on the ground that the President, Vice-President or any member there was disqualified for or a deceased to hold his office or by reason of such act having been done during the period of any vacancy in the office of the President, Vice-President or any member of the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 17--> The Committee may employ such establishment as may be necessary or proper for the efficient execution of its duties and of the functions in the said temple and institutions and may assign to the members of such establishment such salaries, prequisities and accommodation as it thinks fit.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 18--> (1) If in the opinion of the Commissioner, the number of the persons employed by the Committee or whom the Committee proposed to employ as such or the salaries assigned by the Committee to these persons or any of them are excessive the Committee shall on the requisition of the Commissioner, within such time as may fixed by the Commissioner in this behalf reduce the number of these persons or their salaries as the case may be. (2) If in the opinion of the Commissioner any person employed by the Committee is any reason of bad character in competence or illness or for any other sufficient reason not fit to be retained in the Committee or for the performance of service in the temples or institutions, the Committee shall on the requisition of the Commissioner within one month from the date of receipt of such requisition dispense with the services of such person: Provided that before making such requisition the Commissioner call upon the person concerned to show cause why such requisition should not be made. (3) The Committee to whom a requisition is made under sub-section (1) and any person whose services are dispensed within the compliance with a requisition under sub-section (2) may appeal to the Chief Commissioner whose decision shall be final.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 19--> (1) The Committee may delegate to the President or the Vice-President or both the powers of entering in its behalf into any particular contract where of the value or amount does not exceed two hundred rupees or into any class of such contracts. (2) A contract where or the value of amount exceeds two hundred rupees shall not be entered into until it has been sanctioned by the Committee at a meeting.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 20--> (1) Every contract made or on behalf of the Committee where of value or amount exceeds fifty rupees shall be in writing. (2) Every such contract shall be signed by the President or the Vice-President. (3) If a contract to which the section applies is entered into otherwise than in confirmity it shall not be binding on the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 21--> (1) If any member, officer or other person employed by the Committee is otherwise than with the written permission of the Commissioner directly or indirectly interested in any contracts made with Committee he shall be deemed to have committed, an offence under Section 168 of the Indian Penal Code. (2) Person shall not by reason of his being a share holder in or a member of any incorporate or registered company be deemed to be interested in any contract entered into between the Committee and the company but he shall be not take part in any proceedings of the Committee relating to any such contract.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 22--> (1) No suit shall be instituted against the Committee or of any of its officers or servants or any person acting under its direction for any thing done or purporting to be done under this Act until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing, stating the cause of action the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff and the relief which he claims has been in the case of the Committee delivered or left at its office and in the case of any such officer, servant or person as aforesaid delivered to him or left at his usual place of abode. (2) Every such suit shall be dismissed unless it is instituted within six months from the date of the actual of the alleged cause of action and service of such notice as foresaid or proved. (3) Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that before the suit was instituted tender or sufficient amendments had been made to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall not recover his cost not included in such tender and shall defray the costs of the defendant in the suit. (4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any suit instituted under Section 54 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877).
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 23--> The Committee shall obey all lawful orders issued under the provisions of this Act by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 24--> The Committee shall be bound to administer its affairs and to apply the temple funds and to manage efficiently the properties attached to the temples and institutions to which this Act applies for the proper and efficient performance of service in the said temples and institutions in accordance with the usage of the said temples and institutions and all lawful directions which an authority under this Act may be issued in respect of.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 25--> (1) For every temple and institution under his control and management the Committee shall prepare and maintain a register in the manner prescribed, showing - (i) particulars of scheme in each of the temples and institutions to which this Act applies; (ii) the name of all officers to whom any salary, emoluments or perquisite is attached and the nature time and conditions of service in each case; (iii) the jewels gold, silver, precious stones, vessels and utensils and other moveables belonging to the temple and institutions with their estimated value; (iv) particulars of all properties of the temples and institutions and of all title deeds and other documents; (v) particulars of the idols and images in connected with the institutions whether intended for worship or for being carried in possession; (vi) such other particulars as may be prescribed. (2) The register shall be prepared signed and verified by the President or Vice-President and submitted to the Commissioner within three months from the commencement of this Act or from the date from which any temple or institution comes under this Act, as the case may be or within such further period as may be allowed by the Commissioner. (3) The Commissioner may after such enquiry as he may consider necessary direct the Committee to make such alterations commissions or additions in the register as he may think fit. (4) The Committee shall carry out order of the Commissioner, and then submit two copies of the register and corrected to the Commissioner for approval. (5) One copy of the register as approved by the Commissioner shall be furnished to the Committee and other should be recorded in the office of the Commissioner. (6) The Committee shall scrutinise the entries in the register every year and submit to the Commissioner for his approval a verified statement showing the alterations omissions or additions required in the register and the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (5) shall apply in relation to a register.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 26--> The Committee shall furnish to the Commissioner such accounts returns reports or other information relating to the administration of the temples and institutions the funds property or income or money connected therewith or the appropriation thereof, at such time and in such form as may prescribed.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 27--> (1) Any exchange sale or mortgage and lease for a term executing five years on any immovable property belonging to a given as endowed for the purpose of any of the temple or institutions shall be null and void unless it is sanctioned by the Commissioner as being necessary or beneficial to the temples or institutions: Provided that where such sanction is accorded the particulars relating to the proposed transaction shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed inviting objections and suggestions with respect thereof and objections and suggestions received from the Committee interest shall be duly considered by the Committee. (2) When according to such sanction the Commissioner may impose such conditions and give such directions as he may deems necessary regarding utilisation of amount and by the transactions to the investment thereof and in the case of mortgage regarding the discharge of the same within reasonable period. (3) A copy of the order made by the Commissioner under this section shall be communicated to the Government; and (4) [x x x x x] (5) The Chief Commissioner may after calling for such records and hearing such parties as he may deem necessary pass orders either confirming modifying or setting aside the order of the Commissioner and the order of the Chief Commissioner shall be final.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 28--> The Committee may out of the lands in its charge after making adequate provisions for the purpose referred in sub-section (2) of Section 34 incur expenditure - (1) on arrangement for securing the health safety or convenience of pilgrims or worshipers resorting to the temple or institutions; and (2) for the training of archaks, adyapakas, Vedaparayanikas and others; (3) in incurring such expenditure the Committee shall be guided by such general or special institutions, as may be given by the Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 29--> With the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner and subject to the conditions as may be prescribed the Committee may borrow money from the State Government or from any other sources to carry out any of the purposes of this Act.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 30--> Where any land is required for the purposes of this Act. The Chief Commissioner may at the request of the Committee proceed to require it under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and on payment of the Committee, the compensation awarded under the Act and the charges incurred by the Government in connection with the proceeding that shall vest in the Committee.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 31--> There shall be formed a fund of the temples and institutions named in the Schedule and to such other temple funds which shall consist of - (a) the cash allowance for the time being paid by the Government for the maintenance of the said temples and institutions; (b) the cash allowance for the time being paid by the Government for the maintenance of the said temples and institutions; (c) all funds invested or in hand to the credit of the said temples and institutions at the commencement of the Act; and (d) the income accruing from all lands when have been partially or wholly rest free for the said temple and institutions or may hereafter endowed.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 32--> (1) Subject to the provisions of the annual estimate of income and expenditure passed under Section 34, proceeds of the temple funds shall be utilised for carrying out the duties and obligations imposed upon the Committee under this Act. (2) The Committee shall maintain a minimum working balance in the fund at such limit as may be prescribed from time to time.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 33--> (1) The temple funds may be deposited with the Reserve Bank of India or with any agency of the Bank other than the Government Treasury or with a Schedule Bank in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India. (2) The Committee may from time to time with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner invest any portion of the temple funds in securities of the Government of India or in such other securities and the Chief Commissioner may approve in this behalf and sell, dispose of every such securities for other or the like nature. The income resulting from the securities and proceeds of the sale of the same shall be credited to the temple funds.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 34--> (1) The Committee shall before the end of March in each year subject in such form as may be prescribed. Budget showing the probable receipts and expenditure of the temples and institutions under its control during the following financial year to the Commissioner. (2) Every such budget shall make adequate provision for - (a) the scale expenditure for the time being inforce; (b) the due discharge of all liabilities if any binding on the Committee; (c) the repair and renovation of the buildings of the temple and institutions; (d) any other item of expenditure required to be incurred for the proper discharge of the affairs of the temple and institutions; (e) the maintenance of the maximum closing and balance fixed under Section 12 of this Act. (3) The Commissioner may, after giving notice to the Committee and after considering such representations if any make such alterations commissions or additions in the budget as ma deem fit. (4) Against any order made by the Commissioner under sub-section (3), the Committee may within one month from the date of receipt by in the order appeal to the Chief Commissioner whose decision in the matter shall be final.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 35--> (1) The Committee shall keep regular accounts of all receipts and expenditure. (2) The accounts shall be audited annually or if the Chief Commissioner so direct intervals or at any time by such person or persons as may be appointed by the Chief Commissioner in this behalf.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 36--> After completing the audit for any year or shorter period or for any transaction or series of transactions as the case may be the auditor shall sent a report to the Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 37--> (1) Auditor shall specify in all cases of irregular illegal or improper expenditure or failure to recover the money or other properties due to the said temples and institutions or less or waste of money or other property thereof caused by neglect or misconduct. (2) Auditor shall also report on such other matter relating to the accounts as may be prescribed or in which the Chief Commissioner may require him to report.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 38--> (1) The Commissioner shall send a copy of every audit report to the Committee and it shall be the duty of the Committee to rectify any defect or irregularities pointed out by the Auditor and report the same to the Commissioner. (2) If on a consideration of the report of the auditor along with the report if any of the Committee the Commissioner think that the President, Vice-President any member of the Committee or any other persons connected who was guilty of misappropriation or wilfull west of the funds of the temples or institutions or gross neglect resulting in a loss to temple or institutions Commissioner may after giving notice to the President or Vice-President member of Committee or such other person at the case may be to show cause why an order of surcharge should not be passed against him and after considering his explanation it any by order certify the amount so less and direct the President, Vice-President member of the Committee or such other persons as the case may be to pay within a specified time such amount personally and not from the funds of institutions or the temple funds. (3) The Commissioner shall forward a copy of the order under sub-section (2) with reasons for the same by registered post to the President and Vice-President member of the Committee as the case may be. (4) An order of surcharge under this section shall not bar suit for accounts against the person concerned except in respect of the matter finally dealt with by such order. (5) The President, Vice-President member of the Committee or other person who is aggrieved by such order within 30 days of the receipt by him of the order appeal to the Chief Commissioner who shall pass such order as he thinks fit. The order of the Chief Commissioner shall be final and shall not be questioned in a Court of Law. (6) The Assistant Commissioner, Coorg shall on requisition made by the Commissioner recover such amount from the President and Vice-President member of the Committee or such other person as the case may be as it is an arrears of land revenue and pay the same to the accounts of the temple funds.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 39--> (1) The Chief Commissioner shall appoint by notification in the Coorg Gazette as may be after the commencement of this Act any person to the Commissioner for the purpose of this Act. (2) The Chief Commissioner may by notification in the Coorg Gazette appoint any other person either by name or virtue of office, to be a Deputy Commissioner and assign to him such functions under this Act as may be considered necessary.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 40--> Subject to the provisions of this Act the management of the temple funds and the properties of the temples and institutions to which this Act applies by the Committee shall be subject to the Superintendance and control shall include the power to pass any order which may be deemed necessary to ensure that the said funds and property administered and duly appropriated for the purpose for which they are intended.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 41--> A Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner and every officer or servants appointed to carry out the purpose of this Act by whomsoever appointed shall be a person professing Hindu religion and shall seize to hold office as such when he seize to profess that religion.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 42--> The Commissioner and such other officers as may be authorised by the Commissioner in this behalf shall have power to enter the premises of any temple or institutions to which this Act applies for the purposes of exercising any power conferred or discharging any duties imposed by or under this Act.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 43--> The Commissioner may call for and examine the records of the Committee to satisfy himself as to the regulations of such proceeding of the correctness of legality and propriety of any decisions or orders passed therein. (2) If it appears to the Commissioner is that the decision or order should be modified annulled, reversed and remitted for consideration he may pass order accordingly. (3) The Commissioner shall not pass any order prejudicial to any party under sub-section (2) without hearing or giving him an opportunity of being heard. (4) The Commissioner may stay the execution of any decision or order of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) pending the exercises of his powers under sub-section (2) in respect thereof.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 44--> (1) The Commissioner or any officer or other persons deputed by the Commissioner in this behalf may inspect all movable and immovable property belonging to and all records correspondence, plans, institutions accounts and other documents relating to any temple or any other institutions. (2) It shall be the duty of the Committee and all officers and servants working under it to afford all such assistance and facilities as may be necessary or reasonably required in regard to any inspection made in pursuance of sub-section (1) and also to produce for inspection, any movable properties or documents referred to in sub-section (1) if so required.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 45--> (1) Where it appears to the Commissioner either his own knowledge on the application in writing made by not less than five persons having interest that the Committee has made default in performing any duty imposed on it by or under this Act or that the service is not being conducted in accordance with the usage prescribed thereof or that any immovable property belonging to any of the temple or institution is not being managed by the Committee to the best advantages of the temple funds the Commissioner may by order in writing fix a period for the performance of that duty for proper conduct of such service or for the proper management of such property as the case may be in such manner as may be required. (2) Where the duty conduct of service of management of property is not performed or done within the period so fixed the Commissioner may perform or do it and may direct that the expenses of performing or doing it shall be paid by the Committee out of the temple funds. (3) Where the expenses is not so paid the Commissioner with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner may make an order directing the person having the custody of the fund of the temple or institution to pay the expenses or so much thereof as is from time to time possible from the funds in priority to all other charges of the same.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 46--> (1) Where at any time it appears to the Chief Commissioner, that the Committee is not competent to perform or persistently makes default in the performance of its duties under this Act or exceeds or abuses its power the Chief Commissioner may by an order publish in the Coorg Gazette and containing the reasons for making it declare the Committee to be incompetent or in default or to have exceeded by abused its powers as the case may be and abolish the Committee. (2) Whereas, the Committee is so abolished the following consequences shall ensure namely - (a) all members of the Committee shall as from the date of publication of the order vacate the offices as such members; (b) all powers and duties of the Committee shall thereafter be exercised and performed by the Commissioner or other such persons as the Chief Commissioner may appoint in that behalf; (c) all properties vested in the Committee shall vest in the Government till a new Committee is appointed and shall be under the charge of the Commissioner. (3) Where the Committee has abolished under sub-section (1) a new Committee shall be constituted within six months of the abolished and the persons who has vacated their offices under clause (a), sub-section (2) shall be eligible for being appointed as members if not otherwise disqualified under Section 4.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 47--> (1) The Chief Commissioner may by notification in the Coorg Gazette make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act not in consistent therewith. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers such rules may make provisions - (a) for the manner in which the proceedings of meeting shall be published; (b) as to election of the President and Vice-President; (c) as to the preparation and submission of accounts, returns and reports; (d) as per the manner in which sanction for alienation of movable property shall be published; (e) as to the manner in which sanction for alienation of immovable property shall be published; (f) for the maintenance of minimum working balance; (g) for the custody of the moneys of the temple funds their deposits in and withdrawals from banks and the investments of such moneys; (h) as to the manner in which and the period for which lease of property shall be made; (i) as to the preparation of the budget and as to the sanction if to be required before the Committee incurs any expenditure; (j) as to the manner in which accounts are to be audited and published and as to the powers of the auditor in respect of disallowance and surcharges; (k) as to the preservations maintenance management and improvements of the properties and building of the temples and institutions; (l) for the inspection and supervision of the properties and buildings of the temple and institutions the reports to be submitted by person making such inspection and supervision.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 48--> (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder the Committee may frame bye-laws for regulating - (a) the time and place of meeting; (b) the conduct of its business; (c) the quorum necessary for the transaction of business at ordinary meeting; (d) the division of the duties among its members the formation of sub-Committees and the powers to be exercised by the sub-Committee or by such member as are primary responsible for the current executive administration whether President or Vice-President; (e) members of the Committees or individual members the duties and salaries of its officers and servants; (f) the person by whom receipts under this Act; (g) the persons by whom receipts may be granted on its behalf for money’s received under this Act; (h) the scale of fees to be recovered for the performance of different kinds of pujas, services and the different duties; (i) the proper collection of the income including of expenditure by temple and institutions; (j) the custody and other valuable documents of the temple and institutions; (k) the preservation of the images in the temple; (l) the grant of travelling and haulting allowance to the members of the Committee for attending meetings etc.; (m) the preparation and sanctions of the estimates and acceptance of tenders in respect of works and supplies in temple and institutions; (n) leave allowance, travelling allowance, pension or gratuity personal conducts and punishments of the officers and employees of the Committees of the temple and the institutions; (o) the fees to be recovered for the inspection and grant of copies of resolutions proceedings and other records and documents in the possession of the Committees; (p) other similar matters. (2) No bye-law made under this section shall take effect until it has been confirmed by the Chief Commissioner.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section 49--> (1) The Coorg Temple Funds Management Regulation, 1892 (Central Regulation of 1892) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal the commencement of this Act was managing and controlling the funds the said regulations shall continue to manage the temple under the Act until a new Committee is constituted under this Act and any appointment made and directions issued under the regulations hereby repealed shall continue in force until and unless it is superseded by appointment made or directions issued under this Act.
Coorg Temple Funds Management Act, 1956_Section Sch.-->  Sl. No. Name of the temple or institution Present annual allowance in each 1. Onkareswara Pagoda (Temple) at Mercara 4,435-00 2. Onkareswara Choultry 380-00 3. Raja’s Toombs at Mercara 2,060-00 4. Tavanda (Bhaghamandala) Pagoda Temple 2,320-00 5. Tavanda (Bhaghamandala) Choultry 3,950-00 6. Brahmadaya at Subramanya (South Kanara) 40-00 7. Irupurneswara temple at the source of Lakshmanthirtha river 400-00 8. Subraya Temple at Kunjila Village, Napoklu Nad 20-00 9. Mahalingeswara Temple, Palur 10. Marichandra Temple at Palur  Total 13,605-00 
