Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> An Act to make provision for compulsory vaccination in the 1 [State] of Coorg. Whereas, it is expedient to make vaccination compulsory in the 2 [State] of Coorg. And whereas, the previous sanction of the Governor-General has been obtained under Section 97 of the Government of India Act, 1935, as adapted by the India (Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, to the passing of this Act. It is hereby enacted as follows - Substituted by the A.O. 1950 Substituted by the A.O. 1950
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950, and shall apply to the whole of the 1 [State] of Coorg.2 (2) It shall come into force on such 3 date as the Chief Commissioner may by notification in the Coorg Gazette appoint. Substituted by the A.O. 1950 Received the assent of the President on the 10th March, 1950 From 1st October, 1950 vide Notification No. A. I. 2092/48, dated 15-9-1950
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner of Coorg; (b) "Child" means a boy or girl who has not attained the age of eighteen years; (c) "Guardian" means any person to whom the care, nurture or custody of any child falls by law or by natural right or recognized usage or who has accepted or assumed the care, nurture or custody of any child or to whom the care, nurture or custody of any child has been entrusted by any lawful authority; (d) "Health Officer" means the Civil Surgeon of Coorg or such other officer as may be appointed as the head of the Public Health Department in Coorg; (e) "Inspecting Officer" means and includes the Health Officer, the Assistant Health Officer, Medical Officers in the Coorg Government employment and the persons mentioned in Section 2(m)(i), (ii) and (iv); (f) "Patel" means the headman of a revenue village or of group of villages; (g) "Parent" means the father or mother of a legitimate child and the mother of an illegitimate child; (h) "Person" means a male or female who has attained the age of eighteen years; (i) "Unprotected child" means a child who has not been protected from smallpox by having had that disease either naturally or by having been successfully vaccinated or re-vaccinated within a period of ten years immediately preceding; (j) "Unprotected person" means a person who has no visible marks of smallpox or who is unable to provide satisfactory evidence of successful vaccination or re-vaccination carried out within a period of ten years immediately preceding; (k) "Vaccination" or "re-vaccination" is an operation by which sufficient vaccine lymph is introduced into the skin and allowed to be absorbed without any interference or exposure to sun for at least fifteen minutes following the operation; (l) "Vaccination Depot" means a place or building where vaccination is performed free of charge by direction of the Health Officer or any person authorised by him in this behalf; and (m) "Vaccinator" means - (i) any Medical Practitioner registered under the Madras Medical Registration Act, 1914, or any Provincial or State Medical Registration Act equivalent thereto, (ii) any Licentiate or Associate Licentiate in the Indian Medicine with training in vaccination and registered under class A, or (iii) any person possessing the qualification laid down by the Chief Commissioner for a vaccinator and employed by the Coorg Public Health Department, or (iv) any person qualified to hold the post of a Sanitary Inspector or a Sanitary Assistant in the Coorg Public Health Department.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 3--> (a) The parent of guardian of every unprotected child who is not less than six months old shall procure its vaccination by a vaccinator or shall take or cause the child to be taken to a vaccination depot for such vaccination at the time of the visit which shall be announced by the Patel or the President of the Municipality or Notified Area, as the case may be, by beat of tom-tom of service of notice. (b) Every unprotected person shall get himself vaccinated either at the vaccination depot at the time of the vaccinator’s visit or elsewhere by any other vaccinator.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 4--> The Health Officer or any person duly authorised by him may direct the vaccination of an unprotected child or person in a revenue village.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 5--> Whenever the residence of an unprotected person or child is changed, such person or the parent or guardian of such child, as the case may be, shall within one month of such change of residence, notify the same to the Patel of the Village or the President of the Municipality or Notified Area, from which the residence was changed, as the case may be, furnishing full particulars regarding the address of the new residence of such person or child. The authorities aforesaid shall, without delay, communicate these particulars to the Sanitary Inspector having jurisdiction over the place from which such removal was effected.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 6--> (a) If a Vaccinator finds that an unprotected person or child is not in a fit state of health to be vaccinated or if a medical certificate to that effect in Form I given in the Schedule to this Act is produced, he shall not vaccinate such person or child. (b) If a Vaccinator finds that an unprotected person or child is in a state of health fit for vaccination, he shall vaccinate such person or child.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 7--> (a) Every vaccinated person or child shall be present or be produced, as the case may be, for inspection on such date and at such time and place as may be announced by the Patel or the President of Municipality or Notified Area by beat of tom-tom or service of notice. (b) If the Inspecting Officer finds that a vaccination has been successful, he shall, on demand, give to such person or the parent or guardian of such child, as the case may be, a certificate to that effect in Form II given in Schedule to this Act. In the case of re-vaccination, the Vaccinator shall, after the re-vaccination, on demand, give a certificate showing the date of re-vaccination, to the person re-vaccinated or, as the case may be, to the parent or guardian of the child re-vaccinated. (c) In the event of the vaccination being unsuccessful, the Inspecting Officer, if he thinks fit, may direct that the un-protected person or child shall again be vaccinated and subsequently inspected as provided in this Act, and such person, or the parent or guardian of such child, shall be bound to comply with such direction.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 8--> When an unprotected person or child is successfully vaccinated by a Vaccinator not employed under the Coorg Public Health Department, such person or the parent or guardian of such child, as the case may be, shall forward, within fifteen days of the date of the vaccination, a copy of certificate in Form II given in the Schedule to this Act, of successful vaccination, from such Vaccinator, to the Health Officer or to such person as may be authorised by him in that behalf.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 9--> The Health Officer may cancel any certificate given under this Act if he is satisfied that such certificate has been improperly given or obtained on behalf of any unprotected person or child and thereupon, such certificate shall cease to be valid and notice of such cancellation shall forthwith be given to such unprotected person or the parent or guardian of such unprotected child, as the case may be.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 10--> No fee or remuneration shall be accepted by a Vaccinator employed under the Coorg Public Health Department for any vaccination performed or certificate given under these rules: Provided that the Health Officer or any person authorised by him in that behalf may, on application by a person and upon payment of such fee as the Health Officer may have fixed, direct a Vaccinator to perform the vaccination and cause the result of the vaccination to be ascertained as hereinbefore provided, at the residence of such person.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 11--> (1) The Health Officer or any person authorised by him in this behalf may, with a view to find out if any unprotected person or child lives in any area to which this Act applies, by a notice, call upon - (a) any person to produce a certificate to vaccination or to be present for inspection between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. and if found unprotected, to state his name, age, parentage and address; (b) the owner or occupier or a house or the tenant of any portion thereof - (i) to produce all the children living with him or under his care or guardianship for inspection between the hours of 6 a.m. and 6 p.m. and to give the name, age, sex, parentage and place of birth of each such child; (ii) to furnish the name, age, sex and parentage of every person living with him or under his care. (2) The Health Officer or any person authorised by him may, if he becomes aware of the existence of any person or child who is unprotected and is fit for vaccination, deliver to such person or the parent or guardian of such child or cause to be affixed at the residence of such person or of such parent or guardian a notice requiring the person or the child, as the case may be, to be vaccinated on such date and such time and place to be specified in the said notice. The person or the parent or guardian to whom such notice is delivered or at whose residence it is affixed shall be bound to comply with it unless a certificate is produced from a Vaccinator to the effect that such person or child has either been successfully vaccinated already or a medical certificate is produced that such person or child is unfit for vaccination.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 12--> This Act shall apply, so far as may be, to the re-vaccination of any unprotected child or person.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 13--> (a) No parent or guardian shall be bound to take any child, or cause it to be taken in order to procure its vaccination or inspection, beyond the limits of the revenue village or the Municipality or the Notified Area, in which such parent or guardian resides. (b) No person shall be bound to procure his vaccination or inspection at any place beyond the limits of the revenue village or the Municipality or the Notified Area, in which he resides.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 14--> Whoever commits a breach of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules framed thereunder, shall be liable on conviction - (a) to a fine which may extend to twenty rupees; or (b) in case of a continuing breach, to a fine which may extend to five rupees for every day during which the breach continues after the conviction for the first breach or after receipt of notice from the Health Officer or any person authorized by him to discontinue such breach: Provided that the amount of fine shall in no case exceed one hundred rupees.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 15--> No prosecution shall be instituted under the provisions of this Act except with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or such other officer as may be appointed by him in this behalf.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 16--> The Chief Commissioner may make rules for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Act, subject to the following conditions, viz - (a) The draft of the rules shall be published in the Coorg Gazette; (b) Such draft shall not be further proceeded with until six weeks after such publication or until such date as the Chief Commissioner may appoint; (c) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Coorg Gazette and upon such publication shall have effect as if enacted in this Act.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section 17--> The Vaccination Act of 1880 (Act No. XIII of 1880) is hereby repealed insofar as its provisions apply to Coorg.
Coorg Vaccination Act, 1950_Section Sch.-->  Form I [Form of Certificate referred to in Section 6(a)] The child*/person ...... aged ...... residing at ...... is not in a fit state for vaccination for a period of ......... on account .........of ............ Date......... Signature ............ Designation ......... *Note - In the case of child, name of parent or guardian of the child. Form II [Form of Certificate referred to in Sections 7(b) and 8] It is hereby certified that child*/person............ aged............ residing at ............ has been vaccinated/re-vaccinated on ............ and bears........................ marks. Date ............ Signature ............ Designation ............ *Note -In the case of child, name of parent or guardian of the child. 
