Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section Preamble--> An Act to make provision for the setting up of Debt Conciliation Boards to relieve agriculturists from indebtedness. Whereas, it is expedient to relieve agriculturists from indebtedness by amicable settlement between them and their creditors. And whereas, the previous sanction of the Governor General has been obtained, under Section 97 of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the passing of this Act. It is hereby enacted as follows -
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940.1 (2) It extends to the whole of the 2 [State] of Coorg. (3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification, appoint. Received the assent of the Governor General on the 12th February, 1940 Substituted by the A.O. 1950 1st January, 1941, Notification of the C.C. of Coorg No. A. 1-4168(1)/40, dated 12-11-1940
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - (a) "Agriculture" includes horticulture, the use of land for any purpose of husbandry, inclusive of the keeping or breeding of livestock, poultry or bees, sericulture and the growing of fruits, vegetables and the like; (b) the expressions "holding", "landholder" and "land" shall have to meanings assigned to them in the Coorg Land and Revenue Regulation I of 1899; (c) "Board" means a Debt Conciliation Board established under sub-section (1) of Section 3; (d) "Creditor" means a person to whom a debt is owing, and includes a co-operative society and a religious or a charitable institution; (e) "Debt" includes all liabilities owing to a creditor, in cash or kind, secured or unsecured, payable under a decree or order of a Civil Court or otherwise, whether mature or not, but shall not include arrears of wages, land revenue or anything recoverable as an arrear of land revenue, or any money for the recovery of which a suit is barred by limitation; (f) "Debtor" means a person who earns his livelihood mainly by agriculture, or who is an occupancy tenant or landholder, whether he cultivates the land personally or otherwise, whose debts exceed Rs. 150 or such lower amount, not being less than Rs. 50 as the Chief Commissioner may, by notification, prescribe for a particular area; (g) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 3--> (1) The Chief Commissioner may establish a Debt Conciliation Board for the 1 [State] or any part thereof. Such Board shall consist of a Chairman and two or more members, not exceeding 5 including the Chairman, to be appointed by the Chief Commissioner who may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel any appointment and dissolve any Board. (2) The Chairman and every member of a Board so established shall be appointed for a term not exceeding one year. Such Chairman or member may, on the expiration of the period for which he has been appointed, be again appointed from time to time for a further term not exceeding one ear. (3) A Board shall have such quorum as may be prescribed. (4) Where the Chairman and members of a Board are unable to agree, the opinion of the majority shall prevail. Where the Board is equally d vided the Chairman shall have a casting vote. (5) If at any time the Chairman of a Board is temporarily prevented from discharging him duties, he may nominate any member thereof to act for him during his temporary absence and such member shall, while so acting, have the same powers as the Chairman. Substituted by the A.O. 1950
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 4--> (1) A debtor or any of his creditors may apply to the Board appointed for the area in which any holding, land or village of the debtor, or any part thereof, is situate, to effect a settlement between the debtor and his creditors. (2) No debtor or creditor shall simultaneously make more than one application, and where applications have been made by the debtor and any of his creditors, the applications made by the creditors shall be merged in the application made by the debtor.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 4A--> (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Chief Commissioner may direct - (a) that after a specified date a Board shall not receive applications under Section 4; and (b) that applications under Section 4 received by the Board after a date (whether before or after the issue of a direction under this clause) fixed in this behalf and not finally disposed of by it on or before the date specified under clause (a) shall not be further proceeded with. The applications referred to in clause (b) shall be deemed to have been dismissed. (2) All applications received by a Board and not finally disposed of by it before it ceases to exist, shall be deemed to have been dismissed on the date on which the Board ceases to exist. Explanation -Nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to applications deemed to have been dismissed under sub-section (1)]. Inserted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. III of 1948
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 5--> Every application to a Board shall be in writing and shall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), for signing and verifying plaints.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 6--> (1) Every application presented by a debtor to a Board shall contain the following particulars, namely - (a) a statement that the debtor is unable to pay his debts; (b) the place where he resides; (c) the amount and particulars of all claims against him together with the names and residences of his creditors so far as they are known to, or can, by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence be ascertained by him; and (d) the amount and particulars of all his property, including claims due to him, together with a specification of the value of such property not consisting of money, and the place or places at which any such property is to be found. (2) Every application presented by a creditor shall contain the following particulars, namely - (a) the place where the debtor resides; and (b) the amount and particulars of his claim against such debtor.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 7--> The application shall be rejected if it does not comply with any of the requirements mentioned in Sections 5 and 6. The rejection of an application under this section shall not preclude the applicant from making a fresh application.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 8--> (1) On receipt of an application under Section 4, the Board shall, unless it rejects the application under Section 7, pass an order fixing a date and place for hearing the application: Provided that the Board may at any time dismiss the application if, for reasons to be stated in writing, it does not consider it desirable to attempt to effect a settlement between the debtor and his creditors. (2) Notice of the order under sub-section (1) shall be sent by registered post to the debtor or creditors, as the case may be. (3) If the application is presented by a creditor, the debtor shall, on his appearance, furnish the particulars mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 6, and notice shall be sent to all the creditors specified by him.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 9--> (1) If, on receipt of an application under Section 4, the Board admits the application as being within its jurisdiction or, under sub-section (1) of Section 8, dismisses it on the ground of want of jurisdiction, a debtor or his creditor may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice of admission or of the order of dismissal, as the case may be, make an objection in writing to the Board against such admission or dismissal. (2) On receipt of an objection under sub-section (1), the Board shall make such order thereon as it thinks fit and it shall be final. (3) If no objection is made under sub-section (1), or if an objection is made and decided under sub-section (2), the jurisdiction of the Board shall not be questioned in any Civil Court.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 10--> (1) If, after examining the debtor, it is in the opinion of the Board desirable to attempt to effect a settlement between him and his creditors, a notice shall be issued and served or published in the manner prescribed, calling upon every creditor of the debtor to submit a statement of debts owed to such creditor by the debtor. Such statement shall be submitted to the Board in writing on or before such date as the Board may fix in this behalf not being earlier than two months from the date of service or publication of the notice, as the case may be: Provided that, if the Board is satisfied that any creditor was, for good and sufficient cause, unable to comply with such directions, it may extend the period for the submission of his statement of the debt owed to him. (2) Every debt of which a statement is not submitted to the Board in compliance with the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be deemed for all purposes and all occasions to have been duly discharged: Provided that, if a creditor proves to the satisfaction of the Board that the notice was not served on him and that he had no knowledge of its publication or that he was prevented from complying with the provision of sub-section (1) on account of unforeseen or unavoidable difficulty or cause, the Board may revive the debt on application made within two months from the date on which he first had knowledge of the order of discharge: Provided also that, in any area in which a Board has been dissolved, the Civil Court may entertain an application for revival of the debt on the same conditions.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 11--> (1) Every creditor submitting a statement of the debts owed to him in compliance with a notice issued under sub-section (1) of Section 10 shall furnish, along with such statement, full particulars of all such debts and shall at the same time produce all documents, including entries in books of account, on which he relies to support his claims, together with a true copy of every such document: Provided that if the Board is satisfied that any creditor was for good and sufficient cause unable to produce such documents along with the statement, it shall require them to be produced on a date fixed for the purpose. (2) The Board shall, after marking for the purpose of identification every original document so produced and verifying the correctness of the copy, retain the copy and return the original to the creditor. (3) If any document which is in the possession or under the control of the creditor is not produced by him as required by sub-section (1), the document shall not be admissible in evidence against the debtor in any suit brought by the creditor or by any person claiming under him.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 12--> Every statement submitted under sub-section (1) of Section 10 together with all particulars furnished along with it under sub-section (1) of Section 11, shall be signed and verified in the manner prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), for signing and verifying plaints.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 13--> (1) The Board shall call upon the debtor and each creditor respectively to explain his case regarding each debt. (2) If there is a dispute as to the existence or the amount of the debt due to any creditor or the assets of any debtor the Board may decide the matter after taking such evidence as may be adduced by all the parties concerned and such decision shall be binding on all parties in all proceedings before the Board: Provided that a decree of a Civil Court relating to a debt shall be conclusive evidence as to the existence and amount of the debt. (3) The Board shall prepare a complete schedule of the creditors and of the assets and liabilities of the debtor.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 14--> (1) Subject to the provisions of Sections 132 and 133 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), and the rules made under Section 35, a Board shall have power to summon any person whose attendance it considers necessary either to be examined as a party or to give evidence as a witness or to produce any document for the purpose of ascertaining the antecedents of any debt or for any other purpose in connection with an inquiry under this Act. (2) Any person present may be required by a Board to give evidence or to produce any document then and there in his possession or power.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 15--> (1) Subject to rules made under this Act - (a) when any creditor agrees in respect of any debt owing to him to an amicable settlement with the debtor, the Board shall embody such settlement in writing; or (b) when creditors to whom there is owing not less than forty per cent of the total debt agree to an amicable settlement with the debtor, the Board, if it considers that an offer made by the debtor for the settlement of any debt not included in the amicable settlement is a fair offer which the creditor concerned ought reasonably to accept, may pass an order that the debt to which the offer relates shall be settled in accordance with such offer: Provided that for the purposes of this clause an offer shall not be considered by the Board to be a fair offer - (i) if its terms are less favourable than the terms of the amicable settlement relating to a debt of the same description, or (ii) if it contemplates the reduction of any debt to an amount which is less than the original principal of the debt unless creditors to whom there is owing not less than sixty per cent of the total debt agree to the proposed reduction: Provided also that, when a Co-operative Society is one of such creditors, no settlement, insofar as it affects the debts owing to such society, shall be valid without the previous approval in writing of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies. (2) The terms of any settlement of debt under sub-section (1) shall be embodied in an award to be made by the Board and such award shall include particulars showing the amounts payable to such creditors and the manner and the order in which and the times at which the amounts shall be paid. Such award shall be explained to the parties present and shall be signed or otherwise authenticated by the Board; but the validity of an award shall not be affected by the absence of any of the parties. (3) Every award thus made shall, within one month from the date of its making, be registered under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (XVI of 1908), by the Chairman of the Board in such manner as may be prescribed and it shall then take effect as if it were a decree of a Civil Court. (4) For the purpose of the registration of an award under sub-section (3) the Chairman of the Board shall be deemed to be an officer of Government empowered to execute such instrument within the meaning of Section 88 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908. Explanation -The words "total debt" means the sum total of all debts regarding the amount of which there is no doubt or dispute. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 16--> In any scheme of debt conciliation under this Act, such properties as are exempt from attachment or sale in execution of decrees under any law for the time being in force in Coorg shall not be taken into account except for purposes of assessing the debtor’s financial position based or the annual income from his land, and shall be left to the debtor free from any liability for his debts.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 17--> Where an 1 [award] registered under sub-section (3) of Section 15 relates to a debt which is secured by a mortgage, lien or charge on any immovable property of a debtor, such mortgage, lien or charge shall subsist to the extent of the amount payable to the creditor in respect of such debt in accordance with the terms of the 2 [award] until such amount has been paid or the property has been sold for the satisfaction of such debt. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 18--> (1) If a debtor defaults in paying any amount due in accordance with the terms of an 2 [award] registered under sub-section (3) of Section 15, such amount shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue on the application of the creditor made within ninety days from the date of default: Provided that properties referred to in Section 16 shall not be liable to attachment or sale for the recovery of any amount under this Act. (2) Where the 3 [Assistant Commissioner] has, under sub-section (1), recovered any amount which was payable in accordance with the terms of the 4 [award], he shall proceed to make payments as follows - (a) He shall, in the first instance, apply the sum realised from the sale of any portion of the immovable property referred to in Section 17 to the payment of any amount payable under the 5 [award] on account of a debt which is secured by a mortgage, lien or charge on such property in order of priority determined in accordance with the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (IV of 1882), and, if the said sum is insufficient to meet such payments, the amounts which have remained unpaid shall rank equally with unsecured debt; (b) If there is a surplus after the payments have been made under clause (a) he shall apply to the payment of any other amounts payable under the 6 [award] the sum of the surplus and of the proceeds realised from the sale of such portion of any other property of the debtor except property referred to in Section 16 as will, together with the surplus, be sufficient to meet the payment of such amounts; (c) If the sum of the surplus and sale proceeds referred to in clause (b) is insufficient to meet the payment of other amounts referred to therein, such other amounts and any amount payable on account of any unsecured debt for the recovery of which a decree has been passed by a Civil Court and of which details are given in the 7 [award] shall rank equally between themselves for the purposes of payment; (d) Any further surplus remaining after the payments have been made under clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall be paid by the 8 [Assistant Commissioner]. (3) Where the 9 [Assistant Commissioner] fails, under sub-section (1), to recover as an arrear of land revenue any part of the amount referred to therein, he shall certify that it is irrecoverable and thereupon the 10 [award] shall cease to subsist. (4) Where an 11 [award] ceases to subsist, any amount which was payable under such 12 [award] but has not been paid shall be recoverable as if a decree of a Civil Court had then been passed for its payment. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Schedule II of Coor Act No. VI of 1940 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940 Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 19--> (1) If a creditor refuses to accept any amount tendered to him by his debtor in accordance with the terms of an 1 [award] registered under sub-section (3) of Section 15 or if, in any case, the debtor is doubtful as to the person entitled to receive such amount, the debtor may apply to the 2 [Assistant Commissioner] for permission to deposit such amount with him. (2) An application made under sub-section (1) shall be in writing and shall contain - (a) a statement of the grounds on which it has been made; (b) the name of the creditor to whose credit the deposit is to be entered; and (c) the name of the persons to whom payment was last made and of the person now claiming it. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 20--> (1) If it appears to the 1 [Assistant Commissioner] that the applicant is entitled to make the deposit under Section 19 he shall receive such deposit and give a receipt therefor. (2) Payment of deposit -The 2 [Assistant Commissioner] shall cause a notice of such deposit to be served on every person who, he has reason to believe, claims or is entitled to it and may pay the amount thereof to any person appearing to him to be entitled to it, or may retain it pending the decision of a Civil Court as to the person entitled to it. Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940 Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 21--> A debtor who has made a deposit under Section 20 shall be held to have fulfilled the terms of the 2 [award]. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 22--> If no amicable settlement is arrived at under sub-section (1) of Section 15, the Board shall dismiss the application.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 23--> (1) Where, during the hearing of any application made under Section 4, any creditor refuses to agree to an amicable settlement, the Board may, if it is of opinion that the debtor has made such creditor a fair offer which the creditor ought reasonably to accept, grant the debtor a certificate, in such form as may be prescribed, in respect of the debts owed by him to such creditor. (2) Power of Court to disallow costs or interest -Where any creditor sues in a Civil Court for the recovery of a debt in respect of which a certificate has been granted under sub-section (1), the Court shall, notwithstanding the provisions of any law for the time being in force, not allow the plaintiff any costs in such suit, or any interest on the debt after the date of such certificate in excess of simple interest at six per cent per annum on the amount due on the date of such certificate. (3) Where after the registration of an 1 [award] under sub-section (3) of Section 15, any unsecured creditor sues for the recovery of a debt, other than a debt incurred subsequently to such 2 [award] in respect of which a certificate has been granted under sub-section (1) or any creditor sues for the recovery of a debt incurred after the date of such registration, any decree passed in such suit shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), not be executed until all amounts recorded as payable under such 3 [award] have been paid or such 4 [award] has ceased to subsist. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 24--> No suit or other legal proceedings shall be instituted against the Crown or any officer of the Crown in respect of anything done regarding a deposit under this Act, but nothing in this section shall prevent any person entitled to recover the amount of such deposit from recovering it from any person to whom it has been paid under Section 20.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 25--> No Civil Court shall entertain - (a) any suit in respect of - (i) any matter pending before a Board; or (ii) the validity of any procedure or the legality of any 1 [award] made under this Act; or (iii) the recovery of any debt recorded as wholly or partly payable under an 2 [award] registered under sub-section (3) of Section 15 from any person who, as a debtor, was party to such 3 [[award] whether such 4 [award] is subsisting or not; or (iv) the recovery of any debt which has been deemed to have been duly discharged under sub-section (2) of Section 10 except a debt which is revived under the proviso to that sub-section; (b) any application to execute a decree, the execution of which is suspended under sub-section (3) of Section 23. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 26--> Every transfer of property made, with intent to defeat or delay the creditors of the debtor, after an application has been made to a Board under Section 4 and until the 1 [award] registered in respect of such application has ceased to subsist, shall be voidable at the option of any creditor so defeated or delayed. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 27--> No appeal or application for revision shall lie against any order passed by a Board.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 28--> A Board may either on its own motion at any time or on the application from any person interested made within ninety days of the passing of an order, review any order passed by it and pass such order in reference thereto as it thinks fit: Provided that no order shall be varied or reversed unless notice has been given to the persons interested to appear and be heard in support of such order.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 29--> In any proceedings before a Board any party may appear in person or with the permission of the Board by an agent authorised in writing, but not by a legal practitioner.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 30--> When an application has been made to a Board under Section 4, any suit or other proceedings then pending before a Civil Court in respect of any debt for the settlement of which application has been made shall be suspended until the Board has disposed of the application: Provided that no decree, whether passed before the date of such application or passed in the suit after revival for the recovery of an unsecured debt in respect of which a certificate has been granted under sub-section (1) of Section 23, shall be executed until all amounts recorded as payable under an 1 [award] registered under sub-section (3) of Section 15 have been paid or such 2 [award] has ceased to subsist. Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Substituted by Section 2 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 31--> Where in the course of an inquiry into an application made under Section 4 a Board finds that there is any sum owing to Government on account of loans advanced under the Agriculturists’ Loan Act, 1884 (XII of 1884), of the Land Improvement Loans Act, 1883 (XIX of 1883), or otherwise, the Board shall report this fact to the 1 [Assistant Commissioner]. Substituted by Schedule II of Coorg Act No. VI of 1940
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 32--> 1 [(1)] In calculating the period of limitation for any suit filed in, or proceedings before, a Civil Court for the recovery of a debt which was the subject of any proceedings under this Act, the time during which such proceedings had continued 2 [as well as the time taken for the obtaining of certified copies of the board] shall be excluded. 3 [(2) The period during which proceedings under this Act have been pending including the actual period fixed in the award for payment of all the debts shall, in all suits filed or proceedings taken, in Civil Courts to recover debts, be excluded from computation under Section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908) or the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (IX of 1908).] Inserted by Section 3 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Inserted by Section 3 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943 Inserted by Section 3 of Coorg Act No. II of 1943
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 33--> The members of a Board shall be deemed to be public servants with in the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (XLV of 1860).
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 34--> All proceedings under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of Section 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 35--> In addition to any power specially conferred by this Act, the Chief Commissioner may make rules - (a) prescribing the quorum for, and regulating the procedure before, a Board; (b) prescribing the manner in which notices shall be issued a served or published under sub-section (1) of Section 10; (c) prescribing the charges to be made by a Board for anything done under this Act and the persons by whom and the manner in which such charges shall be paid; (d) prescribing the records to be kept and the returns to be made by a Board; (e) prescribing the allowances, if any, to be paid to the Chairman and members of a Board; (f) regulating the power of a Board to summon parties and witnesses under Section 14 and the grant of expenses to witnesses; (g) for the settlement of debts by a Board and prescribing the place at which and manner in which an award shall be registered under Section 15; (h) prescribing the form of certificate to be granted under sub-section (3) of Section 18 or sub-section (1) of Section 23; and (i) generally, for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
Coorg Debt Conciliation Act, 1940_Section 36--> (1) All rules for which provision is made in this Act shall be made by the Chief Commissioner and shall be consistent with this Act. (2) All rules shall be subject to the condition of previous publication in the Coorg Gazette. (3) In making any rule the Chief Commissioner may direct that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, and, where the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day after the first during which the breach has been persisted in. 
