Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section Preamble--> An Act to impose a cess on1 the manufacture of certain cotton textiles. WHEREAS it is expedient to impose a cess on2 manufacture of certain cotton textiles; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 .for certain cotton textiles manufactured in the provinces of India . Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 for "certain cotton textiles manufactured in the provinces of India ".
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Cotton the Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948. (2) It extends to the whole of India, except1 the territories which immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 31st day of December.1947. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.3) Order, 1956.for "Part B States".
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 2--> In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context (a) "cloth" and "yarn" mean respectively the cloth and yarn of which prices fixed by any order made under section 3 or continued by section 1 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Power) Act, 1946 (24 of 1946), were in force immediately before the commencement of this Act: (b) "Producer" Means a person engaged in the production of cloth or yarn or both by power as defined in clause (f) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1934 (25 of 1934).1 See now the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 3--> The Central Government may, by notification No.1 in the Official Gazette, levy on any cloth or yarn held in stock by a producer or a wholesale dealer on such date as the Central Government may fix in this behalf a cess at such rate as may be specified in the notification. 90/4 Tex.1/48 (I) dated the 2nd March, 1948, Gazette of India, 1948, Extraordinary , p.407.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 4--> Where before the date mentioned in station 3 a producer or wholesale on any dealer has made a contract of sale in respect of any cloth or yarn on which a cess is levied under section it shall be lawful for him to charge the amount of the cess to the buyer in addition to the contract price.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 5--> The cess shall be paid by the producer or the wholesale dealer as the case may be to such authority with in such time and in such manner as may be specified in the notification.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 6--> The cess shall be paid by the producer or the wholesale dealer as the case may be to such authority within such time and in such manner as may be specified in the notification.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 7--> The amount of cess in arrears and any sum imposed as penalty under section 6 shall, without prejudice to any other liability incurred under this Act be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 8--> Any authority authorized by the Central Government in this behalf may, with a view to securing compliance with this Act, (a) Require any producer or dealer to furnish to such authority such information relating to his business as that authority may specify; (b) inspect or cause to be inspected any books or other documents belonging to or under the control of such producer or dealer; (c) enter and search or authorize any person to enter and search any premises and seize or authorize any person on seize any cloth or yarn in respect of which he has reason to believe that a contravention of this Act has been or is about to be committed.
Cotton Textile Cess Act, 1948_Section 9--> (1) Whoever evades or attempts to evade the payment of cess payable by him under this Act or fails to comply with any order issued to him under clause (a) of section 8 or furnish any information which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be false or does not believe to be true, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extent to 6 months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both. (2) Any Court trying any offence under this Act may order that any cloth or yarn together with the packages or coverings thereof on respect of which the Court is satisfied that on offence under this Act has been committed shall be forfeited to the Central Government. 
