Court Fees Act, 1870_Section Preamble--> 
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Court Fees Act, 1870. Extent of Act- It extends to the whole of India except 1 [the territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States.] Commencement of Act- And it shall come into force on the first day of April, 1870. Substituted by Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “Part B States”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 1A--> 1 [In this Act "the appropriate government" means, in relation to fees or stamps relating to documents presented or to be presented before any officer serving under the Central Government, that government, and in relation to any other fees or stamps, the State Government.] Inserted by the A.O. 1937
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 2--> Repealed by AO, 1937 Earlier S. 2 (relating to repeal of enactments) repealed by Act 14 of 1870 and was added by Act 10 of 1901, s. 2. Later amended by Act 24 of 1917.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 3--> The fees payable for the time being to the clerks and officers (other than the Sheriffs and attorneys) of 1 [the 2 [High Courts other than those of Kerala, Mysore and Rajasthan]]; or chargeable in each of such courts under No. 11 of the First, and Nos. 7, 12, 14, 3 [...] 20 and 21 of Schedule II to this Act annexed; Levy of fees in Presidency Small Causes Courts- and the fees for the time being chargeable in the Courts of Small Causes at the Presidency-towns, and their several offices; shall be collected in manner hereinafter appearing. Substituted by the A.O. 1950, for “the Courts which are High Courts for the purposes of the Government of India Act, 1935”. Substituted by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 2) Order, 1956, for “High Courts for Part A States”. The number “16”, repealed by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 4--> No document of any of the kinds specified in the First or Second Schedule to this Act annexed, as chargeable with fees, shall be filed, exhibited or recorded in, or shall be received or furnished by, any of the said High Courts in any case coming before such Court in the exercise of its extraordinary original civil jurisdiction; or in the exercise of its extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction; In their appellate jurisdiction: or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the 1 [judgments (other than judgements passed in the exercise of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the Court) of one] or more Judges of the said Court, or of a Division Court; or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the Courts subject to its superintendence; as Courts of reference and revision: or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court of reference or revision; unless in respect of such document there be paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by either of the said Schedules as the proper fee for such document. Substituted by Act 19 of 1922, s. 2, for “judgment of two”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 5--> When any difference arises between the officer whose duty it is to see that any fee is paid under this Chapter and any suitor or attorney, as to the necessity of paying a fee or the amount thereof, the question shall, when the difference arises in any of the said High Courts to be referred to the taxing-officer, whose decision thereon shall be final, except when the question is, in his opinion, one of general importance, in which case he shall refer it to the final decision of the Chief Justice of such High Court, or of such Judge of the High Court as the Chief Justice shall appoint either generally or specially in this behalf. When any such difference arises in any of the said Courts of Small Causes, the question shall be referred to the Clerk of the Court, whose decision thereon shall be final, except when the question is, in his opinion, one of general importance, in which case he shall refer it to the final decision of the first Judge of such Court. The Chief Justice shall declare who shall be taxing-officer within the meaning of the first paragraph of this section.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 6--> Except in the Courts hereinbefore mentioned, no document of any of the kinds specified as chargeable in the First or Second Schedule to this Act annexed shall be filed, exhibited or recorded in any Court of Justice, or shall be received or furnished by any public officer, unless in respect of such document there be paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by either of the said Schedules as the proper fee for such document.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 7--> The amount of fee payable under this Act in the suits next hereinafter mentioned shall be computed as follows: (i) for money- In suits for money (including suits for damages or compensation, or arrears of maintenance, of annuities, or of other sums payable periodically)-according to the amount claimed; (ii) for maintenance and annuities- In suits for maintenance and annuities or other sums payable periodically-according to the value of the subject-matter of the suit, and such value shall be deemed to be ten times the amount claimed to be payable for one year; (iii) for other movable property having a market-value- In suits for movable property other than money, where the subject-matter has a market-value-according to such value at the date of presenting the plaint; (iv) In suits- (a) for movable property of no market-value- for movable property where the subject-matter has no market-value, as, for instance, in the case of documents relating to title, (b) to enforce a right to share in joint family property- to enforce the right to share in any property on the ground that it is joint family property, (c) for a declaratory decree and consequential relief- to obtain a declaratory decree or order where consequential relief is prayed, (d) for an injection- to obtain an injunction, (e) for easements- for a right to some benefit (not herein otherwise provided for) to arise out of land, and (f) for accounts- for accounts-according to the amount at which the relief sought is valued in the plaint or memorandum of appeal: In all such suits the plaintiff shall state the amount at which he values the relief sought 1 [...] ; (v) for possession of land, houses and gardens- In suits for the possession of land, houses and gardens- according to the value of the subject-matter; and such value shall be deemed to be- where the subject-matter is land, and- (a) where the land forms an entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual revenue to government, or forms part of such an estate and is recorded in the Collector's register as separately assessed with such revenue, and such revenue is permanently settled-ten times the revenue so payable; (b) where the land forms an entire estate, or a definite share of an estate, paying annual revenue to government, or forms part of such estate and is recorded as aforesaid; and such revenue is settled, but not permanently- five times the revenue so payable; (c) where the land pays no such revenue, or has been partially exempted from such payment, or is charged with any fixed payment in lieu of such revenue, and net profits have arisen from the land during the year next before the date of presenting the plaint-fifteen times such net profits; but where no such net profits have arisen therefrom- the amount at which the Court shall estimate the land with reference to the value of similar land in the neighbourhood; (d) where the land forms part of an estate paying revenue to government, but is not a definite share of such estate and is not separately assessed as above-mentioned-the market-value of the land: Proviso as to Bombay Presidency: PROVIDED that, in the [territories] subject to the Governor of Bombay in Council, the value of the land shall be deemed to be (1) where the land is held on settlement for a period not exceeding thirty years and pays the full assessment to government- a sum equal to five times the survey-assessment; (2) where the land is held on a permanent settlement, or on a settlement for any period exceeding thirty years, and pays the full assessment to government- a sum equal to ten times the survey assessment; and (3) where the whole or any part of the annual survey-assessment is remitted- a sum computed under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) of this proviso, as the case may be, in addition to ten times the assessment, or the portion of assessment, so remitted. Explanation: The word "estate", as used in this paragraph, means any land subject to the payment of revenue, for which the proprietor or a farmer or raiyat shall have executed a separate engagement to government, or which, in the absence of such engagement, shall have been separately assessed with revenue; (e) for houses and gardens- where the subject-matter is a house or garden according to the market-value of the house or garden; (vi) to enforce a right of pre-emption- In suits to enforce a right of pre-emption according to the value computed in accordance with paragraph (v) of this section of the land, house or garden in respect of which the right is claimed; (vii) for interest of assignee of land-revenue- In suits for the interest of an assignee of land-revenue-fifteen times his net profits as such for the year next before the date of presenting the plaint; (viii) to set aside an attachment- In suits to set aside an attachment of land or of an interest in land or revenue-according to the amount for which the land or interest was attached: PROVIDED that, where such amount exceeds the value of the land or interest, the amount of fee shall be computed as if the suit were for the possession of such land or interest; (ix) to redeem- In suits against a mortgagee for the recovery of the property mortgaged, to foreclose; and in suits by a mortgagee to foreclose the mortgage,or, where the mortgage is made by conditional sale, to have the sale declared absolute- according to the principal money expressed to be secured by the instrument of mortgage; (x) for specific performance- In suits for specific performance (a) of a contract of sale- according to the amount of the consideration; (b) of a contract of mortgage- according to the amount agreed to be secured; (c) of a contract of lease- according to the aggregate amount of the fine or premium (if any) and of the rent agreed to be paid during the first year of the term; (d) of an award- according to the amount or value of the property in dispute; (xi) between landlord and tenant- In the following suits between landlord and tenant:- (a) for the delivery by a tenant of the counterpart of lease, (b) to enhance the rent of a tenant having a right of occupancy, (c) for the delivery by a landlord of a lease, 2 [(cc) for the recovery of immovable property from a tenant, including a tenant holding over after the determination of a tenancy,] (d) to contest a notice of ejectment, (e) to recover the occupancy of 3 [Immovable] property from which a tenant has been illegally ejected by the landlord, and (f) for abatement of rent- according to the amount of the rent of the 4 [immovable] property to which the suit refers, payable for the year next before the date of presenting the plaint. The words “and the provision of the Code of Civil Procedure, section 31, shall apply as if, for the word ‘claim’, the words ‘relief sought’ were substituted” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I. Inserted by Act 6 of 1905, s. 2. Substituted by Act 6 1905, s. 2, for “land”. Substituted by Act 6 1905, s. 2, for “land”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 8--> The amount of fee payable under this Act on a memorandum of appeal against an order relating to compensation under any Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of land for public purposes, shall be computed according to the difference between the amount awarded and the amount claimed by the appellant.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 9--> If the Court sees reason to think that the annual net profits or the market-value of any such land, house or garden as is mentioned in section 7, paragraphs (v) and (vi), have or has been wrongly estimated, the court may, for the purpose of computing the fee payable in any suit therein mentioned, issue a commission to any proper person directing him to make such local or other investigation as may be necessary, and to report thereon to the Court.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 10--> (i) If in the result of any such investigation, the Court finds that the net profits or market-value have or has been wrongly estimated, the Court, if the estimation has been excessive, may in its discretion refund the excess paid as such fee: but, if the estimation has been insufficient, the Court shall require the plaintiff to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the said market-value or net profits been rightly estimated. (ii) In such case the suit shall be stayed until the additional fee is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed. 1 [...] Clause (iii) repealed by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 11--> In suits for mesne profits or for immovable property and mesne profits, or for an account, if the profits, or amount decreed are or is in excess of the profits claimed or the amount at which the plaintiff valued the relief sought, the decree shall not be executed until the difference between the fee actually paid and the fee which would have been payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits or amount so decreed shall have been paid to the proper officer. Where the amount of mesne profits is left to be ascertained in the course of the execution of the decree, if the profits so ascertained exceed the profits claimed, the further execution of the decree shall be stayed until the difference between the fee actually paid and the fee which would have been payable had the suit comprised the whole of the profits so ascertained is paid. If the additional fee is not paid within such time as the Court shall fix, the suit shall be dismissed.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 12--> (i) Every question relating to valuation for the purpose of determining the amount of any fee chargeable under this Chapter on a plaint or memorandum of appeal, shall be decided by the Court in which such plaint or memorandum, as the case may be, is filed, and such decision shall be final as between the parties to the suit. (ii) But whenever any such suit comes before a Court of appeal, reference or revision, if such Court considers that the said question has been wrongly decided, to the detriment of the revenue, it shall require the party by whom such fee has been paid to pay so much additional fee as would have been payable had the question been rightly decided, and the provisions of section 10, paragraph (ii), shall apply.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 13--> If an appeal or plaint, which has been rejected by the lower Court on any of the grounds mentioned in the Code of Civil Procedure , is ordered to be received, or if a suit is remanded in appeal, on any of the grounds mentioned in section 351 of the same Code, for a second decision by the lower Court, the Appellate Court shall grant to the appellant a certificate, authorizing him to receive back from the Collector the full amount of fee paid on the memorandum of appeal: PROVIDED that, if, in the case of a remand in appeal, the order of remand shall not cover the whole of the subject-matter of the suit, the certificate so granted shall not authorise the appellant to receive back more than so much fee as would have been originally payable on the part or parts of such subject-matter in respect whereof the suit has been remanded.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 14--> Where an application for a review of judgment is presented on or after the ninetieth day from the date of the decree, the Court, unless the delay was caused by the applicant's laches, may, in its discretion, grant him a certificate authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the application as exceeds the fee which would have been payable had it been presented before such day.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 15--> Where an application for a review of judgment is admitted, and where, on the rehearing, the Court reverses or modifies its former decision on the ground of mistake in law or fact, the applicant shall be entitled to a certificate from the Court authorizing him to receive back from the Collector so much of the fee paid on the 1 [application] as exceeds the fee payable on any other application to such Court under Schedule II to this Act, No. 1, clause (b) or clause (d). But nothing in the former part of this section shall entitle the applicant to such certificate where the reversal or modification is due, wholly or in part, to fresh evidence which might have been produced at the original hearing. Substituted by Act 20 of 1870, s. 1, for “plaint or memorandum of appeal”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 16--> Where the court refers the parties to the suit to any one of the mode of settlement of dispute referred to in section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 , the plaintiff shall be entitled to a certificate from the court authorising him to receive back from the collector, the full amount of the fee paid in respect of such plaint.] Inserted by Act 46 of 1999, s. 34, w.e.f. 1-7-2002. Earlier s. 16 relating to “Additional fee where respondent takes objection to unappealed part of decree” was repealed by Act 5 of 1908.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 17--> Where a suit embraces two or more distinct subjects, the plaint or memorandum of appeal shall be chargeable with the aggregate amount of the fees to which the plaints or memoranda of appeal in suits embracing separately each of such subjects would be liable under this Act. Nothing in the former part of this section shall be deemed to affect the power conferred by the Code of Civil Procedure , section 9.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 18--> When the first or only examination of a person who complains of the offence of wrongful confinement, or of wrongful restraint, or of any offence other than an offence for which police officers may arrest without a warrant, and who has not already presented a petition on which fee has been levied under this Act, is reduced to writing under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure , the complainant shall pay a fee of eight annas, unless the court thinks fit to remit such payment.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19--> Nothing contained in this Act shall render the following documents chargeable with any fee- (i) Power-of-attorney to institute or defend a suit when executed 1 [by a member of any of the Armed Forces of the Union] not in civil employment. (ii) [...] Repealed by Act 12 of 1891 (iii) Written statements called for by the Court after the first hearing of a suit. (iv) [...] Repealed by Act 13 of 1889 (v) Plaints in suit tried by Village Munsifs in the Presidency of Fort St. George. (vi) Plaints and processes in suits before district panchayats in the same Presidency. (vii) Plaints in suits before Collectors under Madras Regulation XII of 1816. (viii) Probate of a will, letters of administration, 2 [and, save as regards debts and securities, a certificate under Bombay Regulation VIII of 1827], where the amount or value of the property in respect of which the probate or letters or certificate shall be granted does not exceed one thousand rupees. (ix) Application or petition to a Collector or other officer making a settlement of land-revenue, or to a Board of Revenue, or a Commissioner of Revenue, relating to matters connected with the assessment of land, or the ascertainment of rights thereto or interests therein, if presented previous to the final confirmation of such settlement. (x) Application relating to a supply for irrigation of water belonging to government. (xi) Application for leave to extend to cultivation, or to relinquish land, when presented to an officer of land-revenue by a person holding, under direct engagement with government, land of which the revenue is settled but not permanently. (xii) Application for service of notice of relinquishment of land or of enhancement of rent. (xiii) Written authority to an agent to distrain. (xiv) First application (other than a petition containing a criminal charge or information) for the summons of a witness or other person to attend either to give evidence or to produce a document, or in respect of the production or filing of an exhibit not being an affidavit made for the immediate purpose of being produced in court. (xv) Bail bonds in criminal cases, recognizances to prosecute or give evidence, and recognizances for personal appearance or otherwise. (xvi) Petition, application, charge or information respecting any offence, when presented, made or laid to or before a police officer, or to or before the Heads of Villages or the Village Police in the territories respectively subject to the Governors in Council of Madras and Bombay. (xvii) Petition by a prisoner, or other person in duress or under restraint of any Court or its officers. (xviii) Complaint of a public servant (as defined in the Indian Penal Code ), a municipal officer, or an officer or servant of a Railway Company. (xix ) Application for permission to cut timber in government forests, or otherwise relating to such forests. (xx) Application for the payment of money due by government to the applicant. (xxi) Petition of appeal against the chaukidari assessment under 5 Act No. 20 of 1856 , or against any municipal tax. (xxii) Applications for compensation under any law for the time being in force relating to the acquisition of property for public purposes. (xxiii) Petitions presented to the Special Commissioner appointed under Bengal Act 2 of 1869 (to ascertain, regulate and record certain tenures in Chota Nagpur). 3 [(xxiv) Petitions under the Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 , sections 45 and 48.] Substituted by the A.O. 1950, for “by an officer, warrant-officer, non-Commissioned officer or private of Her Majesty’s Army”. Substituted by Act 7 of 1889, s. 13, for “and certificate mentioned in the First Schedule to this Act annexed, No. 12” Substituted by Act 15 of 1872, s. 2, for the clause (xxiv).
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19A--> Where any person on applying for the probate of a will or letters of administration has estimated the property of the deceased to be of greater value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has consequently paid too high a court-fee thereon, if within six months after the true value of the property has been ascertained, such person produces the probate or letters to the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority 1 [for the local area] in which the probate or letters has or have been granted, and delivers to such authority a particular inventory and valuation of the property of the deceased, verified by affidavit or affirmation, and if such authority is satisfied that a greater fee was paid on the probate or letters than the law required, the said authority may- (a) cancel the stamp on the probate or letters, if such stamp has not been already cancelled; (b) substitute another stamp for denoting the court-fee which should have been paid thereon; and (c) make an allowance for the difference between them as in the case of spoiled stamps, or repay the same in money, at his discretion. Substituted by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3(1), for “of the Province”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19B--> Whenever it is proved to the satisfaction of such authority that an executor or administrator has paid debts due from the deceased to such an amount as, being deducted out of the amount or value of the estate, reduces the same to a sum which, if it had been the whole gross amount or value of the estate, would have occasioned a less court-fee to be paid on the probate or letters of administration granted in respect of such estate than has been actually paid thereon under this Act, such authority may return the difference, provided the same be claimed within three years after the date of such probate or letters. But when, by reason of any legal proceeding, the debts due from the deceased have not been ascertained and paid, or his effects have not been recovered and made available, and in consequence thereof the executor or administrator is prevented from claiming the return of such difference within the said term of three years, the said authority may allow such further time for making the claim as may appear to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19C--> Whenever 1 [...] a grant of probate or letters of administration has been or is made in respect of the whole of the property belonging to an estate, and the full fee chargeable under this Act has been or is paid thereon, no fee shall be chargeable under the said Act when a like grant is made in respect of the whole or any part of the same property belonging to the same estate. Whenever such a grant has been or is made in respect of any property forming part of an estate, the amount of fees then actually paid under this Act shall be deducted when a like grant is made in respect of property belonging to the same estate identical with or including the property to which the former grant relates. The word “such” repealed by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19D--> The probate of the will, or the letters of administration of the effects of any person deceased heretofore or hereafter granted shall be deemed valid and available by his executors or administrators for recovering, transferring or assigning any movable or immovable property whereof or whereto the deceased was possessed or entitled, either wholly or partially as a trustee, notwithstanding the amount or value of such property is not included in the amount or value of the estate in respect of which court-fee was paid on such probate or letters of administration.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19E--> Where any person on applying for probate or letters of administration has estimated the estate of the deceased to be of less value than the same has afterwards proved to be, and has in consequence paid too low a court-fee thereon, the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority 1 [for the local area] in which the probate or letters has or have been granted, may, on the value of the estate of the deceased being verified by affidavit or affirmation, cause the probate or letters of administration to be duly stamped on payment of the full court-fee which ought to have been originally paid thereon in respect of such value and of the further penalty, if the probate or letters is or are produced within one year from the date of the grant, of five times, or, if it or they is or are produced after one year from such date, of twenty times, such proper court-fee, without any deduction of the court-fee originally paid on such probate or letters: PROVIDED that, if the application be made within six months after the ascertainment of the true value of the estate and the discovery that too low a court-fee was at first paid on the probate or letters, and if the said authority is satisfied that such fee was paid in consequence of a mistake or of its not being known at the time that some particular part of the estate belonged to the deceased, and without any intention of fraud or to delay the payment of the proper court-fee, the said Authority may remit the said penalty, and cause the probate or letters to be duly stamped on payment only of the sum wanting to make up the fee which should have been at first paid thereon. Substituted by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3(1), for “of the Province”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19F--> In case of letters of administration on which too low a court-fee has been paid at first, the said Authority shall not cause the same to be duly stamped in manner aforesaid until the administrator has given such security to the Court by which the letters of administration have been granted as ought by law to have been given on the granting thereof in case the full value of the estate of the deceased had been then ascertained.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19G--> Where too low a court-fee has been paid on any probate or letters of administration in consequence of any mistake, or of its not being known at the time that some particular part of the estate belonged to the deceased, if any executor or administrator acting under such probate or letters does not, within six months 2 [...] after the discovery of the mistake or of any effects not known at the time to have belonged to the deceased, apply to the said Authority and pay what is wanting to make up the court-fee which ought to have been paid at first on such probate or letters, he shall forfeit the sum of one thousand rupees and also a further sum at the rate of ten rupees per cent, on the amount of the sum wanting to make up the proper court-fee.] As to recovery of penalties or forfeitures under sec. 19G, see s. 19J of this Act. The words and figures “after the first day of April, 1875, or” omitted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19H--> (1) Where an application for probate or letters of administration is made to any court other than a High Court, the Court shall cause notice of the application to be given to the Collector. (2) Where such an application as aforesaid is made to a High Court, the High Court shall cause notice of the application to be given to the chief controlling revenue authority 2 [for the local area in which the High Court is situated]. (3) The Collector within the local limits of whose revenue-jurisdiction the property of the deceased or any part thereof is, may at any time inspect or cause to be inspected and take or cause to be taken copies of, the record of any case in which application for probate or letters of administration has been made; and if, on such inspection or otherwise, he is of opinion that the petitioner has underestimated the value of the property of the deceased, the Collector may, if he thinks fit, require the attendance of the petitioner (either in person or by agent) and take evidence and inquire into the matter in such manner as he may think fit, and, if he is still of opinion that the value of the property has been under-estimated, may require the petitioner to amend the valuation. (4) If the petitioner does not amend the valuation to the satisfaction of the Collector, the Collector may move the Court before which the application for probate or letters of administration was made, to hold an inquiry into the true value of the property: PROVIDED that no such motion shall be made after the expiration of six months from the date of the exhibition of the inventory required by section 277 of the 7 Indian Succession Act, 1865 , or, as the case may be, by section 98 of the Probate and Administration Act, 1881 . (5) The Court, when so moved as aforesaid, shall hold, or cause to be held, an inquiry accordingly, and shall record a finding as to the true value, as near as may be, at which the property of the deceased should have been estimated. The Collector shall be deemed to be a party to the inquiry. (6) For the purposes of any such inquiry, the Court or person authorised by the Court to hold the inquiry may examine the petitioner for probate or letters of administration on oath (whether in person or by commission), and may take such further evidence as may be produced to prove the true value of the property. The person authorized as aforesaid to hold the inquiry shall return to the Court the evidence taken by him and report the result of the inquiry, and such report and the evidence so taken shall be evidence in the proceeding, and the Court may record a finding in accordance with the report, unless it is satisfied that it is erroneous. (7) The finding of the Court recorded under sub-section (5) shall be final, but shall not bar the entertainment and disposal by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority of any application under section 19E. (8) The State Government may make rules for the guidance of Collectors in the exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3).] Inserted by Act 11 of 1899, s. 2. Earlier s. 19H was inserted by Act 13 of 1875, s. 6 and repealed by Act 8 of 1890, s. 2 and Sch. Substituted by Act 10 of 1901, s. 3(2), for “of the Province”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19I--> (1) No order entitling the petitioner to the grant of probate or letters of administration shall be made upon an application for such grant until the petitioner has filed in the court a valuation of the property in the form set forth in Schedule III, and the court is satisfied that the fee mentioned in No. 11 of Schedule I has been paid on such valuation. (2) The grant of probate or letters of administration shall not be delayed by reason of any motion made by the Collector under section 19H, sub-section (4).] Inserted by Act 11 of 1899, s. 2.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19J--> (1) Any excess fee found to be payable on an inquiry held under section 19H, sub-section (6), and any penalty or forfeiture under section 19G may, on the certificate of the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority, be recovered from the executor or administrator as if it were an arrear of land-revenue by any Collector 2 [[...] . (2) The Chief Controlling Revenue-authority may remit the whole or any part of any such penalty or forfeiture as aforesaid, or any part of any penalty under section 19E or of any court-fee under section 19E in excess of the full court-fee which ought to have been paid.] Inserted by Act 11 of 1899, s. 2. The words “in any part of British India” omitted by the A.O. 1948.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 19K--> Nothing in section 6 or section 28 shall apply to probates or letters of administration.] Inserted by Act 11 of 1899, s. 2.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 20--> The High Court shall, as soon as may be, make rules as to the following matters:- (i) the fees chargeable for serving and executing processes issued by such Court in its appellate jurisdiction and by the other Civil and Revenue Courts established within the local limits of such jurisdiction; (ii) the fees chargeable for serving and executing processes issued by the Criminal Courts established within such limits in the case of offences other than offences for which police-officers may arrest without a warrant; and (iii) the remuneration of the peons and all other persons employed by leave of a Court in the service or execution of processes. The High Court may from time to time alter and add to the rules so made. Confirmation and publication of rules- All such rules, alterations and additions shall, after being confirmed by the State Government 1 [...] be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law. Until such rules shall be so made and published, the fees now leviable for serving and executing processes shall continue to be levied, and shall be deemed to be fees leviable under this Act. The words “and sanctioned by the Governor General of India in Council” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 21--> A table in the English and vernacular languages, showing the fees chargeable for such service and execution, shall be exposed to view in a conspicuous part of each court.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 22--> Subject to rules to be made by the High Court and approved by the State Government 1 [...], every District Judge and every Magistrate of a District shall fix, and may from time to time alter, the number of peons necessary to be employed for the service and execution of processes issued out of his Court and each of the Courts subordinate thereto. Number of peons in Mofussil Small Causes Courts- And for the purposes of this section, every Court of Small Causes established under 8 Act No. 11 of 1865 (to consolidate and amend the law relating to Courts of Small Causes beyond the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Courts of Judicature) shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court of the District Judge. The words “and the Governor General of India in Council” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 23--> Subject to rules to be framed by the Chief Controlling Revenue Authority and approved by the State Government 1 [...], every officer performing the functions of a Collector of a District shall fix, and may from time to time alter, the number of peons necessary to be employed for the service and execution of processes issued out of his Court or the Courts subordinate to him. The words “and the Governor General of India in Council” omitted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 24--> Repealed by the Amending Act, 1891 , s. 2 and Sch. I
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 25--> All fees referred to in section 3 or chargeable under this Act shall be collected by stamps.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 26--> The stamps used to denote any fees chargeable under this Act shall be impressed or adhesive, or partly impressed and partly adhesive, as the 1 [appropriate government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time direct. Substituted by the A.O. 1937, for “Local Government”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 27--> The 1 [appropriate government] may, from time to time, make rules for regulating (a) the supply of stamps to be used under this Act; (b) the number of stamps to be used for denoting any fee chargeable under this Act; (c) the renewal of damaged or spoiled stamps; and (d) the keeping accounts of all stamps used under this Act: PROVIDED that, in the case of stamps used under section 3 in a High Court, such rules shall be made with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of such Court. All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law. Substituted by the A.O. 1937, for “Local Government”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 28--> No document which ought to bear a stamp under this Act shall be of any validity, unless and until it is properly stamped. But, if any such document is through mistake or inadvertence received, filed or used in any Court or office without being properly stamped, the presiding Judge or the head of the office, as the case may be, or, in the case of a High Court, any Judge of such Court, may, if he thinks fit, order that such document be stamped as he may direct; and, on such document being stamped accordingly, the same and every proceeding relative thereto shall be as valid as if it had been properly stamped in the first instance.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 29--> Where any such document is amended in order merely to correct a mistake and to make it conform to the original intention of the parties, it shall not be necessary to impose a fresh stamp.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 30--> No document requiring a stamp under this Act shall be filed or acted upon in any proceeding in any Court or office until the stamp has been cancelled. Such officer as the Court or the head of the office may from time to time appoint shall, on receiving any such document, forthwith effect such cancellation by punching out the figure-head so as to leave the amount designated on the stamp untouched, and the part removed by punching shall be burnt or otherwise destroyed.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 31--> Repealed by the Code of Criminal Procedure(Amendment) Act, 1923
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 32--> Repealed by the Amending Act, 1891 , section2 and Schedule I
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 33--> Whenever the filing or exhibition in a Criminal Court of a document in respect of which the proper fee has not been paid is, in the opinion of the presiding Judge, necessary to prevent a failure of justice, nothing contained in section 4 or section 6 shall be deemed to prohibit such filing or exhibition.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 34--> (1) The 2 [appropriate government] may from time to time make rules for regulating the sale of stamps to be used under this Act, the person by whom alone such sale is to be conducted, and the duties and remuneration of such persons. (2) All such rules shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law. (3) Any person appointed to sell stamps who disobeys any rule made under this section, and any person not so appointed who sells or offers for sale any stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. Substituted by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. II, for section 34. Substituted by the A.O. 1937, for “Local Government”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 35--> The 1 [appropriate government] may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, reduce or remit, in the whole or in any part of 2 [the territories under its administration], all or any of the fees mentioned in the First and Second Schedules to this Act annexed, and may in like manner cancel or vary such order. Substituted by the A.O. 1937, for “Local Government”. Substituted by Act 38 of 1920, s. 2 and Sch. I, for “British India”.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 36--> Nothing in Chapters II and V of this Act applies to the commission payable to the Accountant General of the High Court at Fort William, or to the fees which any officer of a High Court is allowed to receive in addition to a fixed salary.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section Sch.1--> THE FIRST SCHEDULE SCHEDULE I
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section Sch.2--> THE SECOND SCHEDULE SCHEDULE II
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section Sch.3--> (See section 19-I) FORM OF VALUATION (TO BE USED WITH SUCH MODIFICATIONS, IF ANY, AS MAY BE NECESSARY) In the Court of ................................. Re: Probate of the Will of ................................................................ (or administration of the property and credits of ......................................................................,) deceased. I, ..............................................................., solemnly affirm/make oath and say that I am the executor (or one of the executors or one of the next-of-kin) of .............................................................., deceased, and that I have truly set forth in Annexure A to this affidavit all the property and credits of which the above named deceased died possessed or was entitled to at the time of this death, and which have come, or are likely to come, to my hands. 2. I further say that I have also truly set forth in Annexure B all the items I am by law allowed to deduct. 3. I further say that the said assets, exclusive only of such last-mentioned items, but inclusive of all rents, interest, dividends and increased values since the date of the death of the said deceased, are under the value of.................................................................. Inserted by Act 11 of 1889, s. 3. Earlier Schedule III was repealed by Act 14 of 1870, s. 1 and Sch.
Court Fees Act, 1870_Section 1--> VALUATION OF THE MOVEABLE AND IMMOVABLE,PROPERTY OF --, DECEASED - Rs. A. P. Cash in the house and at the banks, household goods, wearing apparel, books, plate, jewels, etc.  (State estimated value according to best of Executor's or Administrator's belief)  Property in Government securities transferable at the Public Debt Officer.  (State description and value at the price of the day; also the interest separately, calculating it to the time of, making the application.)  Immovable property, consisting of  (State description, giving, in the case of house, the assessed value, if any, and the number of years' assessment the market value is estimated at, and in the case of land, the area, the market-value and all rents that have accrued.)  Leasehold property  (If the deceased held any leases for year determinable, state the number of years , purchase the profit rents are estimated to be worth and the value of such, inserting separately arrears due to the date of death and all rents received or due since that date to the time of making the application.)  Property in public companies  (State the particulars and the value calculated at the price of day; also the interest separately, calculating it to the time application.)  Policy of insurance upon life, money out on mortgage and securities, such bonds, mortgage, bills, notes and other money  (State the amount of the whole; also the interest separately, calculating it to the time of making the application.)  Book debts  (Other than bad)  Stock in trade  (State the estimated value, if any)  Other property not comprised under the foregoing  heads  (State the estimated value, if any)  Total  Deduct amount shown in Annexure B not subject to duty  Net Total  ANNEXURE B SCHEDULE OF DEBTS, ETC.  Rs. A. P. Amount of debts due and owing from the deceased, payable by law out of the estate  Amount of funeral expenses  Amount of mortgage incumberances  Property held in trust not beneficially or with general power to confer a beneficial interest  Other property not subject to duty  Total  
