Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and the representation of the people Act, 1951 and to provide against printing and publication of certain objection matters.BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 1--> This Act may be called the Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 2--> In the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860.) (hereinafter referred to as the Indian Penal Code, 1860 ), for section 153A, the following section shall be substituted, namely ;-- "153A.Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.- (1) whoever -- (a) by words, either spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups ornament castes or communities, or (b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and which disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquillity, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. (2) Offence committed in place of workshop, etc.- whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of workshop or in any place or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious workshop or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine".
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 3--> Section 505 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section, and --- (i) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered but before the Exception, the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :-- "(2) Statements creating or removing enmity, hatred or ill- will between classes.- Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or alarming news with interest in create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, or grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings off enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or relational groups or cassettes or communities, shall be a punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine, or with both. (3) Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship, etc.- whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of workshop or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious workshop of religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall be liable to fine"; (ii) in the Exception, after the words "circulates it", the words "in good faith and" shall be inserted.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 4--> In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 , -------- (a) in section 196, for the words "the State Government or section officer empowered by the State Government by the State Government in this behalf", the words "the State Government or District Magistrate or such other offence of may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf" shall be substituted; (b) in Schedule II, ---- (i) for the entries in columns 1 to 8 relating to section 153A, the following entries shall be substituted, namely :-- Promoting enmity between classes. Imprisonment Of either description for three years, or fine, Or both. Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 153 A(1) Promoting enmity between classes. May arrest without Warrant Warrant Not bailable. ditto Imprisonment Of either description for three years, or fine, Or both. Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class. 153A(2) Promoting Enmity between classes in place of workshop, etc. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Imprisonment Of either description for Five years ditto.    (ii) for the entry in column 3 relating to section 154, the entry "shall not arrest without warrant" shall be substituted ; (iii) for the entries in columns 1 to 8 relating to section 505, the following entries shall be substituted, namely; Ditto. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 505(1) False statement, rumuor, etc., with intent to cause mutiny or offence against the public peace. May arrest without warrant. Ditto Not baildable Not Com pound able Imprisonment of either descriptions for Three years or fine, or both. Presidency Magistrate or Magistrate Of the first class. 505(1) False statement, rumuor, etc., with intent to create on enmity hatred or ill-will between different classes. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Imprisonment of either description for Three years, or or fine, or both Ditto. False statement, rumour, etc., with intent to create on enmity hatred or ill-will between different classes. Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto Ditto (iv) for the entries in columns 3 and 7 relating to section 506 as applicable to "Criminal intimidation" (first paragraph) the entries "Shall not arrest without warrant" and "Imprisonment of either description for 2 years, or fine, or both" shall, respectively, be substituted.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 5--> In section 8 of the Representation of the people Act, 1951 (43 of 1951.), in sub-section (1), for the words, figures and letters "section 171E or section 171F of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 ", the words, figures and letters "section 153A or section 171F or sub-set in (2) or sub-section (3) of section 505 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 " shall be substituted.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 6--> (1) The Central Government or a State Government or any authority so authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, if satisfied that such action is necessary for the purpose of preventing or combating nay activity prejudicial to the maintenance of communal harmony and affecting or likely or affect public order, may by order in writing addressed to the printer, publisher or editor, prohibit the printing or publications of any document or any class of documents of any matters relating to a particular subject or class of subjects for a specified period or in a particular issues or issues of a newspaper or periodical: Provided that no such order shall remain in force or more than two months from the making thereof: Provided further that the person against whom the order has been made may, within ten days of the communications of the order, make a representation,:- (i) to the Central Government, where such order is made by the Central Government or any authority authorised by it; and (ii) to the State Government, where such order is made by the State Government. and the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, after the consolation with a committee, to be known as Press Consultative, Committee, dispose of the matter, modifying, confirming or rescinding the over. (2) In the event of disobedience of an order made under sub-section (1), the Central Government or the State Government or the authority issuing the order as the case may be, may, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the person guilty of the disobedience is liable under this Act or under may any other law for the time being in force, direct that copies of the publication made in violation of an order made under sub-section (1) be seized, and that any printing press or other instrument or apparatus use in the publication be closed down for the periods such order is in operation.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 7--> Whoever contravenes, disobeys, or neglects to comply with any order made under section 6 of this Act, shall on Conviction, be Punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to one year, or with fine up to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Criminal and Election Laws Amendment Act, 1969_Section 8--> (1) A Press Consultative Committee referred to in the second proviso, to sub-section (1) of section 6, shall consist of such number of persons, being editors, publishers, and journalists, as may be prescribed, by rules made under this section. (2) The Central Government may make rules for the constitution of Press Consultative Committees, the term of office of the members of such Committees, the allowances, if any, to be paid to such members the attending the meetings of the Committee and the manner of filling causes vacancies among them, and for all matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. (3) In particular and without prejudice to the generally of the force power under sub-section (2), such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the number of persons who may be appointed as members of a Press Consultative Committee and the class or category of persons from whom such members are to be appointed; (b) the authority or authorities which may such appointments; (c) the procedure to be followed by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, in consulting the Press Consultative Committee; (d) the procedure to be followed by the press Consultative Committee; (e) any other matter for which rules have to be made for enabling the Press Consultative Committee to function. (4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
