Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the regulation of the production, supply and distribution of jute goods in the 1 [State of Tamil Nadu]. WHEREAS it is necessary to provide for the regulation of the production, supply and distribution of jute goods in the 2 [State of Tamil Nadu] It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted for Province of Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted for Province of Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The 3[Tamil Nadu] Jute Goods Control Act, 19491 . (2) It extends to the whole of the 2 [State] of 3 [Tamil Nadu]. (3) It shall come into force at once. Received the assent of the Governor-General on the 10th December, 1949; first published in the Fort St. George Gazette, Extraordinary on the 14th December, 1949 This word was substituted for the word Province by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) Controller means the Jute Controller appointed by the 1 [State] Government under section 3; (b) jute goods includes all jute manufactures. This word was substituted for the word Province, by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, appoint any person to be the Jute Controller for the State.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the control of the State Government, the Controller, so far as it appears to him to be necessary or expedient for regulating, maintaining or increasing the production, supply or distribution of jute goods, may, by order in writing- (a) require any person holding a stock of jute goods to sell the whole or a specified part thereof at such prices and to such person (including the Central or State Government or in such circumstances as may be specified in the order; (b) require any person engaged in the production of jute goods to comply with such directions as may be specified in the order as to the type, quality or quantity of the jute goods to be produced or delivered by him from time to time. (2) Any person to whom an order is issued under sub-section (1) shall comply with such order, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any contract or other instrument to which he is a party.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person contravenes any order issued to him by the Controller under section 4, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the person contravening an order issued by the Controller under section 4 is a company or other body corporate, every director, manager, secretary or other officer or agent thereof shall, unless he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent such contravention, be deemed to be guilty of such contravention.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on a report in writing of the facts constituting such offence made by the Controller.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person (including the Controller) for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any order issued under section 4. (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government, the Controller or any other person, in respect of any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in go of faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any order issued under section 4.
Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Act, 1949_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Tamil Nadu Jute Goods Control Ordinance, 1949 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any notifications or orders issued, action taken, or thing done in the exercise of any power conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been issued, taken or done in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under this Act as if this Act had come into force on the 5th day of November, 1949. 
