Letters Patent Providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to amend the Letters Patent providing for the appointment of Sheriff at Fort St. George or Madraspatnam bearing the date the Twenty-sixth Day of December, One Thousand Eight Hundred. Whereas it is expedient to amend the Letters Patent providing for the appointment of Sheriff at Fort St. George or Madraspatnam bearing date the Twenty-sixty day of December, One Thousand and Eight Hundred for the purpose hereinafter appearing; Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in Thirty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Letters Patent Providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Letters-Patent providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 19831 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th December, 1982. Received the assent of the President on the 2nd March, 1983 and published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, dated March 4, 1983
Letters Patent Providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Letters Patent providing for the appointment of Sheriff at Fort St. George or Madraspatnam bearing date the Twenty-sixth Day of December, One Thousand Eight Hundred, to the clause commencing with the portion. And We do further, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, grant, ordain and appoint, that the persons who shall be Sheriff at Fort St. George or Madraspatnsm and ending with the portion shall be committed to the custody of such Sheriff, by the said Supreme Court of Judicatute at Madras, or by the Chief Justice, or any of the said Puisne Justices of the said Court, respectively, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- Provided that the State Government may, instead of appointing a new Sheirff as aforesaid, direct, in public interest, by notification, that the same person may continue as Sheriff for a further period of one year.
Letters Patent Providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Letters Patent providing for Sheriff Appointment (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 15 of 1982) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Letters Patent providing for the appointment of Sheriff at Fort St. George or Madraspatnam bearing date the Twenty-sixth Day of December, One Thousand Eight Hundred, as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the said Letters Patent as amended by this Act. 
