Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the improvement of live-stock in the State of Tamil Nadu Whereas it is expedient to provide for the improvement of live-stock in the 1 [State of Tamil Nadu]; 2 [It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted for "Province of Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. These words were substituted for the paragraph containing the enacting formula and the paragraph preceding that paragraph by Section 5 of the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948).
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called THE 1 [Tamil Nadu] Live Stock Improvement Act, 19402 3 . (2) It extends to the whole of the 4 [State] of 5 [Tamil Nadu]. 6 (3) This section shall come into force at once and the 7 [State] Government may from time to time by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette apply all or any of the remaining provisions of this Act to the whole or any portion of the 8 [State] of 9 [Tamil Nadu] from such date and for such period, if any, as may be specified in the notification, and may cancel or modify any such notification. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on the 29th August, 1940, Published in the Fort St. George Gazette, dated 3rd September, 1940. Fort St. George Gazette, dated 13th March, 1940, Part IV-A, This Act was extended to Kanyakumari district and the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district by Section 3 of and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu (Transferred Territory) Extension of Laws Act, 1957 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1957) repealing the corresponding law in force in that territory. The word was substituted for the word Province by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Section 1 came into force on the 3rd September, 1940. The remaining sections have been applied to certain portions of the State from time to time. Substituted for "Province of Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted for "Province of Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) "bull" includes a buffalo-bull; (b) "cow" includes a buffalo-cow and a heifer; (c) "Director" means the officer appointed by the 1 [State] Government as the 2 [Director of Animal Husbandry] for the 3 [State] of 4 [Tamil Nadu] and includes any other person on whom the powers or duties of the Director under this Act have been conferred or imposed under Section 3; (d) "licence" means a licence granted under Section 4; (e) "licensing officer" means the Director or any other officer or person authorised to grant licences under Section 4; (f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (g) a person is said to "keep a bull" if he owns the bull or has the bull in his possession or custody; and (h) a bull is said to be "castrated" if it is rendered incapable of propagating its species. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted, for the words Director of Veterinary Services by Section 3 of and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State] Government may, by general or Special order, confer or impose on any person all or any of the powers or duties of a Director under this Act. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall keep a bull which has attained the prescribed age except under and in accordance with the terms, conditions and restrictions of a licence granted under this section, unless it is certified by the prescribed officer, that the bull has been effectively castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director. Explanation - Where a person keeps more than one bull, he shall obtain a separate licence in respect of each bull. (2) Every licence under this section shall be granted by the Director or any officer or person authorised by him by general or special order. It shall be in such form, for such period, and subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed. No fee shall be charged for the grant of the licence.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, the licensing officer may refuse to grant or any revoke a licence in respect of any bull if in his opinion the bull appears to be- (a) of defective or inferior conformation and consequently likely to beget defective or inferior progeny, or (b) suffering from an incurable contagious or infectious disease or from any other disease rendering the bull unsuitable for breeding purposes, or (c) of a breed which is undesirable to propagate in the district or part of the district in which it is kept. (2) The licensing officer may also revoke a licence granted in respect of any bull kept within his jurisdiction (whether such licence was granted by himself or by any other officer) if in his opinion- (a) the licence was granted under circumstances of which the licensing officer was not aware at the time of granting the licence, or (b) there has been a breach of any of the terms, conditions or restrictions of the licence. (3) If a licence is revoked under this section, the officer revoking the licence shall give notice thereof to the person keeping the bull or to the persons stated in the licence to be the owner of the bull. The notice shall set out the grounds for the revocations. (4) No person shall be entitled to any compensation for the refusal or revocation of any licence under this section.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A licence granted in respect of a bull shall be surrendered without delay to the licensing officer, if (a) the period specified in the licence expires, or (b) the licence is revoked under this Act, or (c) the bull dies, or is certified by the prescribed officer to have been effectively cas-trated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The licensing officer may by order require any person keeping a bull to submit it for inspection by himself or by any officer or person deputed by him for the purpose at any reasonable time either at the place where the bull is kept for the time being or at any other reasonable place specified in the order, and thereupon it shall be the duty of the person keeping the bull to submit it for inspection accordingly, and render all reasonable assistance in connection with such inspection to the officer concerned.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The licensing officer may by order require any person keeping a bull which in his opinion has attained the prescribed age, and in respect of which no licence is for the time being in force under this Act, to have it castrated, within one month from the date of service of the order, by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and specified in the order. (2) Such castration shall be performed or caused to be performed by the licensing officer free of charge, unless the owner or other person keeping the bull desires to make his own arrangements for complying with the order.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any notice or order is served under Section 5, Section 7, or Section 8 on any person who is not the owner of the bull, it shall be the duty of that persons forthwith to take all reasonable steps to inform the owner of the contents of such notice or order, and if he fails to do so, he shall be liable to indemnify the owner against any loss the owner may sustain by reason of such failure.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be the duty of any person who for the time being keeps a bull in respect of which a licence has been obtained and is in force, to produce such licence- (a) within a reasonable time, at any place where the bull is for the time being, on demand made by a licensing officer of an 1 [Officer of the Animal Husbandry Department not below the rank of Assistant Surgeon), or an officer of the Agricultural Department not below the rank of Upper Subordinate, or an officer of the Revenue Department not below the rank of Revenue Inspector, or such other officer as may be authorised in this behalf by the 2 [State] Government by general or special order, or (b) before a cow is served by the bull, on demand made by person in charge of the cow. These words were substituted for the words officer of the Veterinary department not below the rank of Vet-erinary Assistant Surgeon by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever- (a) keeps a bull in contravention of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder or of any terms, conditions or restrictions of a licence, or (b) neglects or fails to submit a bull for inspection when required to do so, under Section 7, or (c) neglects or fails to comply with an order served under Section 8, or (d) neglects or fails to produce a licence when required to do so under Section 10, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a second or any subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If a person who keeps a bull neglects or fails to submit it for inspection, or to have it castrates when required to do so under Section 7 or Section 8 the licensing officer may direct that the bull shall be castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and marked with prescribed mark in the prescribed manner, free of charge. (2) (a) If it is not known in whose ownership, possession or custody a bull is for the time being and the fact cannot be ascertained after an inquiry in the prescribed manner, the licensing officer may seize the bull or cause it to be seized, and if he is of opinion that the bull has attained the prescribed age and is unsuitable for breading purposes on any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of Section 5 may direct that the bull shall be castrated by a method and in a manner approved by the Director and marked with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner, free of charge. (b) Every bull seized under clause (e) shall after it has been castrated and marked as aforesaid where necessary, be sold by public auction or sent to a pinjrapole or infirmity recognised by the 1 [State] Government in this behalf. (c) In case the owner of any bull seized under clause (a) appears before the licensing officer within such time as may be prescribed in this behalf and proves to the satisfaction of such officer that the bull is owned by him- (i) in case the bull has been sold by public auction, the proceeds of such sale shall be paid to the owner after deducting therefrom the cost, charges and expenses incurred for the maintenance and sale of the bull; and (ii) in any other case, the bull shall be delivered to the owner on payment of the cost, charges and expenses incurred for its maintenance. (d) The costs, charges and expenses referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (i) of clause (c) shall be determined in the prescribed manner. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For the purposes of this Act, a licensing officer or any officer or person authorised by him in this behalf shall have power at all reasonable times- (a) to inspect any bull; (b) to mark any bull with a prescribed mark in the prescribed manner; and (c) subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, as may be prescribed, to enter any premises or other place where he has reason to believe that a bull is kept.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be the duty of all village officers and servants and of all officers of the 1 [Animal Husbandry], Agricultural and Revenue Departments- (a) to give immediate information to the nearest licensing officer of the commission of any offence, or of the intention or preparation to commit any offence punishable under this Act, which may come to their knowledge; (b) to take all reasonable measures in their power to prevent the commission of any such offence which they may know or have reason to believe is about or likely to be committed and (c) to assist any licensing officer in carrying out the provisions of this Act. These words were substituted for the words Veterinary by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948).
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No Magistrate shall take cognisance of any offence under this Act except upon a complaint made by licensing officer or any person authorised by such officer in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Director, every licensing officer, all officers such persons authorised by the Director or a licensing officer, under this Act, and all village officers and servants, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie against any officer or servant of the 1 [State] Government for any act done or purporting to be done under this Act without the previous sanction of the 2 [State] Government. (2) No officer or servant of the 3 [State] Government shall be liable in respect of any such act in any civil or criminal proceeding if the act was done in good faith in the course of the execution of duties or the discharge of functions imposed by or under this Act. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit shall be instituted against the 1 [Government] and no suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall be instituted against any officer or servant of the 2 [State] Government in respect of any act done or purporting to be done under this Act unless the suit, prosecution or other proceeding is instituted within six months from the date of the act complained of. This word was substituted for the word Crown by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State] Government may at any time either suo motu or on application call for and examine the record of any order passed by, or any proceedings recorded by any officer or person under this Act, for the purpose of satisfying themselves as to the legality or propriety of such order as to the regularity of such proceedings, and may pass such order in reference thereto as they think fit. Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the orders of proceedings of any Court or Magistrate. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) the 1 [State] Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) the circumstances in which duplicates of licences may be granted, the fees which may be charged for the grant of such duplicates, and the conditions restrictions and limitations subject to which they may be granted; (c) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by officers appointed under this Act, and the procedure of such officers; and (d) the service of notice and orders issued under this Act. (3) In making a rule under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 1[State] Government may provide that a person guilty of a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. (4) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall be subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication. (5) All rules made under this Section shall be published in the Fort St. George Gazette and upon such publication shall have effect as if enacted in this Act. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Live-Stock Improvement Act, 1940_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Section 21 was omitted by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948) 
