Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the fixation of ceiling on agricultural land holdings and for certain other matters connected therewith in the State of Tamil Nadu. Whereas under clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution of India, the State should, in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to sub serve the common good and that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment; And whereas the area of agricultural land available for cultivation in the State is limited; And whereas there is great disparity in the ownership of agricultural land leading to the concentration of such land in the hands of certain persons; And whereas it is necessary to reduce such disparity in the ownership of agricultural land in the State; And whereas it is necessary to fix a ceiling on the agricultural land holdings; And whereas is it necessary to acquire the agricultural land in excess of the ceiling area and to distribute such land to the landless and other persons among the rural population; And whereas such distribution will best sub serve the common good, increase agricultural production and promote justice, social and economic; And whereas it is expedient to provide for all these and other matters connected therewith; Be it enacted in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 19612 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of 3 [Tamil Nadu] Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the President on the 13th April, 1962; Published in the "Fort St. George Gazette" Part IV, Section 4, dated 2nd May, 1962. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of Sub-section (2) and (3) of Section 6 nothing contained in this Act shall apply to lands, held, (i) by any religious institution, or (ii) by any religious trust of a public nature, which is in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no such religious institution or religious trust of a public nature as is referred to in sub-section (1) shall acquire by any means whatsoever any land after the date of the commencement of this Act. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for the purposes of this section- (a) Where a public trust in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act, has been created both for a public purpose of a religious nature and for any other public purpose; or (b) Where the income from a public trust in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act is appropriated both for a public purpose of religious nature and for any other public purpose, such public trust shall be deemed to be a religious trust of a public nature.] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (1) "agriculture" includes- (a) horticulture; (b) the raising of crops, grass or garden produce; (c) the use by an agriculturist of land held by him or part thereof, for grazing; (d) the use of any land for the purpose of raising manure crops; (e) dairy farming; (f) poultry farming; (g) livestock-breeding; (h) growing of trees; and "agricultural" shall be construed accordingly; (2) "agricultural company" means any company formed for the purpose of carrying on any business that has for its main object the acquisition of gain by the company from agricultural land and "non-agricultural company" means any other company; (3) "agricultural year" means the year commencing on the 1st day of April, or in respect of the whole or a part of any district on such other date as the Collector of the District may specify in that behalf by notification in the District Gazette; (4) "ancillary purposes of the plantation" includes replanting; (5) "authorized officer" means any Gazetted Officer authorized by the Government by notification to exercise the powers conferred on, and discharge the duties imposed upon, the authorized officer under this Act for such area as may be specified in the notification; (6) "Bhoodan Yagna" and "Gramdan Land" shall have the same meaning as in clauses (a) and (d) respectively of section 2 of the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Bhoodan Yagna Act, 1958 (TN Act 15 of 1958); (7) "Ceiling area" means the extent of land which a person is entitled to hold under section 5; (8) "Company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956); (9) "creditor" means a secured creditor and includes any decree-holder who has obtained an attachment of land in execution of a decree or order; (10) "cultivating tenant"- (i) means a person who, contributes his own physical labour or that of any member of his family in the cultivation of any land belonging to another, under a tenancy agreement, express or implied; and (ii) includes (a) any such person who continues in possession of the land after the determination of the tenancy agreement, or (b) the heir of such person, if the heir contributes his own physical labour or that of any member of his family in the cultivation of such land, or (c) a sub-tenant if he contributes his own physical labour or that of any member of his family in the cultivation of such land; but (iii) does not include a mere intermediary or his heir; 2 [(11) "date of the publication of this Act" means the 15the day of February, 1970. 3 [(12) "date of the publication of this Act" means the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling of Land) Act, 1970 in the Fort St. George Gazette.] (13) [omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1970] (14) "family" in relation to a person means the person, the wife or husband, as the case may be, of such person and his or her. (i) minor sons and unmarried daughters, and (ii) minor grandsons and unmarried grand-daughters in the male line, whose father and mother are dead. 4 [Explanation I - For the purpose of this clause, in the case of persons governed by Hindu Law, "minor sons" "minor grandsons" shall not include sons or grandsons:- (i) between whom and the other members of the family, a partition by means of a registered instrument has taken place; or (ii) in respect of whose family properties a preliminary decree for partition has been passed; before 5 [the notified date] 6 [Explanation II - For the purpose of this clause:- (a) in the case of persons governed by Hindu Law, "unmarried daughters" and "unmarried grand-daughters" shall not include "unmarried daughters" or "unmarried grand-daughters"- (i) in whose favour any land had been voluntarily transferred by either of whose parents or grandparents on account of natural love and affection; or (ii) in whose favour a preliminary decree for partition has been passed before the notified date. (b) in the case of persons governed by any law other than Hindu Law "minor sons" "un-married daughters", "minor grand-sons" and "unmarried grand-daughters" shall not include "minor sons", "unmarried daughters", "minor grandsons" and "unmarried grand-daughters" (i) in whose favour any land had been voluntarily transferred by either of whose parents or grand-parents on account of natural love and affection; or (ii) in whose favour a preliminary decree for partition has been passed before the notified date, (15) "Forest land" includes any wasteland containing trees or shrubs; (16) "full-owner" means a person entitled to the absolute proprietorship of land; (17) "Government" means the State Government; (18) Omitted by Act 20 of 1972 (19) "to hold land" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means to own land as owner or to possess or enjoy land as possessory mortgagee or as tenant or as intermediary or in one or more of those capacities; (20) "inam land" in any area in the State except the transferred territory:- (a) means any land the grant of which in inam has been made, confirmed or recognized by the Government, and (b) includes:- (i) any land in any lease-hold village; (ii) any land which is exempt either in whole or in part, from payment of land revenue; (iii) any land of which the land revenue alone or portion thereof has been granted in inam to any person, provided that such grant has been made, confirmed, or recognized by the Government; and (iv) any inam constituting as estate under the Tamil Nadu Estates Land Act, 1908 (Act 1 of 1908). But does not include any inam land on which full assessment of revenue has been levied under the 7 [Tamil Nadu] Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 (Act 40 of 1956); (21) "intermediary" means any person who, not being an owner or a possessory mortgagee, has an interest in land, and is entitled, by reason of such interest, to possession thereof, but has transferred such possession to others; (22) "land" means agricultural land, that is to say, land which is used or capable of being used for agricultural purposes or purposes subservient thereto and includes forest land, pasture land plantation and tope, but does not include house-site or land used exclusively for non-agricultural purposes; (23) "Land Board" means the 8 [Tamil Nadu] Land Board constituted under section 24; (24) "Land Commissioner" means the Land Commissioner appointed under section 97; (25) "Land owner" means the owner of the land let for cultivation by a tenant and includes the heirs, assignees, legal representatives of such owner or person deriving rights through him; (26) "Land Tribunal" means a Land Tribunal constituted under section 76; (27) "Lease-hold village" means any village specified in column (4) of Schedule II and such other village or part thereof as the Government may, by notification from time to time, specify; (28) "Limited Owner" means any person entitled to a life estate in any land and includes persons deriving rights through him; 9 [Explanation: A person who has a right to enjoy the land during his life time shall be deemed to be a limited owner notwithstanding that he has no power to alienate the land. (29) "member of the Armed Forces" means a person in the service of 10 [the Air Force Army, Border Security Force or Navy of the Union of India and includes a seaman]; Provided that if a question arises whether any person is a member of the Armed Forces, such question shall be decided by the Government and their decision shall be final; (30) Omitted by Act 41 of 1971 11 [(31) "notified date" means the date specified by the Government in a notification, which shall be a date after the date of publication of this Act;] (32) "orchard" means an enclosure or assemblage of fruit or nut-bearing trees, constituting the main crop therein, whether of spontaneous or artificial growth but does not include trees on such bunds as are not within or adjunct to such enclosure or assemblage; 12 [Explanation: The expression "fruit or nut bearing trees" shall not include plantation tree.] (33) "owner" (a) means:- (i) any person holding lands in severally or jointly or in common under a ryotwari settlement or in any way subject to the payment of revenue direct to the Government, or (ii) a land-holder as defined in the 13 [Tamil Nadu] Estates Land Act, 1908 (Act I of 1908), or a ryot as defined in that Act or (iii) an inamdar not being a land-holder defined as aforesaid, and (b) includes:- (i) full owner or limited owner, or (ii) the lessee of any lease-hold village or his heirs, assignees, legal representatives or persons deriving rights through him; (34) "person" includes any 14 [...] company, family, firm, society or association of individuals, whether incorporated or not 15 [or any private trust or public trust]; (35) "plantation" means any land used for growing all or any of the following, namely cardamom, cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea; (36) "possessory mortgagee" means a mortgagee entitled to the possession of the whole or part of the mortgaged property and to receive the rents and profits accruing from such property or any part of such rents and profits and to appropriate the same in lieu of interest or in payment of the mortgage money or partly in lieu of interest and partly in payment of the mortgage money 16 [and "possessory mortgage" and "possessory mortgagor" shall be construed accordingly;] 17 [(36-A) "private trust" includes a trust under which the beneficiaries are persons, who are ascertained or capable of being ascertained. Explanation - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for the purposes of this clause, where the income from a public trust is substantially appropriated for the benefit of the founder of the trust or his heirs or of the family of the founder or of his heirs, such trust shall be deemed to be a private trust notwithstanding the terms of the trust] 18 [(36-AA) "Proclamation of Emergency" means the Proclamation issued under clause (1) of Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th day of October, 1962.] 19 [(36-AAA) "public trust" means a trust for a public purpose of a religious, charitable or of an educational nature; 36-B "religious institution means any (i) Temple; (ii) Math; (iii) Mosque or (iv) Church; Which is dedicated to, or for the benefit of, or used as of right by, the public as a place of religious worship] (37) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to this Act; (38) "Seaman" means every person including a master, pilot or apprentice employed or engaged as a member of the crew of a ship or a sailing vessel to which the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (Central Act 44 of 1958) applies; (39) "Settlement Officer" means an officer appointed under sub-section (1) of Section 58; 20 (39-A) [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003] (40) "standard acre" means:- (1) in any area in the State, except the transferred territory (a) 0.8 acre of wet land assessed to land revenue at any rate above Rs. 15 per acre ; or (b) 1 acre of wet land assessed to land revenue at the Rate of Rs. 10 and above but not exceeding Rs. 15 per acre ; or 21 [(bb) 1.6 acres of wet land irrigated by any Government source other than a source mentioned in item (a) or ; (c) 1.2 acres of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs. 8 and above but below Rs. 10 per acre ; or (d) 1.6 acres of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs. 6 and above but below Rs. 8 per acre ; or (e) 1.75 acres of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs. 4 and above but below Rs. 8 per acre or (f) 2 acres of wet land assessed to land revenue at any rate below Rs. 4 per acre; or (g) 2.5 acres of dry land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs. 2 and above per acre; or (h) 3 acres of dry land assessed to land revenue at any rate below Rs. 1.25 and above but below Rs. 2 per acre; or (i) 4 acres of dry land assessed to land revenue at any rate below Rs. 1.25 per acre; (2) In the Kanyakumari District: - (a) 1 acre of registered wet land irrigated by any source forming part of, or benefited by, any project; or (b) 1.2 acres of registered dry land irrigated by any source mentioned in item (a); or 22 [(bb) 1.6 acres of wet land irrigated by any Government source other than a source mentioned in item (a) or] (c) 1.6 acres of dry land irrigated by any Government source other than a source mentioned in item (a); or (d) 4 acres of dry land un-irrigated by any source mentioned in item (a) or by any other Government source of irrigation; (3) in the Shencottah Taluk of the Tirunelveli district:- (a) 1.2 acres of wet land irrigated by any river or stream or by tank fed by any river or stream; or (b) 1.6 acres of wet land irrigated by any Government source other than a source mentioned in item (a); or (c) 2 acres of dry land irrigated by any Government Source ; or (d) 4 acres of dry land unirrigated by any source mentioned in item (a) or by any other Government source of irrigation; Explanation I - For the purpose of sub-clause (1) of clause (40), "land revenue" shall mean:- (i) in the case of any land in respect of which a ryotwari settlement is in force on the date of the commencement of this Act, the ryotwari assessment payable on that date; (ii) in the case of any inam land on which full assessment of revenue has been levied under the 23 [Tamil Nadu] Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 (TN Act 40 of 1956) (iii) in the case of any land other than in inam land referred to in clause (ii) in respect of which a ryotwari settlement is not in force on the date of the commencement, of this Act, but is brought into force after that date but before the date of publication of the draft settlement under sub-section (5) of section 10, the ryotwari assessment payable under such settlement after it is brought into force ; (iv) in the case of any land in respect of which a ryotwari settlement effected in pursuance of section 22 of the 24 [Tamil Nadu] Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 (TN Act 26 of 1948) has not been brought into force before the date of publication of the draft statement under sub-section (5) of section 10, or in the case of any inam land, the land revenue notified by the Government in this behalf with due regard to the highest rate of ryotwari assessment payable for any land of a similar description and with similar advantages in the nearest ryotwari village. Provided that no notification shall be issued under this clause, unless the persons likely to be affected by such notification are given a reasonable opportunity to make representation and adduce evidence in respect of the rates propose to be specified in the notification: Provided further that the land revenue notified by the Government under this clause shall not be modified, notwithstanding that a different rate of assessment is fixed under- (i) any settlement that may be brought into force; or (ii) the 25 [Tamil Nadu] Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 40 of 1956); after the date of the publication of the said notification ; Explanation II - In sub-clauses (2) & (3) of clause (40) "wet land" and "dry land" shall include inam wet land and inam dry land respectively. Explanation III - For the purpose of sub-clause (2) of clause (40), "project" means any of the following irrigation systems, namely:- (i) Kodayar project system proper ; (ii) (a) Pazhayar system (b) Valliar system; (c) Thiruparappu Right Bank Channel and Left Bank Channel system (d) Champakulam system; (iii) Alathuraiyar system. Explanation IV - In any area in the State, except the transferred territory one acre of dry land: (a) irrigated by direct flow of water from any Government source of irrigation of supplying water- (i) for two crops and above, shall be deemed to be equivalent to one acre of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs.8 and above but below Rs. 10 per acre; (ii) for only one crop, shall be deemed to be equivalent to one acre of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs, 4 and above but below Rs.6 per acre: (b) irrigated by lifting water from any government source of irrigation shall be deemed to be equivalent to one acre of wet land assessed to land revenue at the rate of Rs.4 and above but below Rs.6 per acre: Provided that the Government may in respect of any particular area, by notification, direct that one acre of dry land irrigated from any Government source of irrigation shall be deemed to be equivalent to any specified extent of any of the categories of land specified in sub-clause (1) of clause (40) on the ground of quality of the soil or on any other ground: Provided further that such notification shall not come into force unless it is approved by the Legislature. Explanation V - Where the land held by a person consists of more than one of the kinds of the land specified in clause (40), the extent, of the land held by him shall, for the purposes of this Act, be reduced to standard acres calculated according to the proportions specified in clause (40) ; (41) "State" means the State of 26 [Tamil Nadu] ; (42) "Stridhana land" means any land held on the date of the commencement of this Act by any female member of a family in her own name ; (43) & (44) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971 (45) "Surplus land" means the land held by a person in excess of the ceiling area and declared to be surplus land u/s 12, 13 or 14; (46) "tenant" means any person who has paid or has agreed to pay rent or other consideration for his being allowed by another to enjoy the land of the latter under a tenancy agreement express or implied, and includes:- (i) any such person who continues in possession of the land after the determination of the tenancy agreement; (ii) the heirs, assignees, legal representatives of such person, or persons deriving rights through such person ; (iii) a cultivating tenant; (47) "tope" means any land containing groups of fruit or nut bearing trees including Palmyra trees, constituting the main crop in such land, whether of spontaneous or artificial growth and includes orchards, but does not include trees on such bunds as are not within or adjunct to such groups of trees; 27 [Explanation - The expression "fruit or nut bearing trees" shall not include plantain tree. (48) "transferred territory" means the Kanyakumari district and the Schencottah taluk or the Tirunelveli district; 28 [(49) "trust" means a private trust or a public trust]. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Sub-sections (11) and (12) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Sub-sections (11) and (12) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Explanation numbered as Explanation I and Explanation II added by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted for "date of the commencement of this Act, by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Explanation numbered as Explanation I and Explanation II added by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Explanation added by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972 with effect from 6.4.1960. Substituted by Act 35 of 1998. Sub-section (31) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Explanation added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. The word trust omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Added, by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1965 with effect from 2nd May, 1962. Clause (36-A) renumbered as Clause (36-AA) and before Clause (36-AA) as so renumbered Clause (36-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972. Clause (36-A) renumbered as Clause (36-AA) and before Clause (36-AA) as so renumbered Clause (36-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972. Cls. (36-AAA) and (36-B) inserted, inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972. Clause (39-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 and omitted by Act 26/2003. Clause (bb) added by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Clause (bb) added by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O.1969. Explanation added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974. Clause (49) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.72.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, by virtue of the operation of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971, the total extent of land held by any person exceeds the ceiling area, then, in relation to such person and in this Act unless the context otherwise requires,- (i) date of the commencement of this Act means the date specified by the Government under sub-section (2) of section 1 of the TN Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971; (ii) notified date means the date specified by the Government in a notification which shall be a date subsequent to the date specified under sub-section (2) of section 1 of the TN Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971; S.3-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, by virtue of the operation of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling of Land) Second Amendment Act, 1972, the total extent of land held by any person exceeds the ceiling area, then, in relation to such person and in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (i) date of commencement of this Act, means the 1st day of March, 1972; (ii) notified date means the date specified by the Government in a notification which shall be a date subsequent to the date of the publication of the TN Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1972, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. S. 3-B inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3-C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, by virtue of the operation of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third Amendment Act, 1972, the total extent of land held by any person exceeds the ceiling area, then, in relation to such person and in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (i) date of the commencement of this Act, means the 1st day of March 1972; (ii) notified date means the date specified by the Government in a notification which shall be a date subsequent to the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third Amendment Act, 1972, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. S. 3-C inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3-D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, by virtue of the operation of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fourth Amendment Act, 1972, the total extent of land held by any person exceeds the ceiling area, then, in relation to such person and in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:- (i) date of the commencement of this Act, means the 1st day of March, 1972 (ii) notified date means the date specified by the Government in a notification which shall be a date subsequent to the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fifth Amendment Act, 1972, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. S. 3-D inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 3-E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if, by virtue of the operation of Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fifth Amendment Act, 1972, the total extent of land held by any person exceeds the ceiling area, then, in relation to such person and in this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (i) date of commencement of this Act, means- (a) for the period before the 15the day of February 1970, the 6th day of April, 1960; (b) for the period commencing on the 15th day of February, 1970, the 15th day of February, 1970; (ii) notified date means the date specified by the Government in a notification which shall be a date subsequent to the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land)Fifth Amendment, 1972, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. S. 3-E inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, or any custom, usage or contract or decree or order of a Court or other authority.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) 1 [(a) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3-A) (3-B) and (3-C and of Chapter VIII, the ceiling area in the case of every person (other than the institutions referred to in clauses (c) and (d) and subject to the provisions of sub-sections (3-A) (3-B) (4) & (5) and of Chapter VIII, the ceiling area in the case of every family consisting of not more than five members shall be 2 [15 standard acres.] (b) The ceiling area in the case of every family consisting of more than five members shall, subject to the provision of sub-sections (3-A) (3-B) (3-C) (4) and (5) and of Chapter VIII, be 3 [15 standard acres] together with an additional 5 standard acres for every member of the family in excess of five. 4 (c) (i) The ceiling area in the case of the institutions mentioned in column (1) of the Table below and in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act, shall be the extent specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) thereof; Provided that such extent was held by such institution on the date of the commencement of this Act. THE TABLE (1) (2) (1) Any College affiliated to or recognized by any University under any law or rule relating to education 40 standard acres. (2) Any High School or equivalent school recognized by the Government or University under any law or rule relating to education. 20 standard acres (3) Any Elementary School or Higher Elementary School or Other equivalent institution recognized by the Government or University under any law or rule relating to education 10 standard acres (4) Any Students Hostel 25 standard acres (5) Any Polytechnic Institution 25 standard acres (6) Any Agricultural School 25 standard acres (7) Any Orphanage 25 standard acres (ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (i), no such institution as is referred to in that sub-clause and - (a) holding land; on the date of the commencement of this Act, less than the extent specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the Table under sub-clause (i), shall acquire by any means whatsoever, after the date, any land in excess so held ; and (b) holding no land at all on the date of the commencement of this Act, shall acquire by any means whatsoever, after that date, and land.] Explanation - In calculating the extent of land held on the date of the commencement of this Act, by any of the institutions mentioned above the extent of land held by such institutions and the extent of land apportioned under sub-section (3-B) shall be taken into account. (c) (i) The ceiling area in the case of a public trust of a charitable nature in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act (other than such trusts under which the institution referred to in clause (c) (i) are the beneficiaries) shall be 5 standard acres ; Provided that such extent of land is held by such trust on the date of the commencement of this Act. (ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause (i), no such public trust of a charitable nature as is referred to in sub-clause (i) and- (A) holding land on the date of the commencement of this Act less than five standard acres shall acquire by any means whatsoever, after that date, any land in excess of the extent so held; and (B) holding no land at all on the date of the commencement of this Act shall acquire by any means whatsoever, after the date, any land] (2) For the purposes of this section, all the lands held individually by the member of a family or jointly by some or all the member of such family shall be deemed to be held by the family. (3) (a) In calculating the extent of land held by a member of a family or by an individual person, the share of the member of the family or of the individual person in the land held by an undivided Hindu Family, a Marumakkattayam tarward, an Aliyasanthana family or a Nambudiri Illom shall be taken into account. (b) In calculating the extent of land held by a family of by an individual person, the share of the family or of the individual person in the land held by a firm, society or association of individuals (whether incorporated or not) or by a company (other than a non-agricultural company) shall be taken into account Explanation - For the purposes of this section:- (a) the share of a member of a family or of an individual person in the land held by an undivided Hindu Family, a Marumakkattayam tarward, an Aliyasanthana family or a Nambudiri Illom, and (b) the share of a family or of an individual person in the land held by a firm, society or association of individuals (whether incorporated or not) or by a company (other than a non-agricultural company) shall be deemed to be the extent of land - (i) which, in case such share is held on the date of the commencement of this Act, would have been allotted to such member, person or family had such land been partitioned or divided, as the case may be, on such date; or (ii) which, in case such share is acquired in any manner whatsoever after the date of the commencement of this Act, would be allotted to such member, person or family if a partition or division were to take place on the date of the preparation of the draft statement under sub-section (1) of section 10. 5 [3-A (i) For the purposes of this Act, the land owned by a private trust shall be deemed to be land owned by the beneficiaries under the private trust and each such beneficiary shall be deemed to be the owner of the land to the extent of the share of his beneficial interest in the said trust. (ii) In calculating the extent of land held by such beneficiary for the purpose of this Act, such extent of the share of the land as is mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into account. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, the trustee of a private trust shall be deemed to be a beneficiary under such private trust, if any income or part thereof from such private trust is enjoyed by him or his heirs, or by his family or the family of his heirs. (iii) (a) The land by the public trust referred to in the Explanation to clause (36-A) of section 3 shall be deemed to be held by the founder of the trust of his, heirs or the family of the founder or of his heirs (b) In calculating the extent, of land held by such founder or his heirs or such family, the extent of the land held by the public trust shall be taken into account. (iv) (a) Where any of the institutions mentioned in clause(c) of sub-section (1), is a beneficiary under a public trust, the land owned by such public trust shall be deemed to be the owner of the land for the purposes of this Act to the extent of the share of the beneficial interest in such public trust. (b) In calculating the extent of land held by such institution, such extent of the share of the land as is mentioned in sub-clause(a) shall be taken into account. (3-B) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 6 [but subject to the provisions of section 37-B and Section 73] where the income from a public trust in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act, is appropriated for the establishment or maintenance of the one or more institutions referred to in column (1) of the Table under sub-clause (i) of clause (c) of subsection (1), the ceiling area in the case of such public trust shall be the extent of standard acres, which is equal to the total extent of land calculated in the manner specified below for all categories of institutions: number of institutions in each category mentioned in column (1) of the Table 10 number specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) thereof: Provided that such extent of land was held by such trust on the date of the commencement of this Act. (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), no such public trust as is referred to in that clause and - (i) holding land on the date of the commencement of this Act less than the extent allowed under clause (a) shall acquire by any means whatsoever after that date, and land in excess of the extent so held and (ii) holding no land at all on the date of the commencement of this Act shall acquire by any means whatsoever after that date any land. (3-C) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions of section 37-B and section 73, no land shall be held by any public trust which is created after the date of the commencement of this Act.] (4) (a) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5), where the stridhana land held by any female member of a family together with the other land held by all the member of that family, is in excess of 7 [15] standard acres, the female member concerned may hold, in addition to the extent of land which the family is entitled to hold under sub-section (1), stridhana land not exceeding 10 standard acres: Provided that where any extent of stridhana land held by a female member is included in the extent of land which the family is entitled to hold under sub-section (1) and in case where the extent so included is: - (i) 10 or more than 10 standard acres, she shall not be entitled to hold any stridhana land in addition to the extent so included ; or (ii) less than 10 standard acres, she may hold in addition to the extent so included an extent of stridhana land, which together with the extent so included, shall not exceeded 10 standard acres. (b) Where the extent of stridhana land held under clause (a) by any female member of a family consisting of more than five members- (i) is 5 or more than 5 acres, she shall not be deemed to be a member of that family for the purpose of clause (b) of sub-section (1); or (ii) is less than 5 standard acres, the additional extent of 5 standard acres allowed under clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be reduced by the same extent as the extent of stridhana land so held. Illustrations: (a) An undivided Hindu Family consists of the husband A, his wife and his three sons B, C and D, and the wife B and grandsons E and F. B is a major and C and D are minors. E and F are the minor sons of B. The extent of land held by the undivided Hindu Family is 8 [40] standard acres, that is to say, As share and the share of his sons in the land held by the undivided Hindu Family is 9 [10] standard acres each. As wife has 10 [15] standard acres of stridhana land and Bs wife has 11 [10] standard acres of stridhana land. For the purpose of ceiling, As family and Bs family will each constitute a separate unit. [Section 3(14)]. As family consists of himself, his wife and his minor sons, C and D. If the share of A in the land held by the undivided Hindu Family, namely, 12 [10] standard acres is included with the 13 [15] standard acres allowed under sub-section (1) of section 5, the wifes stridhana land to the extent of 14 [5] standard acres may be included to make up 15 [15] standard acres [section 5(4)]. The wife can hold in addition, 16 [5] standard acres as stridhana land. All the members of As family will, therefore, be together entitled to hold 17 [20] standard acres and the remaining 18 [25] standard acres will be treated as surplus land. Bs family consists of himself, his wife and his minor sons E and F. If the stridhana land of Bs wife, namely, 19 [10] standard acres is included within the 20 [15] standard acres allowed under sub-section (1) of section 5, the share of B and his sons in the land held by the undivided Hindu family to the extent of 5 standard acres may be included to make up 21 [15] standard acres [section 5(4)]. All the members of Bs family will therefore be together entitled to hold 22 [15] standard acres and the remaining 23 [5] standard acres will be treated as surplus land (b) A family consists of husband and his wife. The husband is a member of an undivided Hindu Family and his share in the Land held by the undivided Hindu Family is 24 [10] standard acres. The wife has stridhana land of 25 [10] standard acres. If the entire stridhana land of 26 [10] standard acres held by the wife is included within the 27 [15] standard acres allowed under sub-section(1) of section 5 then an extent of 28 [5], standard acres of the share of the husband in the undivided Hindu family may be included to make up 29 [15] standard acres. 30 [5] standard acres will be treated as surplus land and the wife is not entitled to hold any additional extent of stridhana land [section 5(4)]. But if the 31 [10] standard acres which is the share of the husband in the undivided Hindu family is included within the 32 [15] standard acres allowed under sub-Section (1) of Section 5, then an extent of 33 [5] standard acres of stridhana land of the wife could also be included to make up 34 [15] standard acres. The wife may retain additional 35 [5] standard acres of stridhana land Section 5(4). There will be no surplus land. (c) A Muslim family consists of the husband, his wife, and his two minor sons. The wife has 36 [15] standard acres of stridhana land and the minor sons have no property. The husband has 37 [25] standard acres. If the entire extent of land which the family is entitled to hold under sub-section (1) of Section 5 consists of the land owned by the husband only, then, the wife can hold additional 38 [10] standard acres [Section 5(4)]. The remaining 39 [15] standard acres will be treated as surplus land. (d) A Christian family consists of the husband, his wife and his two minor sons. The husband and the minor sons have no property. The wife has stridhana land of 40 [20] standard acres. The family can retain 41 [15] standard acres. The remaining 42 [5] standard acres will be treated as surplus land and the wife is not entitled to hold any additional extent of stridhana land [Section 5(4)]. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and in sub-section (4) and in Chapter VIII the total extent of the land held or deemed to be held by any family shall in no case exceed 43 [30] standard acres. (6) In calculating the extent of land held or deemed to be held by any person, the extent of land which may revert to such person, immediately after the death of any limited owner shall during the lifetime of the limited owner, be excluded. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Substituted for 30 by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted for 30 by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Sub-sections (3-A) (3-B) and (3-C) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect form 1.3.1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 1987 Substituted for 30 by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted for "80" by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu act 17 of 1970.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where under the terms of a public trust any interest either in the land in respect of which the public trust is created or in the land income from such land is reserved in favour of the founder of such public trust, or of any other person, the authorized officer shall declare the extent of land which bears to the total extent of land in respect of which the public trust is created, the same proportion as such interest bears to the total interest in such land or the income therefrom. The extent of the land so declared shall, with effect from the date of such declaration, be deemed to be held by the founder or such other person and shall be taken into account in calculating the extent of land held by him. The extent so declared shall cease to be the public trust property from the date of such declaration but shall be subject to any other liability that may be subsisting on such land: Provided that the extent of such liability shall bear the same proportion to the entire liability as the extent so declared bears to the total extent. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu On and from the date of the commencement of this Act, no person shall, except as otherwise provided in this Act, but subject to the provisions of Chapter VIII, be entitled to hold land in excess of the ceiling area: Provided that in calculating the total extent of land held by any person, any extent in excess of the ceiling area and not exceeding half an acre in the case of wet land and one acre in the case of dry land shall, irrespective of the assessment of such land, be excluded. 1 [Explanation - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for the purpose of this proviso, "acre" means ordinary acre." Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 36 of 1998.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Within 2 [thirty] days 3 [from the notified date], every person, who on the date of the commencement of this Act, held or is deemed to have held, land 4 [in excess of the ceiling area] shall, in respect of all land held or deemed to have been held by such person on such date, furnish to the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction the holding of such person or the major part thereof is situated, a return containing the following particulars, namely:- (i) particulars of all the land ; (ii) particulars of the members of the family and of the stridhana land held by each female member of the family ; (iii) particulars of any interest either in the land held by a trust or in the income from such land reserved in his favour or any member of his family ; (iv) 5 [...] (v) particulars of land:- (a) interspersed among plantations, or (b) contiguous to any plantations, In existence 6 [on the date of the commencement] of this Act in any area 7 [...] and which land such person desires to hold for extension, or ancillary purposes, of the plantation: (vi) particulars of the encumbrances, if any, over the land together with the name and address of the creditor; (vii) particulars of any pending litigation respecting the land or part thereof ; (viii) particulars of the land which such persons desires to retain within the ceiling area and the land which he desires to be declared as surplus land ; (ix) particulars of the land held by tenant, if any, and the name and address of such tenant; 8 [and] (x) 9 [...] (xi) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 10 [Explanation I - In the case of a member of the Armed Forces, the reference to 11 [thirty ] days shall be deemed to be a reference to one year.] Explanation II - Where land is held or deemed to be held by:- (a) an individual, the return shall be furnished by him or any person authorized by him in writing in this behalf. (b) A person who is a minor, lunatic, idiot or is subject to a like disability, the return shall be furnished by the guardian, manager or other person in charge of such person or of the property of such person. (c) A company or other corporate body, the return shall be furnished by any person competent to act for such company or body in this behalf. Explanation III - Where land is held or deemed to be held by a family, the return shall be furnished by the person in management of such family or of the property of such family and the return so furnished shall be binding on the other members of the family: Provided that the authorized officer shall give to the other members of the family a reasonable opportunity of making their representations and of adducing evidence before the preparation of the draft statement under sub-section (1) of section 10 (2) 12 [...] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1972 Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person who has held or is deemed to have held land 1 [in excess of the ceiling area fails to furnish the return under section 8 or furnishes an incorrect or incomplete return under that section, the authorized officer may, by notice, require such person to furnish the return or the additional particulars, as the case may be, within the time specified in the notice, or within such further time not exceeding thirty days as the authorized officer may, in his discretion, allow. (2) (a) Where any person, on whom notice under sub-section (1) has been served, fails to furnish the return, or the additional particulars, as the case may be, within the time specified in that notice, or within the further time allowed by the authorized officer under sub-section (1), the authorized officer may obtain in such manner as may be prescribed the necessary information either by himself or through such agency as he thinks fit. (b) The authorized officer shall, as soon as may be, after obtaining the information under clause (a), give to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of making his representation and of adducing evidence, if any, in respect of such information and consider any such representation and evidence and pass such order as he deems fit. (3) Where the authorized officer finds from the return furnished under section 8, or under sub-section (1), or the additional particulars, if any furnished under sub-Section (1) or from the information obtained by the authorized officer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) that the person concerned desires to hold:- (a) (i) any land interspersed among plantations, or (ii) any land contiguous to any plantation, in existence 2 [on the date of the commencement of this Act] in any area 3 [...] 4 [...] (b) 5 [...] (4) 6 [...] Substituted for "in excess of 15 standard acres" by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1974 The words "other than a hill area omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1072. The word "or" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The word "or" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On the basis of the return furnished under sub-section (1) of section 8 and on the basis of the representation and evidence under proviso to Explanation III to sub-section (1) of Section 8 or on the basis of the return furnished under sub-section (1) of section 9 and the additional particulars, if any, furnished under that sub-section, or on the basis of the information obtained by the authorized officer under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 9 and the orders passed on the representation and the evidence, if any, under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 9, as the case may be, the authorized officer shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), and (4) and after making such enquiry as he deems fit, prepare a draft statement in respect of each person holding or deemed to have held land in excess of the ceiling area. Such draft statement shall contain the following particulars, namely:- (i) the name and address of the person; (ii) particulars of all land held by such person and the total extent of such land ; (iii) particulars of the members of the family and of the stridhana land held by each female member of the family; (iv) particulars of any interest either in the land held by a trust or in the income from such land reserved in his favour of any member of his family; (v) 1 [...] (vi) Particulars of land:- (a) interspersed among plantations, or (b) contiguous to any plantation, in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act in any area 2 [...] and which land such person desires to hold for extension, or ancillary purposes, of the plantation; (vii) Particulars of the encumbrances, if any, over the land together with the name and address of the creditor ; (viii) Particulars of the land which such person desires to retain within the ceiling area ; (ix) The extent of the ceiling area of the person ; (x) Particulars of the land which may be comprised within the ceiling area; (xi) Particulars of the land held by tenant, if any and the name and address of such tenant ; (xii) Particulars of the land proposed to be declared as surplus land ; 3 [and] (xiii) 4 [...] (xiv) Such other particulars as may be prescribed. (2) (a) For the purpose of calculating for the first time 5 [after the date of the commencement of this Act], the ceiling area of a family holding land on the date of the commencement of this Act in excess of 6 [15] standard acres, the authorized officer shall take into account only those members of that family who are alive on the notified date. But for the purpose of calculating the ceiling area of such family for the second or for any subsequent time, the authorized officer shall take into account only those members of that family who are alive on the date of the preparation of the draft statement under sub-section (1). (b) For the purpose of calculating the ceiling area of any other family for the first time after the date of the commencement of this Act or for any subsequent time, the authorized office shall take into account only those members of that family who are alive on the date of the preparation of the draft statement under sub-section (1). (3) If any person has failed to specify the particulars of the land which he desires to retain within his ceiling area, the authorized officer shall, as far as practicable, specify in the draft statement, the land which is capable of easy and convenient enjoyment as the land to be retained by such person within his ceiling area. (4) If any person has specified the particulars of the land which he desires to retain within his ceiling area, the authorized officer shall, as far as practicable, 7 [but subject to the provisions of sub-sections (4-A) and (4-B) declare the same land as comprised within his ceiling area: Provided that where in the opinion of the authorized officer, the utility of any land or part thereof held by any person has been diminished by any willful act of such person, after the date of the commencement of this Act, the authorized officer shall declare such land or any part thereof as comprised within his-ceiling area: Provided further that the authorized officer shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, declare the share of any person in the land held by an agricultural company, a cooperative society or a land mortgage bank, or any part of such share as comprised within the ceiling area: Provided also that subject to the above provisions, the land which the authorized officer proposes to declare as surplus land under clause (i) of sub-section (1) shall, as far as practicable, be such as is capable of easy and convenient enjoyment. 8 [(4-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section(4), where the transfer or partition of any land has been declared to be void under section 22, it shall be the duty of the authorized officer to include, subject to the transfer or the person effecting the partition, as the case may be as if no such transfer or partition had taken place: Provided that in respect of the land so included nothing in this sub-section shall affect the rights of the transferee or of the person in whose favour the partition was effected. (4-B) Where the transfer of any land has been declared to be void under section 22 and where the extent of the land so transferred is in excess of the ceiling area of the transferor, the land so transferred is in excess of the ceiling area of the transferor, the land so transferred shall be included within the ceiling area of the transferor in the following order of preference; (i) firstly, land transferred to a person who was landless immediately before the date of such transfer and who was not related to the transferor or any member of his family; (ii) secondly, land transferred to a cultivating tenant who was cultivating that land immediately before the date of such transfer ; (iii) thirdly, land transferred to a person who was not related to the transferor or any member of his family; and (iv) land transferred to others.] Explanation - In this sub-section "landless person" means a person who does not hold any land.] (5) The draft statement shall be published and a copy thereof shall be served on the persons concerned, the tenants, creditors and all other persons who in the opinion or the authorized officer are interested in the land to which such draft statement relates, together with a notice stating that any objection to the draft statement shall be preferred within 9 [thirty] days from the service of such notice. The authorized officer shall duly consider any objection received within the time specified in the said notice from the person on whom a copy of the draft statement has been served or any objection received within 10 [thirty] days from the date of the publication of the draft statement from any other person. The authorized officer shall after giving the objector a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of adducing evidence, if any, and subject to such rules as may be made, pass such orders as he deems fit. 11 [...] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974. Sub-section (4-A) and (4-B) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974. Substituted for "sixty" by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Substituted for "sixty" by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Proviso omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If while considering the objections received under sub-section (5) of section 10 or otherwise, the authorized officer finds that any question has arisen regarding the title of a person to any land and such question has not already been finally determined by, or is not pending before a competent Court, the Land Tribunal or other authority, the authorized officer may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), decides such question summarily in such manner as may be prescribed and may pass such order as he deems fit. (2) Where in the opinion of the authorized officer the decision of a question under sub-section (1) involves a substantial question of law or of fact, he shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing refer the question to the Land Tribunal. (3) The order of the authorized officer under sub-section (1) shall not be subject to any appeal or revision, but any party may, within three months form the date of service of a copy of such order, institute a suit in the Land Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the land or the major part thereof is situated to have the order set aside or modified but subject to the final result of such suit if any, the order of the authorized officer shall be final.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the disposal of the objections, if any, preferred under sub-section (5) of section 10 and after passing the order, if any, under sub-section (1) of section 11, the authorized officer shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under, make necessary alterations in the draft statement in accordance with the order passed on the objections aforesaid and the order, if any, passed under sub-section (1) of section 11, and shall declare the surplus land held by each person. The authorized officer shall thereafter publish a final statement specifying therein the entire land held by him, the land to be retained by him within the ceiling area and the land declared to be surplus and such other particulars as may be prescribed and cause a copy thereof to be served on the person referred to in sub-section (5) of section 10. Such a statement shall, subject to the provisions of section 14, be conclusive evidence of the facts stated therein.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11 and 12, the authorized officer shall, in calculating the extent of land held by any person exclude:- (i) the land in respect of which any question of title is pending before a competent Court, or the 1 [Land Tribunal 2 (***)] or other authority; 3 [and] (ii) 4 [...] (iii) the land in respect of which the question whether such land could be permitted to be used for the extension or for ancillary purposes, of the plantation in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act in any area 5 [...] is pending before the Land Board; and where after such exclusion the land hold by such person is in excess of the ceiling area, he shall declare the land in excess to be surplus land. The land so declared as surplus land shall be incorporated in the final statement published under section 12. (2) 6 [...] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) As soon as may be after the final disposal of the proceeding or suit relating to the question of title of any land exclude under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 13, the authorized officer shall (i) amend the final statement published under section 12, or (ii) where there is no such final statement prepare a final statement, if necessary, under section 12, in accordance with the decision of the Court or the 1 [Land Tribunal 2 (***)] or other authority as the case may be. (2) As soon as may be, after the Land Board has decided- (a) 3 [...] (b) under section 31 whether any land excluded under clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 13 could be permitted to be used for extension, or for ancillary purposes, of any plantation, the authorized officer shall- (i) amend the final statement published under section 12 or (ii) where there is no such final statement, prepare a final statement, if necessary, under section 12, in accordance with the decision of the Court or the Land Board. (3) 4 [...] (4) The final statement amended or prepared under sub-sections5 [(1) or (2)] shall be published and the authorized officer shall cause a copy of the final statement as so amended or prepared to be served on the persons referred to in sub-section (5) of section 10. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 12 and 14, the authorized officer may, either of his own motion or on the application of any of the parties, - (a) if he is satisfied that a bonafide mistake has been made in regard to any entry in such final statement. (b) at any time, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in regard to any entry in such final statement.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any land held by any person as possessory mortgagee is in excess of the ceiling area of such person, the possession of the land in such excess shall, with effect from the date of publication of the final statement under section 12 or 14:- (a) in any case where the total holding of the possessory mortgagor is not in excess of the ceiling area, revert to the possessory mortgagor ; (b) in any case where the total holding of the possessory mortgagor is in excess of the ceiling area, and where he desires the land mortgaged by him or any part thereof to be included within his ceiling area in the return furnished by him under section 8, revert to him subject of the condition that the land so reverted together with the other land held by him does not exceed the ceiling area. (2) Where the possession of the land in excess held by a possessory mortgagee or any part thereof does not revert to the possessory mortgagor under sub-section (1), the Government may acquire such land under section 18. (3) (a) (i) The possessory mortgagor to whom possession of the land mortgaged reverts under sub-section (1), shall pay the mortgage money due to the possessory mortgagee in respect of that land. (ii) Where possession of a part only of the land mortgaged reverts to the possessory mortgagor under sub-section (1), the possessory mortgagor shall pay to the possessory mortgagee such amount of the mortgage money as bears to the entire amount of the mortgage money, the same proportion as the value of the part aforesaid on the date of such reversion bears to the value of the entire extent of the land mortgaged on the said date. (iii) Where no agreement can be reached in respect of the mortgage money payable under sub-clause (i) or (ii), the authorized officer shall, subject to the provisions of sub-clause (iv) and after making such enquiry as he deems fit, decide the amount so payable. (iv) Where in the opinion of the authorized officer the decision of a question under sub-clause (iii) involves a substantial question of law or of fact, he shall for reasons to be recorded in writing refer the question to the Land Tribunal. (b) The Land or any part thereof, the possession of which reverts to the possessory mortgagor under sub-section (1), shall be the security for the payment of the mortgage money. (c) The mortgage money referred to in clause (a) shall, for the purpose of Article 132, of the First Division of the First Schedule to the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (Central Act 9 of 1908), be deemed to have become due with effect from the date of reversion under sub-section (1), and shall carry interest at the rate of five and half per cent per annum from the said date. Explanation - In this sub-section "mortgage money" means the money payable in accordance with the provisions of the TN Agriculturists Relief Act, 1938 (Act 4 of 1938). (4) Where the possession of any land or any part thereof is likely to revert to the possessory mortgagor under sub-section (1), the authorized officer shall first fix the ceiling area of the possessory mortgagee.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any land held by any person as tenant is in excess of the extent of land which he is entitled to hold under section 5, the possession of the land in such excess shall, with effect from the date of the publication of the final statement under section 12 or 14 revert to the land owner where and to the extent to which the land of the landowner himself is not liable to be declared as surplus land in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (2) Where in respect of any land, the possession of which reverts to the landowner under sub-section (1), the contract of tenancy provides for the continuance of the tenancy after the expiry of the agricultural year immediately succeeding the date of such reversion, such land owner shall pay 1 [...] to the tenant an amount equivalent to one-eighth of 2 [the annual value of the land calculated in the manner specified in Part I of Schedule III]. Out of 3 [such amount], three-fourths shall be paid to the cultivating tenant and one-fourth to the intermediary, if any. (3) If any dispute arises in regard to the amount 4 [...] payable under sub-section (2), either party may make an application to the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction the land or the major part thereof is situated, for deciding such dispute. The authorized officer shall decide such dispute in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed. The words "as compensation" Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "the fair rent calculated in the manner specified in paragraph 4 of Part I of Schedule III" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for such compensation, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words "as compensation" Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) After the publication of the final statement under section 12 or 14, the Government shall, subject to the provisions of sections 16 and 17, publish a notification to the effect that the surplus land is required for a public purpose. (2) As soon as may be after the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), the authorized officer shall:- (a) cause to be published in every village or town in which any part of the land specified in such notification is situated a proclamation containing the terms of the notification; (b) cause a copy of the notification to be served on the persons concerned, the creditors, persons whose names appear in the final statement published under section 12 or 14 and such other persons as may be specified in the rules made by the Government. (3) On the publication of the notification under sub-section (1), the land specified in the notification together with the trees, standing on such land and buildings, 1 [machinery, plant, apparatus, wells filter points or power lines] constructed, erected or fixed on such land and used for agricultural purposes shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been acquired for a public purpose and vested in the Government free from all encumbrances with effect from 2 [the date of such publication] and all right, title and interest of all persons in such land with effect from the said date, be deemed to have been extinguished: Provided that where there is any crop standing on such land on 3 [the date of such publication] the authorized officer may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, permit the harvest of such crop by the person who had raised such crop. 4 [...] (4) Subject to the rules made under sub-section (5), the authorized officer may, at any time after the publication of the notification under sub-section (1), take possession of any land specified in the said notification. (5) The Government may make rules:- (a) specifying the classes of tenants, who may be allowed to continue in possession of the land. (b) permitting any co-operative society registered or deemed to have been registered under the TN Co-operative Societies Act, 1983 (Act 30 of 1983) or under the Travancore-Cochin TN Co-operative Societies Act, 1951 (Travancore-Cochin Act 10 of 1952) or any land mortgage bank to which the TN Co-operative Land Mortgage Banks Act, 1934 (Act 10 of 1934) applies or any agricultural company to continue in possession of the land notwithstanding anything contained in sections 5 and 7, even after the publication of the notification under sub-section (1). Such rules may also provide for the conditions subject to which the persons referred to in clauses (a) and (b) may continue in possession of the land. Substituted for "machinery plant or apparatus by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978. Sub-section (3-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 7 of1974 was omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where for any reason, the extent of any land held by any person has not been included in the total extent of the land held by such person for the purposes of this Act, the Land Commissioner may, at any time, direct the authorized officer to include such land in such total extent and the ceiling area shall be calculated or recalculated, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and accordingly, the provisions of section 9 and other provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be, apply as if the extent of the land so included were mentioned in the return required to be furnished under section 8.] S. 18-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where the authorized officer has made any correction under section 15 in the final statement published under section 12 or 14, the Government may by notification make the necessary consequential or incidental modification in the notification in the notification published under sub-section (1) or section 18.] Sections 18-B to 18-E inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where, as a result of any decision in any appeal or revision or other proceeding or in pursuance of a direction under section 18-A, the notification published under sub-section (1) of section 18 requires cancellation or modification, the Government may, by notification, cancel or modify such notification to give effect to such decision and noting in this section shall be deemed to prevent the issue of a fresh notification by the Government under sub-section (1) of section 18 in accordance with this Act.] Sections 18-B to 18-E inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any notification, - (a) is modified under section 18-B or 18-C, as the case may be, by way of omission (whether relating to extent or survey number or otherwise) the land to which such omission relates, or (b) is cancelled under section 18-C, the surplus land specified in such notification, shall be deemed never to have vested in the Government and the authorized officer shall make the necessary consequential modification in the 2 [...] assessment roll concerned. Any amount paid 3 [under section 50] in respect of such land shall be recovered by the Government as if it were an arrear of land revenue. The land referred to in sub-section (1) shall stand reverted with effect from the date of the publication of the notification effecting the modification or cancellation, as the case may be, to the person lawfully entitled to such land and any assignment of such land by the Government to any person prior to such date shall be deemed to have been cancelled. No claim shall be enforceable in respect of such land against the Government or any person deriving rights form them, for the period from the date of the vesting of such land in the Government and ending with the date of reversion under this sub-section.] Sections 18-B to 18-E inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974. The word Compensation omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for by way of compensation omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any notification is modified under section 18-B or 18-C by way of inclusion, the land to which such inclusion relates shall be deemed to have vested in the Government as if such land were included in a notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 18 and accordingly, the provisions of this Act shall apply to the land so vested.] Sections 18-B to 18-E inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 18-F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person who, after the date of vesting of the property in the Government under sub-section (3) of the section 18, is in possession of, or deriving any benefit from, such property, shall be liable to pay to the Government for the period for which he is in such possession or deriving such benefit after such vesting an amount 3 [ * * *] for the use, occupation or enjoyment of that property as the authorized officer may fix in the prescribed manner. Such officer shall take into consideration such factors as may be prescribed. (2) Any amount payable to the Government under sub-section (1) shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue.] S. 18-F inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978. Substituted for "Compensation from" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "as compensation", omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On and after the notified date, no document relating to any transfer of land either by sale, gift, exchange, lease, 1 [possessory mortgage], surrender, agreement, settlement, or otherwise, shall be registered unless a declaration in writing is made in duplicate in such form as may be prescribed and filed by the transferee before the registering authority under the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act 16 of 1908) as to the total extent of land held by him. (2) The registering authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall forward within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, one copy of the declaration referred to in sub-section (1) to the authorized officer, within whose jurisdiction the land which is the subject-matter of the transfer or the major part thereof as situated. (3) On receipt of the copy of the declaration under sub-section (2), the authorized officer may obtain such information as may be necessary and take such action as he deems fit in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf. Substituted for "mortgage" by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, as a result of any transfer of land either by sale, gift (other than gift made in contemplation of death), exchange, surrender, agreement, settlement or otherwise effected on or after the notified date, the extent of land held by the transferee exceeds the ceiling area, then the right, title or interest accrued in his favour by virtue of such transfer in the land in excess of the ceiling area shall, as a penalty for contravention of the provisions of section 7, be deemed to have been transferred to the Government with effect from the date of such transfer, on a declaration made by the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction such excess land or the major part thereof is situated. The authorized officer shall record in writing the reasons for such declaration: Provided that:- (a) no such declaration shall be made unless the transferor and the transferee have been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of adducing evidence if any, (b) the transferee shall be liable for payment of the consideration for, and to discharge other liabilities under, such transaction and the transferor shall have no claim for such consideration against the Government, otherwise than in respect of such land. (c) No suit or other proceeding by the transferee shall lie in any Court for the refund of the consideration for any such transaction. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, "transfer" does not include inheritance, bequest, lease, or possessory mortgage. (2) The Government may make rules providing for the manner in which any right, title or interest transferred to the Government under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 20-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any acquisition of any land made in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 2, of sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) of sub-section (1), sub-clause (ii) of clause (d) of sub-section (1), clause (b) of sub-section (3-B) and of sub-section (3-C) of section 5, shall be null and void, and any land which is so acquired shall, as a penalty for such contravention, be deemed to have been transferred to the Government with effect from the date of such acquisition on a declaration made by authorized officer within whose jurisdiction such land or the major part thereof is situated. The authorized officer shall record in writing the reasons for such declaration: Provided that:- (a) no such declaration shall be made unless the transferor and the transferee have been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of adducing evidence if any. (b) The transferee shall be liable for the payment of the consideration for and to discharge other liabilities under, such transaction and the transferor shall have no claim for such consideration against the Government, otherwise than in respect of such land. (c) No suit or other proceeding by the transferee shall lie in any Court for the refund of the consideration for any such transaction. (2) The Government may make rules providing for the manner in which any right, title or interest transferred to the Government under sub-section(1) shall be disposed of.] Section 20-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, on or after the date of the commencement of this Act:- (a) any person acquires by inheritance or bequest from any person; (b) and before the notified date, any person acquires by sale in execution of a decree or order of a Civil Court or of an award or order of any other lawful authority, Any lands, which, together with the land, if any, already held by him, exceeds in the aggregate the ceiling area, then he shall, within ninety days from the notified date or from the date of such acquisition, whichever is later, furnish to the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction his holding or the major part thereof is situated, a return containing the following particulars namely: (i) Particulars of the land already held by him and those of the land so acquired ; (ii) Particulars of the land which he desires to retain within the ceiling area; (iii) Particulars of the date of the acquisition ; (iv) Particulars of the manner of acquisition and of the documents, if any under which such acquisition was made ; (v) The name and description of the person who held the land immediately before the date of acquisition. (vi) Particulars of the land held by the tenant, if any, and the name and address of such tenant; and (vii) Such other particulars as may be prescribed. Explanation I - In this sub-Section, "bequest" shall include gift made in contemplation of death. 1 [...] (2) if, as a result of marriage or adoption on or after the date of the commencement of this Act, the extent of land held by any person exceeds in the aggregate the ceiling area, then, he shall, within ninety days from the notified date or from the date of marriage or adoption, as the case may be, whichever date is later, furnish to the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction his holding or the major part thereof is situated, a return containing the following particulars, namely:- (i) Particulars of the land held before the date of the marriage or adoption ; (ii) Particulars of the land held after date of the marriage or adoption ;and (iii) Such other particulars as may be prescribed. 2 [...] (3) If he furnishes the return or fails to furnish the return or furnishes an incorrect or incomplete return, within the period specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) the provisions of section 9 and other provisions of this Act shall, as far as may be apply as if it were a return required to be furnished under section 8. Explanation II omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970. Explanation II omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 21-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 or in any other provisions of the Act and in any other law for the time being in force, where, 2 [after the 15th day of February, 1970 but before the 2nd day of October, 1970]. (a) any person has effected by means of a registered instrument a partition of his holding or part thereof ; or (b) any parent or grand-parent has voluntarily transferred any land on account of natural love and affection to any minor son, unmarried daughter, minor grand-son, or unmarried grand-daughter in the male line ; or (c) any person has voluntarily transferred any land:- (i) to any educational institution; or (ii) hospital of a public nature solely for the purposes of such institution or hospital, such partition or transfer shall be valid: Provided that in the case of transfer to such educational institution or hospital the land transferred absolutely vests in the institution or hospital and the entire income from such land is appropriated for the institution or hospital.] S.21-A inserted, by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 Substituted for "after the date of commencement of this Act, but before the notified date, by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 with effect from 1.3.1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where, on or after the date of the commencement of this Act, but before the notified date, any person has transferred any land held by him by sale, gift (other than gift made in contemplation of death,) exchange, surrender, settlement or in any other manner whatsoever except by bequest 3 [or has effected a partition of his holding or part thereof] the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction such land, holding or the major part thereof is situated may after notice to such person and other persons affected by such transfer 4 [or partition] and after such enquiry as he thinks fit to make, declare the transfer 5 [or partition] to be void if he finds that the transfer 6 [or the partition as the cease may be] defeats any of the provisions of this Act. These words omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 were re-introduced by Tamil Nadu Act 7 1974. Section 22 is re-numbered as Section 22 (1) and sub-section (2) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1996. These words omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 were re-introduced by Tamil Nadu Act 7 1974. These words omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 were re-introduced by Tamil Nadu Act 7 1974. These words omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 were re-introduced by Tamil Nadu Act 7 1974. These words omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 were re-introduced by Tamil Nadu Act 7 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of Section 20, for the purpose of fixing, for the first time after the date of the commencement of this Act, the ceiling area of any person holding land on the date of the commencement of this Act in excess of 15 standard acres:- (a) any transfer, whether by sale (including sale in execution of a decree or order of a civil Court or of an award or order of any other lawful authority) or by gift (other than gift made in contemplation of death,) exchange, surrender, settlement or otherwise ; or (b) any sub-division (including sub-division by a decree or order of a civil Court or any other lawful authority) whether by partition or otherwise, effected on or after the notified date and before the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) of section 18 shall be, and shall be deemed to have been, void and accordingly the authorized officer shall calculate the ceiling area of such persons as if no such transfer or sub-division had taken place. Explanation - This sub-section shall, on and from the 15th day of February, 1970, have effect as if for the figures and words "30 standard acres", the figures and words "15 standard acres" had been substituted. (2) It shall be the duty of the authorized officer to include the land so transferred or sub-divided, within the ceiling area of the transferor or the person who held the land immediately before such sub-division, as the case may be, as if no such transfer or sub-division, had taken place.] S.23 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974 with effect from 6.4.1960.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may constitute for the State a Board called the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Land Board. (2) The Land Board shall consist of- (a) 2 [...] (b) the Land Commissioner, ex-officio; 3 [(c) the Chief Conservator of Forests, ex-officio ; (cc) the Director of Land Reforms, ex-officio ;] 4 [(d) two non-official members nominated by the Government.] (3) The member referred to in 5 [clause (b)] of sub-section (2) shall be the Chairman of the Land Board. The Secretary to the Land Board shall be a Gazetted Officer nominated by the Government, but he shall not be entitled to vote. (4) (a) The term of office, of a member referred to in 6 [clause (d)] of sub-section (2) shall be three years or such shorter period as the Government may fix and such member shall be eligible for re-nomination. (b) Any member, referred to in 7 [clause (d)] of sub-section (2) shall be deemed to have vacated his seat if he absent himself with excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Land Board, from the meetings of the Land Board, for a period of three consecutive months reckoned from the date of the commencement of his term of office or of the last meeting which he attended, as the case may be, or if within the said period less than three meetings have been held, absents himself from three consecutive meetings held after the said date: Provided that no meeting from which a member absents himself shall be counted against him under this clause if due notice of that meeting was not given to him. (5) 8 [A member referred to in Clause (d) of sub-section (2)] may, at any time by notice in writing to the Chairman, resign his office, but he shall continue in office until the nomination of his successor. (6) (a) A casual vacancy in the office of a member referred to in 9 [clause (d)] of sub-section (2) shall be filled by fresh nomination. (b) 10 [...] Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted for clause (c) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Substituted by Tami Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Tami Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Tami Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted for "A member referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) may, at any time by notice in writing to the Government and a member referred to in clause (d) of that sub-section by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Land Board shall perform such functions as are assigned to it by or under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 30--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any owner of plantation in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act in any area 1 [...] desiring to acquire in excess of the ceiling area land which is interspersed among plantations or is contiguous to any plantation and which may be required for the extension, or for ancillary purposes, of the plantation shall make an application to the Land Board for permission to acquire such land. Every such application shall be in writing and shall contain- (a) the extent and other particulars of the land proposed to be acquired and those of the land, if any, held by the applicant; (b) such other particulars as may be prescribed. The words "other than a hill area" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act XX of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 31--> State(s): Tamil Nadu On receipt of a copy of the return, additional particulars or information, as the case may be, forwarded by the authorized officer under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 9 or on receipt of the application under section 30, the Land Board shall, after making such enquiry and inspection of the land and the plantation specified in the application as it deems fit and after satisfying itself that the land in respect of which permission is required is necessary for the extension, or for ancillary purposes, of the plantation, grant the permission for the whole or part of such land and subject to such conditions as it deems fit, or refuse to grant such permission: Provided that the extent of land which is contiguous to any plantation and in respect of which land permission is granted under this section shall in no case exceed twenty per centum of the total extent of such plantation.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 32--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Land Board shall, in deciding whether to grant or refuse permission under section 31 take, into consideration the following matters, namely:- (i) Area under plantation and area required for ancillary purposes of the plantation. (ii) programme for extension of the plantation; (iii) lands necessary for factories, labour quarters, playgrounds, hospitals, schools and other ancillary buildings ; and (iv) such other matters as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 33--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Land Board may cancel the permission granted under section 31- (a) on the breach of any condition specified by the Land Board under section 31, or (b) if the land in respect of which the permission was granted is used for any purpose other than for the purpose of extension, for ancillary purposes, of the plantation, or (c) if the person concerned has obtained the permission by fraud or misrepresentation: Provided that no such permission shall be cancelled unless a reasonable opportunity has been given to the person likely to be affected by such cancellation to show cause against such cancellation.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 34--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [The decisions] of the Land Board granting or refusing permission under section 2 [31] or cancelling permission under section 3 [33] shall be final and shall not be called in question in any Court. Substituted for "The decision " by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 and again Substituted by Act 26 of 2003. Substituted for "27 or 31" Substituted for "29 or 33", by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 35--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Land Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business as its meetings as may be prescribed. (2) The Chairman, or in his absence, such member as may be chosen by the members present from among themselves shall preside at a meeting of the Land Board. (3) No member of the Land Board shall vote on, or take part in, the discussion of any question coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Land Board, if the question is one in which he is directly or indirectly interested. (4) All questions at a meeting of the Land Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman or in his absence, the member presiding shall have a second or casting vote (5) All communications and orders of the Land Board shall be issued by the Secretary or by such officer subordinate to him as may be authorized by the Land Board on this behalf.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 36--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Land Board may, either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties:- (a) if it is satisfied that a bonafide mistake has been made in regard to any decision, make the necessary correction therein; (b) at any time, correct any clerical or arithmetical mistake in its decision.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 37--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act of the Land Board shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of a defect in its constitution or on the ground that the Chairman or any member had ceased to hold his office or by reason, of such act having been done during the period of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman or any member of the Land Board.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 37-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any industrial or commercial undertaking desires to hold or acquire any land in excess of the ceiling area, it shall make an application to the Government for permission to hold or acquire such land. Every such application shall be in writing and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. Explanation - In this section, "industrial or commercial undertaking" means any industrial or commercial undertaking (other than a co-operative society) which bona fide carries on any, industrial or commercial operation. (2) The government may grant the permission for the whole or part of the land specified in the application subject to such conditions as they deem fit or refuse to grant such permission. The order granting such permission shall contain the particulars of the land in respect of which such permission is granted. (3) The Government shall, in deciding whether to grant or refuse the permission under sub-section (2), take into consideration the following factors namely- (a) The nature of the industrial or commercial operation ; (b) whether the excess land is required for immediate use or future use; and (c) such other particulars as may be prescribed. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no industrial or commercial undertaking which has been approved by the Government under clause (iv) of section 73 before the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second Amendment Act, 1972, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall be entitled to hold or acquire land in excess of the ceiling area unless such industrial or commercial undertaking has obtained the permission of the Government under this section in respect of such excess land. (5) The Government may cancel the permission in respect of any land granted under this section on the breach of any condition specified by the Government.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 37-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions of section 73, - (a) if any public trust created before the 1st March 1972 desires to hold or acquire any land in excess of the ceiling area for the purpose of and in the case of any public trust created after 1st March 1972, if such public trust desires to hold or acquire any land for the purpose of - (i) establishing any educational institution or hospital; or (ii) expanding any existing educational institution or hospital by way of addition to, alteration of, or improvement to, any educational institution or hospital 3 [...] (b) 4 [...] 5 Explanation - In this section - (A) educational institution means any college (including engineering or medical or agricultural or veterinary college) or any school or other equivalent institution or any polytechnic institution ; (B) hospital means any place for the reception and treatment of persons suffering from illness or injury and includes any maternity home, asylum, infirmary, lying-in-hospital or any place for the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence but does not include a dispensary."] 2. The Government may grant the permission 6 [prospectively] for the whole or part of the land specified in the application subject to such conditions as they deem fit or refuse to grant such permission. The order granting such permission shall contain the particulars of the land in respect of which such permission is granted. 3. The Government shall, in deciding whether to grant or refuse the permission under sub-section (2), take into consideration the following factors, namely:- (a) the purpose and objectives of the public trust 7 [...] (b) whether the land is required for immediate use or use in future ; and (c) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 4. The Government may cancel the permission in respect of any land granted under this section on the breach of any condition specified by the Government;] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 1987. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 38--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 39--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 40--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 41--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 42--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 43--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 44--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 45--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 46--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 47--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 48--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 49--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [This Chapter which dealt with the Constitution and functions of the Sugar Factory Board were omitted] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 50--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person whose right, title or interest in any land is acquired by the Government under Chapter II shall be paid 2 [an amount] according to the rate specified in Schedule III. 3 [as in force on the date of acquisition of such right, title or interest in any such land.] 4 Explanation - It is hereby declared that for the purposes of this sub-section "person" shall include family and that where any right, title or interest in any land held by a family or deemed to be held by a family under sub-section (2) of section 5, is acquired by the Government under Chapter II, the amount payable under this sub-section shall be determined in respect of the whole of such right, title or interest of the family in such land as a unit, whether such right, title or interest is held individually or jointly by some or all of the members of that family.] (2) Any person claiming any 5 [amount] under sub-section (1) may, within 6 [thirty] days from the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18 7 [...] prefer the claim before the authorized officer in such form and containing such particulars as may be prescribed. (3) (a) The authorized officer shall determine the amount 8 [...] at the rate specified in Schedule III, and prepare a draft 9 [assessment roll] in such manner and containing such particulars as may be prescribed. He shall cause it to be published together with - (i) a statement that the amount 10 [...] specified therein is the entire amount 11 [...] payable for all interests in the land and that subject to the other provisions of this Act, the persons named therein are the only persons who are entitled thereto in the proportion stated therein, and (ii) a notice stating that objection, if any, in respect of any entry in the draft may be preferred by any person in such manner as may be prescribed within 12 [thirty] days from the date of the publication. 13 [...] (b) The authorized officer shall cause to be served on the persons whose names appear in the draft aforesaid a copy of the draft together with a copy of the said statement and of the said notice. (4) The authorized officer shall consider any objection which may be preferred under sub-section (3) and after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard and of adducing evidence, if any, pass such order as he thinks fit and record the reasons therefor. (5) When such objection, if any, in regard thereto has been finally disposed of, the authorized officer shall make such alteration in the draft 14 [...] assessment roll as may be necessary to give effect to any order made in regard to the objection and shall cause the draft so altered to be published finally in such manner as may be prescribed. (6) If no objection is preferred within the period specified in the notice published under sub-section (3) 15 [...] the authorized officer shall cause the draft 16 [...] assessment roll to be published finally in such manner as may be prescribed. (7) Every entry in the 17 [...] assessment roll published finally under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) shall, except as provided in this Act, be final and conclusive evidence of (a) the matters referred to therein; (b) the nature of the interest of the persons named therein; and (c) the appointment of the 18 [amount] among the persons claiming interest in the 19 [amount] (8) When the 20 [...] assessment roll has been published finally under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), the authorized officer shall, within such time as may be prescribed, endorse a certificate thereon stating the date of the final publication thereof and shall date and subscribe the same with its name and official designation and such certificate shall be conclusive proof of such publication and date of such publication. (9) The authorized officer may, if he is satisfied either of his own motion or on the application of any of the parties that a bonafide mistake has been made in regard to any entry in the 21 [draft assessment roll or in the] 22 [...] assessment roll as published finally make necessary correction therein and on such correction being made the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (8) shall as far as may be apply thereto. (10) Not withstanding anything contained in sub-section (9), the authorized officer may at any time correct either of his own motion or on the application of any of the parties any clerical or arithmetical mistake in regard to any entry in the 23 [draft assessment roll or in the] 24 [...] assessment roll as published finally. Substituted for "compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978. Explanation added by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act11 of 1979. Substituted for sixty by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The words "or within such further time not exceeding thirty days as the authorised officer may in his discretion allow", omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The words "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation assessment roll", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for sixty by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Proviso omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words or within the further time allowed by the authorised officer under that sub-section" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Added, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The word "Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 51--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any surplus land acquired under the provisions of this Act is subject to a mortgage or charge subsisting on the date of the acquisition the mortgagee or the charge holder shall where the amount due to him or part thereof can be fixed by agreement be paid such amount or part. Where no such agreement can be reached, the mortgagee or the charge holder shall within 1 [sixty] days from the date of the acquisition, prefer a claim in such manner as may be prescribed before the authorized officer who shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), decide the claim in such manner as may be prescribed and record the reasons for the decision. (2) Where there are more claimants than one, the authorized officer shall settle the order in which each claimant is entitled to receive the amount due to him and in doing so he shall be guided by the appropriate provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (Central Act 4 of 1882). (3) Where in the opinion of the authorized officer the decision of a claim under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) involves a substantial question of law or of fact, he shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refer the claim to the Land Tribunal for decision. (4) If the amount of claim allowed to the mortgagee or the charge holder by the authorized officer exceeds the amount 2 [...] payable under section 50, the entire amount 3 [payable under the said section 50] shall be paid to the mortgagee or the charge holder, as the case may be and the balance may be recovered by the mortgagee or the charge holder in accordance with law for the time being in force. Substituted for "ninety" by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for of such compensation, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 52--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any surplus land acquired under the provisions of this Act is held by a limited owner on the date of the acquisition, the amount 1 [...] payable in respect of such surplus land under section 50 shall subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be kept in deposit before such, authority as may be prescribed. The authorized officer shall direct payment of the interest accruing from the amount 2 [...] so deposited to the person or persons who would, for the time being, have been entitled to the possession of the said land: Provided that where the limited owner has created an encumbrance over the surplus land referred to in this section, the whole or any portion of the interest aforesaid shall be paid to the encumbrance, to the extent to which the encumbrancer is entitled and the balance shall be paid to the person or person who would, for the time being, have been entitled to the possession of the said land. (2) The amount 3 [...] referred to in sub-section (1) shall remain so deposited until the same is paid to any person or persons becoming absolutely entitled thereto. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 53--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any surplus land acquired under the provisions of this Act is on the date of the acquisition subject to a charge for payment of maintenance to another, the amount 1 [...] payable in respect of such surplus land under section 50 shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be kept in deposit before such authority as may be prescribed. Such amount 2 [...] shall be deemed to be substituted security and shall continue to remain such security till the death of the maintenance-holder or till the right to receive maintenance ceases to exist or till the liability to pay maintenance is discharged. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words, "of Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 54--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where the contract of tenancy provided for the continuance of the tenancy in respect of any surplus land that vests in the Government under section 18, after the expiry of the agricultural year immediately succeeding the date of such vesting, the tenant shall be entitled to 2 [an amount] as specified in Schedule IV: Provided that such tenant shall not be entitled to any [amount] in respect of such surplus land also under sub-section (1) of section 50. (2) The 3 [amount] referred to in sub-section (1) shall be apportioned between the cultivating tenant and the intermediary concerned in the manner specified in Schedule IV. Substituted for of such compensation, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for of such compensation, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 55--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The amount 2 [payable under section 50] as finally determined under this Act shall, within such period as may be prescribed, be paid either in cash or in bonds or partly in cash and partly in bonds as the Government may deem fit. (2) The bonds shall be issued on such terms and carry such rate of interest as may be prescribed. The interest shall be paid - (i) in case of any land held by any person referred to in clause (a) or (b) of sub-section (5) of section 18 with effect from the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18; and (ii) in any other case, with effect from the date of taking possession of the land under sub-section (4) of section 18. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 56--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every land in the transferred territory or part thereof shall, if such land or part thereof has not been surveyed in accordance with the provisions contained in the Tamil Nadu Survey and Boundaries Act, 1923 (T.N. Act 8 of 1923), be surveyed in accordance with the provisions of that Act 1 [...]. (2) The cost of the survey, except so much as is payable under the provisions of section 8 of the Tamil Nadu Survey and Boundaries Act, 1923 (T.N. Act 8 of 1923), shall be borne by the Government. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 57--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Settlement Officer shall effect 1 [...] ryotwari settlement of every land in the transferred territory or part thereof in accordance with a settlement notification framed and published by the Government for the purpose. (2) The said notification shall embody the principles adopted in making ryotwari settlements in ryotwari areas, and shall adopt  (a) the rates of assessment set out in the settlement notification in force on such date and in such district as may be specified by the Government; (b) if more than one such notification is in force in that district, the rates set out in one of those notifications which the Government consider to be the most appropriate to the case. (3) Neither the settlement notification nor any order passed in pursuance thereof shall be liable to be questioned in any Court of Law. (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in this section shall be construed to be in derogation of any law relating to the levy of tax on land in force in the transferred territory. Substituted for "Compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 58--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) As soon as may be, after the date of the publication of this Act, the Government shall appoint one or more Settlement Officers to carry out the functions and duties assigned to them by or under this Chapter. (2) Every Settlement Officer shall be subordinate to the Land Commissioner and shall be guided by such lawful instructions as he may issue from time to time and the Land Commissioner shall also have power to cancel or revise any of the orders, Acts or proceedings of the Settlement Officer.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 58-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the provisions of section 56 to 58 shall cease to apply to every land in the transferred territory (other than the Sreepadam land belonging to the Sreepadam Palace) and in respect of such land survey shall be made and ryotwari settlement shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of the 2 [Tamil Nadu] (Transferred Territory) Ryotwari Settlement Act, 1964 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1964) and for the purposes of this Act such survey and settlement shall be deemed to be made and effected under this Chapter. (2) The provisions of sections 56 to 58 shall continue to apply to the Sreepadam land belonging to the Sreepadam Palace. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1965 (1st May, 1965). Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 59--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [Provisions of this Chapter made permanent and S.59 omitted]. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 60--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Chapter, "Cultivating tenants ceiling area" means 5 standard acres held by any person partly as cultivating tenant and partly as owner or wholly as cultivating tenant. Explanation: For the purposes of this Chapter, "Cultivating tenant" includes any tenant who is in actual possession of land but does not contribute his own physical labour or that of any member of his family in the cultivation of such land.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 60-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this chapter, "date of the publication of this Act" and "notified date" shall respectively mean "the 2nd May, 1962" and "the 2nd October, 1962"] S.60-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 61--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every cultivating tenant who holds on the notified date land in excess of the cultivating tenants ceiling area shall, within ninety days from the said date, furnish to the authorized officer a return containing the following particulars, namely:- (i) Particulars of the land if any, which he hold as owner; (ii) Particulars of the land, which he holds as cultivating tenant; (iii) Particulars of the name and address of the landowner concerned ; and (iv) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 1 Explanation - In the case of a member of the Armed Forces, the return under sub-section (1) shall be furnished within six months after the Proclamation of Emergency has ceased to operate.] (2) If any cultivating tenant who has held land in excess of the cultivating tenants ceiling area, fails to furnish the return under sub-section (1) or furnishes an incorrect or incomplete return under that sub-section, the authorized officer may, by notice, require such cultivating tenant to furnish the return of the additional particulars, as the case may be, within the time specified in the notice or within such further time not exceeding thirty days as the authorized officer may, in his discretion, allow. (3) (a) Where any cultivating tenant on whom notice under sub-section (2) has been served fails to furnish the return or the additional particulars, as the case may be, within the time specified in that notice or within the further time, if any, allowed by the authorized officer under sub-section (2), the authorized officer may obtain in such manner as may be prescribed the necessary information either b himself or through such agency as he thinks fit. (b) The authorized officer shall, as soon as may be after obtaining the information under clause (a), give to the cultivating tenant concerned a reasonable opportunity of making his representation and of adducing evidence, if any, in respect of such information and consider any such representation and evidence and pass such orders as he deems fit. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1965 (21st April, 1965)
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 62--> State(s): Tamil Nadu On the basis of the return furnished under sub-section (1) of section 61 or on the basis of the return furnished under sub-section (2) of that section, and the additional particulars, if any, furnished under that sub-section, or on the basis of the information obtained by the authorized officer under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of Section 61, and the orders passed on the representation and the evidence, if any, under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of that section, the authorized officer shall subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf and subject to the rights of the owner of the land, take possession on behalf of the Government, of the land held by the person as cultivating tenant and in excess of the cultivating tenants ceiling area: Provided that the authorized officer shall not take possession of such land unless he has given a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the landowner and the cultivating tenant concerned: Provided further that the authorized officer shall give in such manner as may be prescribed, not less than three months notice in writing intimating the cultivating tenant of his decision to take possession of the land and the notice shall expire with the end of the agricultural year in which such notice is given. 1 [Provided further that the authorized officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit the possession of the land held by the person as cultivating tenant and in excess of the cultivating tenants ceiling area, if the total extent of such excess land does not exceed half an acre in the case of wet land and one acre in the case of dry land, irrespective of the assessment of such land.] Provided also that where there is any crop standing on such land on the date of the expiry of the notice aforesaid, the authorized officer may postpone taking possession of the land permit the harvest of such crop by the person who had raised such crop. 2 [Explanation - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, for the purpose of the third proviso "acre" means ordinary acre."] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act of 36 of 1998.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 63--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) With effect on and from the date on which the authorized officer takes possession of the land under section 62, the Government shall be deemed to be the tenant of the owner of the land. (2) In respect of the land referred to in sub-section (1), the Government shall be liable to pay annually to the owner of such land fair rent as calculated in the manner specified in paragraph 4 of Part I of Schedule III. Such rent shall be paid in cash or in kind in accordance with such rules as may be made by the Government. (3) If any dispute arises in regard to the rent payable under sub-section (2) either party may make an application to the Land Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the land referred to in sub-section (1) or the major part thereof is situated for deciding such dispute.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 64--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The authorized officer shall distribute possession of the land, possession of which he has taken under section 62, to the landless persons holding land below the cultivating tenants ceiling area. (2) The distribution under sub-section (1) shall be in accordance with such rules and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. Such rules may also provide for the manner of recovery of any amount due to the Government from, and the manner of evicting, the person to whom such distribution is made.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 65--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The authorized officer may summarily disposses- (i) any person to whom any land has been distributed under section 64, if such person fails to comply with the conditions subject to which the distribution was made, or contravenes any rule made under this chapter; (ii) any other person occupying such land except in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 66--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where, in respect of any land the possession of which has been taken by the authorized officer under section 62, the contract of tenancy provides for the continuance of the tenancy after the expiry of the agricultural year immediately succeeding the date of taking such possession, the Government shall pay to the tenant 2 [an amount] as provided in sub-section (2) The 3 [amount] payable to any tenant under sub-section (1) shall be one eighth of 4 [the annual value of the land calculated in the manner specified in Part I of Schedule III]. Out of such 5 [amount] three-fourths shall be paid, to the cultivating tenant and one-fourth to the intermediary, if any. (3) If any dispute arises in regard to the amount 6 [...] payable under sub-section (2) either party may make an application to the Land Tribunal within whose jurisdiction the land or the major part thereof is situated for deciding such dispute. Substituted for "Compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted the fair rent for the land calculated in the manner specified in paragraph 4 of Part I of Schedule III, Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "Compensation" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. The words of Compensation omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 67--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No claim of any person to any arrear of rent or any other amount accrued or due in respect of any land for the period prior to the date of taking possession of such land under section 62 shall be enforced by any Court whether in execution of a decree or otherwise against the Government or against any person holding the land under the Government.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 68--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to affect the right of any landowner under the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955) to resume possession for purposes of personal cultivation of the land the possession of which has been taken by the authorized officer under this chapter and for the purposes of such resumption the Government shall be deemed to be the cultivating tenant in respect of the land aforesaid: Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 69--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, on or after the notified date, any person acquires by lease any land which together with the land, if any, already held by him, exceeds in the aggregate the cultivating tenants ceiling area, he shall, within ninety days of such acquisition, furnish to the authorized officer within whose jurisdiction the land or the major part thereof is situated, a return containing such particulars as may be prescribed. (2) If he furnishes the return or fails to furnish the return or furnishes an incorrect or incomplete return, within the period specified in sub-section (1), the provisions of sub-section (2) and (3) of section 61, and other provisions of this Chapter shall, as far as may be apply as if it were a return required to be furnished under sub-section (1) of section 61.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 70--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any land held by any sugar factory as tenant.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 71--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955), the 2 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payments of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1956), the Tiruchirapalli Kaiaeruvaram and Mattuvaram Act, 1958 (Tamil Nadu Act 36 of 1958) and any other law relating to tenancy shall, except in so far as they are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Chapter, continue in force. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 72--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of this Chapter shall, subject to the provisions of section 17, have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other provision of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 73--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Except as otherwise provided in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 5 and in section 6, nothing contained in this Act shall apply to- (i) any land held by the Central Government or any State Government or any local authority ; 1 [(ii) any land held by any University constituted by any law ;] 2 [(iii) any land assigned by the Government to and held by, any Land Colonisation Cooperative Society] 3 [(iv) any land in respect of which the Government have granted permission to any industrial or commercial under taking under section 37-A and such permission continues in force: Provided that such land shall be exempt only so long as the conditions, if any, specified by the Government are complied with;] 4 [(iv-A) any land in respect of which the Government have granted permission to any public trust 5 [...] under section 37-B and such permission continues in force: Provided that such land shall be exempt only so long as the conditions, if any, specified by the Government are complied with.] (v) 6 [...] (vi) all plantations in existence 7 [on the date commencement of this Act;] 8 [Provided that such plantations shall be exempt only so long they continue to be plantations.] (vii) lands converted on or before the 1st day of July, 1959 into orchards or topes or arecanut gardens, whether or not such lands are contiguous or scattered; Provided that such lands shall be exempt only so long as they continue to be orchards, topes or arecanut gardens; (viii) any land used exclusively for growing fuel trees 9 [on the date of the commencement of this Act;] Provided that such land shall be exempt only so long as such land is used for such purpose; (ix) Gramdan land and land donated for purposes of the Bhoodan Yagna ; (x) 10 [...] (xi) any land (a) interspersed among plantations, or (b) contiguous to any plantation, in existence on the date of the commencement of this Act in any area 11 [...] and in respect of which the Land Board has granted permission under section 31 and such permission continues in force; (xii) any land awarded for gallantry to defence personnel]: Provided that such land shall be exempt only for the lifetime of the person to whom the award was granted; (xiii) 12 [...] Clause. (iii) of S. 73 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972. Cl (iii) Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974. Clause (iv) Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 1987. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Cl (iii) Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974. Proviso to Clause (vi) added by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1975. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1974. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 74--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 75--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 76--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government shall constitute as many Land Tribunals as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act. (2) Each Land Tribunal shall consist of one person only who shall be 1 [...] 2 [an officer not below the rank of District Revenue Officer.] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 76-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Land Commissioner may, either suo motu or on application, for reasons to be recorded in writing transfer an appeal pending before a Land Tribunal to another Land Tribunal. (2) The Land Commissioner may, when exercising the powers under sub-section (1) direct the stay of further proceedings before a Land Tribunal. (3) No order under this section adversely affecting a person shall be passed unless that person has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 77--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Each Land Tribunal shall have such jurisdiction over such area as the Government may, by notification, from time to time determine. (2) If any question is referred by the authorized officer to the Land Tribunal or its decision under sections 11 (2), 16 (3) (a) (iv) or 51 (3) the Land Tribunal shall decide such question. (3) Every, Land Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908) Chapter X-A (***) Chapter X-A omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003.)
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 78--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Against any decision of the authorised officer under sections 9 (2) (b), 10 (3), (4), (5), 16 (3) (a) (iii), 20, 22, 50, (4), 51 (1), (2), 52, 61 (3) (b) or 102 (2) (b) the Government may within ninety days from the date of the decision and any person aggrieved by, such decision, any within 1 [thirty] days from the date of such decision, appeal to the Land Tribunal. (2) The Land Tribunal may admit an appeal presented after the expiration of the period mentioned in sub-section (1), 2 [but not exceeding thirty days,] if it is satisfied that the party concerned had sufficient cause for not presenting it within the said period. (3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the Land Tribunal, after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall- (a) determine a case finally; (b) remand a case; (c) take additional evidence or require such evidence to be taken by the authorized officer. Substituted for "sixty" by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Added, by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 79--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Against a decision of the Land Tribunal under section 11 (3) or 77 (2) the Government may, within sixty days from the date of the decision and any person aggrieved by such decision may within thirty days from the date of the decision, appeal to the 2 [High Court]: Provided that the 3 [High Court] may admit an appeal presented after the expiration of the said person if it is satisfied that the party concerned had sufficient cause for not presenting it within the said period. (2) The 4 [High Court] after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, shall- (a) determine a case finally; (b) remand a case; (c) take additional evidence or require such evidence to be taken by the Land Tribunal. Explanation - In this section and in section 78 "date of the decision" means the date on which such decision is communicated to the party concerned. Substituted for "High Court" by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Substituted for "High Court" by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Substituted for "High Court" by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. Substituted for "High Court" by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 80--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of section 4 and of sub-section (1) and (2) of section 12 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1 [1908 (Central Act 9 of 1908) shall, as far as may be, apply to any appeal under section 78 or 79. Sections 4, 12 (1) and (2) of the Limitation Act 36 of 1963.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 81--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 82--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Land Commissioner may call for and examine the record of any authorised officer in respect of any proceeding under section 1 [9(3), 12, 13, 14 (1), 14 (2), 17 (3), 18 (4), 50 (5) or 50 (9) or the record of any proceeding under sub-section (2) of section 54] and in respect of any other proceeding under this Act not being a proceeding in respect of which a suit or an appeal 2 [...] the Land Tribunal is provided by this Act to satisfy himself as to the regularity of such proceeding or the correctness, legality or propriety of any decision or order passed thereon; and if, in any case, it appears to the Land Commissioner that any such proceeding, decision or order should be modified, annulled, reversed or remitted for reconsideration, he may pass orders accordingly: Provided that the Land Commissioner shall not pass any order prejudicial to any party unless the has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. Substituted for "9 (3), (4) 17 (3) or 18 (4) " by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. The words "or revision" omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 83--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of Section 79, every Land Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Court subordinate to the High Court for the purposes of Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908) and its orders shall be liable to revision by the High Court under the provisions of that Section. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 84--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [High Court] the Land Tribunal or the Land Commissioner may stay the execution of any decision or order pending the exercise of its or his powers under this Chapter. Substituted for "High Court" by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 and it is again substituted for the words Special Appellate Tribunal by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 85--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person who is under an obligation to furnish a return under this Act, refuses or willfully fails to furnish the return within the time specified in the notice under sub-section (1) of section 9 or under sub-section (2) of section 61 or within the further time, if any, allowed by the authorized officer under those sub-sections, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1 [two thousand rupees.] (2) If any person who, after having been convicted under sub-section (1), continues to refuse or to willfully fail to furnish the return, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for each day after the previous date of conviction during which he continues so to offend Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 86--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person refuses or willfully fails to furnish the information under sub-section (1) of section 102 within the time specified in the notice under that sub-section or within the further time, if any, allowed by the authorized officer under that sub-section, such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1 [two thousand rupees]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 87--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person who is under an obligation to furnish any return or information under this Act, furnishes any return or information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1 [two thousand rupees]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 88--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person makes any declaration before the registering authority under sub-section (1) of section 19 which he knows or has reason to believe to be false, he shall be punishable with fine not exceeding 1 [two thousand rupees]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 88-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where the transfer or partition of any land has been declared to be void under section 22, and if any person has in the return furnished by him under this Act specified such land to be declared as surplus land of the transferor or of the person effecting the partition, the person so furnishing the return shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees or with both.] Section 88-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 89--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person, on or after the notified date, voluntarily acquires by lease or possessory mortgage any land which together with the land, if any, already held by him exceeds in the aggregate the ceiling area, he shall punishable with fine not exceeding 1 [two thousand rupees]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 90--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person willfully contravenes any lawful order passed under this Act or obstructs any person from lawfully taking possession of any land under any of the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 1 [two thousand rupees]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 91--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person, after the date of vesting in the Government of any land acquired under this Act and before the disposal of such land under this Act, cuts or causes to be cut, trees on the land,. or removes or causes to be removed, any building,1 [machinery, plant, apparatus, wells, filter points or power lines.] constructed, erected or fixed on the land and used for agricultural purposes, or does or causes to be done any act likely to diminish the utility of the land, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine not exceeding 2 [two thousand rupees], or with both. Substituted for "machinery plant or apparatus by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 92--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation - For the purposes of this section- (a) "company" means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, and (b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the film.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 93--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except on complaint in writing made by the authorized officer or any officer empowered by him by special order. (2) No Court inferior to that of Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 94--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject for the provisions of sub-section (2) 1 [and section 94-A] the Government may, after taking into consideration the object specified in the preamble, make rules providing for the manner in which any land acquired by the Government under this Act shall be disposed of: 2 [...] (2) (a) In the disposal of the land acquired by the Government under this Act, the Government shall give preference to any person who is completely dispossessed of his holding, or whose extent of holding is reduced below 3 [three acres of dry land or one and a half acres of wet land] held by him partly as cultivating tenant and partly as own or wholly as cultivating tenant, by virtue of the provisions of this Act. (b) 4 [...] 5 Explanation - Where a person holds both dry and wet land, then, for the purpose of calculating the extent of his holding under this clause, one acre of wet land shall be deemed to be equal to two acres of dry land. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Proviso omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "three standard acres by Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1980. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Explanation added, by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 94-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any surplus land acquired by the Government under this Act was held by any sugar factory immediately before the date of the acquisition the Government shall make arrangement for the cultivation of such land with sugar-cane for supply to the sugar factory concerned. (2) The Government may make rules in respect of the lands referred to in sub-section (1) for the cultivation of sugar-cane through a corporation (including a company) owned or controlled by the State and for such other matters in connection with the administration of such lands. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) the Government may, by notification, direct that it is not compulsory to cultivate sugar-cane in any such land as is referred to in sub-Section (1) and on the issue of such notification, the land concerned may be cultivated either with sugar-cane or with any other crop. (4) Nothing in this section shall be constructed as preventing the Government from making rules under section 94 providing for the manner of disposal of any surplus land acquired under this Act and held by any sugar factory immediately before the date of acquisition and accordingly the Government may make rules under section 94 providing for the disposal of such land. Sections 94-A to 94-C added by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 94-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17 or any other provision of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, where immediately before the date of the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 1971, any land is held as tenant by any sugar factory under a contract of tenancy which is subsisting and where such land is within the ceiling area of the land owner concerned, such land shall be deemed to be held as tenant by the corporation (including a company), if any referred to in sub-section (2) of section 94-A for the unexpired period of the contract 1 [and for a period of] 2 [eight] years after the expiry of such contract] and accordingly the said contract of tenancy shall have force and effect against the said corporation and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the place of the sugar factory the corporation had been a party thereto [and the amount of rent payable under the contract of tenancy shall be continued to be paid to the land owner by the corporation.] 3 [Provided that where the said corporation is of opinion that any land held by it under any such contract of tenancy, is no longer required for the purposes of that corporation, then the said corporation may terminate such contract of tenancy in respect of such land, and release such land to the land owner concerned.] (2) Nothing in this Act shall apply to any land referred to in sub-section (1) only so long as such land is deemed to be held as tenant by the corporation (including a company) under subsection (1). Added by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1975. Substituted for "seven" by Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1981. Proviso to S. 94-B (1) added, by Tamil Nadu Act 49 of 1981.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 94-C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Except as otherwise provided in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 5 and in section 6, nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any extent of land not exceeding 100 standard acres held by a sugar factory solely for research and seed farm purposes. (2) The question whether any land is held solely for research and seed farm purposes shall be declared by the Government.]
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 95--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where on account of any improvements made in the land by or at the cost of the person holding such land, one kind of the lands specified in clause (40) of section 3 is converted into another kind of the lands specified in the said clause after the date of publication of the final statement under section 12 or 14, such conversion shall not be taken into account in calculating the extent of land held by such person. But where such conversion takes place as a result of any irrigation project constructed at the cost of the Government the land so converted shall be reduced to standard acres according to the proportion specified in the clause aforesaid, and the ceiling area of such person shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 96--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the extent of ceiling area which a family is entitled to hold under the provisions of this Act, immediately after the date of the publication of the final statement under section 12 or 14 shall not reduced by reason only of any decrease after the said date in the number of members of such family. 1 [Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the re fixation of the ceiling area under the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1970.] Proviso to S. 96 inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 97--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may appoint 1 [the Commissioner of Land Reforms] as Land Commissioner for the State to exercise such powers and discharge such duties as are assigned to him or under this Act. Substituted for "any member of the Board of Revenue" by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 98--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Substituted for "the land Board or the Sugar Factory Board" by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 99--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On the application of any of the parties or of his own motion- (a) the collector of the district may at any stage after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, transfer any application or other proceeding under this Act pending before any authorized officer in the district. (b) the Land Commissioner may at any stage after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, transfer any application or other proceeding under this Act pending before any authorized officer in any district. (2) Where any application or proceeding has been transferred under sub-section (1), the authorized officer to whom such transfer is made may, subject to any special directions given in the order of transfer, either hold the inquiry do novo or proceed from the stage at which the said application or other proceeding stood when it was transferred.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 100--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The authorized officer, the Land Commissioner [or the Land Board] shall furnish to the Government such returns, statistics, accounts and other information as the Government may from time to time require.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 101--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The authorized officer may obtain from any Court, Land Board, 1 [...] Land Tribunal or other authority any information relating to any proceeding pending before the authorized officer, and such court, Land Board 2 [...] Tribunal or authority, as the case may be, shall, if such information be available with it, furnish him with such information within a reasonable period. The words "Sugar Factory Board" omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. The words "Sugar Factory Board" omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 102--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, the authorized officer may, by notice, require any person to furnish any information relating to the extent of land held by such person, the number of members of the family, if any, of such person and such other particulars as may be prescribed. The person aforesaid shall furnish the information to the authorized officer within such time as may be specified in the notice or within such further time not exceeding thirty days as the authorized officer may, in his discretion, allow. (2) (a) Where any person whom notice under sub-section (1) has been served fails to furnish the information within the time specified in that notice or within the further time allowed by the authorized officer under sub-section (1), the authorized officer may obtain, in such manner as may be prescribed, the necessary information either by himself or through such agency as he thinks fit. (b) The authorized officer shall, as soon as may be after obtaining the information under clause (a), give to the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of making his representation and of adducing evidence, if any, in respect of such information and consider any such representation and evidence and pass such orders as he deems fit.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 103--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The costs of, and incidental to, all proceedings before the authorized officer, Land Commissioner, Land Board 1 [...] Land Tribunal or other authority shall be in his or its discretion. The words "Sugar Factory Board Omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 104--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The authorized officer or any person acting under his orders may at any time enter upon any land but not a dwelling house, with such other officers or persons as he considers necessary and make a survey and take measurements thereof or do any other act which he considers necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 105--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the authorized officer, Land Board, 1 [...] Land Commissioner, Land Tribunal, 2 (***) or other authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereafter. (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by virtue of any provision of this Act or by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. The words "Sugar Factory Board Omitted, by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 106--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may, for the purposes of this Act, cause to be prepared and published a record of rights in accordance with such rules as may be made by them.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 107--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to decide or deal with any question which is by or under this Act required to be decided or dealt with by the authorised officer, Land Board, the Land Commissioner, the Land Tribunal or other authority."] S. 107 was inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 108--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The court-fee payable in respect of - (a) any suit under sub-section (3) of section 11, shall be 1 [one hundred rupees]; (b) any appeal to the Land Tribunal under section 78 shall be 2 [one hundred rupees]; (c) any appeal to the 3 [High court] under section 79, shall be 4 [one hundred rupees]; 5 [(d) any application for revision by the Land Commissioner under section 82 shall be one hundred rupees ;] (e) any application for revision by the 6 [High court] under section 83, shall be 7 [one hundred rupees]; (f) any other case, shall be such fee as may be prescribed. Substituted for the words "twenty-five rupees" in clause (a) of Section 108, by the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1999. Substituted for the words "five rupees" in clause (b) of Section 108, by the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1999. Substituted for the words "High Court" in clause (c) and (e) of section 108 by the Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 and again substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003. Substituted for the words "twenty-five rupees" in clause (c) of Section 108, by the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1999. Clause (d) of section 108 substituted by the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1999. Substituted for the words "High Court" in clause (c) and (e) of section 108 by the Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 and again substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2003. Substituted for the words "ten rupees" in clause (e) of Section 108, by the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1999.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 109--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may, by notification, direct that any power exercisable by the Land Commissioner or any authorized officer, under this Actor the rules made thereunder, shall in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such notification, be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the Government, as may be specified in the notification.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 110--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for  (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed ; (b) all manner of service of notice under this Act; (c) the manner of giving reasonable opportunity or of adducing evidence under this Act (d) 1 [...] (e) the place at which and the manner in which the draft statement under sub-section (5) of section 10 and the final statement under section 12 or 14 may be published; (f) the manner of service of a copy of the final statement under section 12 or 14; (g) the manner of publication of a proclamation under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 18; (h) the qualifications which shall be possessed by the members nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 24; (i) the manner in which the draft 2 [...] assessment roll may be published under sub-section (3) of section 50; (j) the manner of apportionment of the 3 [amount] payable under this Act among the persons claiming interest in such 4 [amount] (k) the procedure to be followed by the authorized officer under this Act; (1) the terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and members of the Land Board 5 [...] ; (m) the manner in which, and the officer by whom fair rent shall be ascertained for the purposes of this Act; (n) the circumstances under and the conditions subject to which and the authority or officer before whom any amount 6 [...] payable under this Act be kept in deposit; (o) the manner of payment of the amount 7 [...] so deposited to the persons entitled thereto ; and (p) the manner of communicating to the party concerned every decision or order in any proceeding against which an appeal or revision is provided for by this Act; 8 [(q) the period within which an application for revision under section 82 may be presented.] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 111--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section 112--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) All rules made under 2 [this Act ***] 3 [...] shall be published in the Fort St. George Gazette and unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so published. (2) Every rule made under this 4 [...] 5 [...] shall, as soon as possible after it is made, be placed on the Table of both Houses of the Legislature, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modification in such rule 6 [...] or both Houses agree that the rule 7 [...] should not be made, the rule 8 [...] shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity anything previously done under the rule 9 [...]. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972. Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Schedule - I [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972.] Schedule - II [See Section 3 (27).] S. No. District Taluk Revenue number and name of the village. Extent of the lease hold. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1. Chingleput Saidapet 13. Grany Lyon Whole village 2. Do. Ponneri 146. Karadiputhur Do. 3. Do. Do. 147. Kannankottai Do. 4. Do. Do. 150. Thervoy Do. 5. Do. Do. 151. Kandigai Do. 6. Do. Do. 180. Pappankuppam alias Alamelumangapuram Do. 7. Madras ... 121. Ikkattutangal Do. 8. Salem Harur 317. Hunisanahalli Do. 9. Do. Do. 318. Sillarahalli Do. 10. Do. Do. 321. Regadahalli Do. 11. Do. Do. 322. Mottankurichi Do. Schedule - III [See Section 50.] Part I (Part I of Schedule III substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979 with effect from 27.10.1978.) [LAND OTHER THAN THE LAND SPECIFIED IN PART II] 1. The amount payable to any person under section 50 in respect of any land (other than the land specified in Part II) acquired by the Government under this Act shall be determined if the manner here-in-after in this Part specified. Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purpose of determining the amount under this Part, all lands acquired from a person by the Government under this Act shall be treated as a unit. 2. The annual value of the land shall be determined in the first instance. 3. The annual value of the land shall be,- (i) in the case of registered wet, dry or manavari land (other than dry or manavari land irrigated by direct flow or lift from any Government or private source of irrigation) twenty times the land revenue on the land. (ii) in case of dry or manavari land irrigated from any Government source of irrigation. (a) receiving supply by direct flow of water for two or more crops, twenty times the aggregate of, - (A) the land revenue on the land ; and (B) rupees nine per acre ; (b) by lift for one or more crops or receiving supply for only one crop by direct flow of water, twenty times the aggregate of,- (A) the land revenue on the land; and (B) rupees five per acre ; (iii) in the case of dry or manavari land irrigated from private source of irrigation owned by any person in his own land, twenty times the aggregate of,- (A) the land revenue on the land ; and (B) rupees five per acre ; (iv) in the case of waste land, five times the land revenue of the land. Explanation - In this part, waste land shall mean the land remaining uncultivated for a period of five years immediately preceding the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18; (v) in the case of forest land, five times the land revenue on the land. Explanation - Forest land for purposes of this Part - (i) shall include any land containing predominantly trees or shrubs or any vegetation of natural growth and such land shall be treated as forest land only, notwithstanding the existence of stray trees, if any, grown there by human effort; and (ii) shall not include any waste land containing trees or shrubs. Provided that the annual value determined under items (i) to (v) of this paragraph shall in no case exceed Rs. 350 per acre. Explanation - In this paragraph and in paragraph 6, land revenue shall in respect of any land have the same meaning as in Explanation 1 to section 3 (40); and shall not include cess, surcharge, additional and special assessment charge for water, or any other levy on land. 4. The amount payable for the land other that forest land acquired by the Government under this Act shall be determined in accordance with the following scale, namely:- (i) for the first sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, ten times such sum or portion ; (ii) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, nine times such sum or portion ; (iii) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, eight times such sum or portion ; (iv) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, seven times such sum or portion ; (v) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, six times such sum or portion ; (vi) for the balance of the annual value of the land, five times such balance. 5. The amount payable for trees on land other than forest land shall be the value of such trees on the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18 subject to the maximum specified below:- (i) in the case of trees grown by human effort other that fruit bearing trees, Rs. 1,000 per acre; (ii) in the case of, - (a) orchards; (b) plantation crops; or (c) fruit bearing trees, grown by human effort, Rs. 3,500 per acre; (iii) in the case of stray or spontaneous growth, Rs. 250 per acre; Provided that the total amount payable for trees under clauses (i) to (iii) shall not exceed Rs. 3,500 per acre. 6. The amount payable for the forest land including the trees on such land acquired by the Government under this Act shall be determined in accordance with the following scale, namely - (i) for the first sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, together with the annual value of the trees, ten times such sum or portion ; (ii) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, together with the annual value of the trees, nine times such sum or portion ; (iii) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, together with the annual value of the trees, eight times such sum or portion ; (iv) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, together with the annual value of the trees, seven times such sum or portion ; (v) for the next sum of Rs. 3,000 or any portion thereof of the annual value of the land, together with the annual value of the trees, six times such sum or portion ; (vi) for the balance of the annual value of the land together with the annual value of the trees, five times such balance. Explanation - In this paragraph, the annual value of the trees shall mean forty times the land revenue on forest land; Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph 4, where the lands acquired from a person by the Government under this Act include forest land and other land, the annual value of all such lands and the annual value of the trees on forest land shall be added together and the amount payable for such lands including the trees on such forest land, shall be determined in accordance with the scales specified in clauses (i) to (vi) of this paragraph, subject to the modification that the expression "the annual value of the land together with the annual value of the trees" shall be construed as "the annual value of the forest land and other land together with the annual value of the trees on forest land." 7. The amount payable for any building, machinery, plant, apparatus, wells, filter points or power lines acquired under this Act shall be written down value [determined in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961)] of such building, machinery, plant, apparatus, wells, filter points or power lines, on the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18. 8. The amount payable under this Part shall be the aggregate of the amount calculated under (i) paragraphs 4,5 and 7 in the case where land acquired is the land other than the forest land ; (ii) paragraphs 6 and 7 in the case where land acquired is forest land ; (iii) paragraphs 6 and 7 in the case where lands acquired include forest land and other land as is referred to in the proviso to paragraph 6; less the amount payable under section 54 to a tenant, in respect of the land concerned. Part - II Land revenue of which or portion thereof has been assigned. Where the amount of land revenue or portion thereof in respect of any land acquired by the Government under this Act has been assigned in favour of any person, the Government shall pay such person 1 [...] twelve times the difference between such amount of land revenue or portion thereof and the proportionate quit rent, jodi, kattubadi or other amount of like nature, if any, payable by such person to the Government. Schedule - IV. [See section 54.] 1. The 2 [amount] payable to any tenant under section 54 shall be one-eighth of 3 [the annual value of the land calculated in the manner specified in Part I of Schedule III.] 2. Out of the 4 [amount referred to in paragraph 1], three-fourths shall be paid to the cultivating tenant and one-fourth to the intermediary if any. Schedule - V(Schedule V inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984.) [See section 77-D (2)] PART - I. SALARY. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the member of the Special Appellate Tribunal in respect of time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensum, that is to say - Chairman-Rs. 3,500 Member-Rs. 2,750 Provided that if an officer in service of the Government is appointed as a member, he shall be paid Rs. 2,750 or his grade pay whichever is higher. Provided further that, if the Chairman or a member of the Special Appellate Tribunal at the time of his appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, his salary in respect of Service as the Chairman or as the case may be, member of the Special Appellate Tribunal shall be reduced  (a) by the amount of that pension, and (b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension, and (c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuity in respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of that gratuity. Part - II. Allowance. The Dearness Allowance, House Rent Allowance, Travelling Allowance and other allowances payable to the chairman and other member in the Special Appellate Tribunal shall be the same as payable to a member in the super-time scale of India Administrative Service, under the rules applicable to the member of such service for the time being in force.] Extracts of Amending Acts Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970 3. Savings - (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) any action taken (including any order made, notification issued, decision or direction given, proceeding taken, liability or penalty incurred and punishment awarded) under the provisions of the principal Act before the date of the publication of this Act in the Fort St. George Gazette, may be continued or enforced after the said date in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act as if this Act had not been passed. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to entitled any person whether or not such person is a party to any proceeding mentioned in sub-section (1) to hold after the 15th day of February 1970, land in excess of the ceiling area under the principal Act as modified by section 2 and the provisions of the Principal Act as modified by section 2 shall, after the said date apply to such person. Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971 4. Abolition of the Sugar Factory Board and the Sugar Tribunal - On and from the date of the commencement of this Act  (a) the Sugar Factory Board and the Sugar Factory Tribunal, constituted under the principal Act, shall stand abolished and any member of such Board or Tribunal shall, with effect from the said date, cease to hold office as such member ; (b) any application, reference or any proceeding, pending before the said Board or Tribunal on the said date shall abate ; (c) any permission granted, or order passed, or decision given by the said Board or Tribunal in respect of any land shall be deemed to be of no effect and accordingly, the provisions of the principal Act, as modified by this Act shall apply to such land. Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972 5. Act to override Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1961 - The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Tamil Nadu Public Trusts (Regulation of Administration of Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961 (Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1961). Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972 6.Abolition of existing Land Board - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, on and from the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette,- (a) the Land Board existing on that date shall stand abolished and any member of such board shall cease to hold office as such member. (b) any application and any proceeding in respect of any land used exclusively in dairy farming or livestock breeding and pending before such board on the said date shall abate. (c) any application and any proceeding in respect of any land which is interspersed among plantations or is contiguous to any plantation and pending before such board on the said date shall stand transferred to the Land Board constituted after the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. (d) any permission granted, or order passed, or decision given by the Land Board before the date of such publication in respect of any land used exclusively for dairy farming or invested breeding shall be deemed to be of no effect and accordingly the provisions of the principal Act, as modified by this Act, shall apply to such land; (e) any permission granted, or order passed or decision given by the Land Board before the date of such publication in respect of any land which is interspersed among plantations or is contiguous to any plantation shall be deemed to have been granted, passed or given by the Land Board constituted after the date of such Publication. 7. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, on the basis that a person who had a right to enjoy the land during his lifetime but had no power to alienate the land was a limited owner under the principal Act shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly done or taken in accordance with law as if section 5 of the Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974. 4. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, on the basis that plantain tree did not fall within "orchard" or "tope" as defined in clause (32) or (47) respectively of section 3 of the principal Act, shall for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly done or taken in accordance with law as if section 3(1) of this Act had been in force at all material times where such acts or proceedings were done or taken. Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974. 5. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, on the basis that any transfer or sub-division of land effected after the notified date and before the date of the publication of the notification under sub-section (1) of section 18 was void shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly done or taken in accordance with law as if section 3 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceeding were done or taken. Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1975. 4. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, on the basis that plantain tree did not fall within "orchard" or "tope" as defined in clause (32) or (47) respectively of section 3 of the principal Act, shall for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly done or taken in accordance with law as if section 3(1) of this Act had been in force at all material times where such acts or proceedings were done or taken. Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978. 5. Certain Provisions of Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974 not to have effect - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974) (hereinafter in this section referred to as the 1972 Act), or in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, sub-section (2) of section 3 of the 1972 Act shall be omitted and shall be deemed always to have been omitted and accordingly the modification made to section 18 of the principal Act by the said sub-section (2),- (a) shall be deemed never to have been made and the provisions of the said section 18 of the principal Act as they stood prior to the said modifications shall continue in force and shall be deemed always to have continued in force; and (b) shall be deemed never to have had the effect of vesting in the state government, the surplus lands specified in any notification published under sub-section (1) of the said section 18 of the principal Act on or after the 2nd May 1962 and before the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, from a date earlier to the date of the publication of the notification under the said sub-section (1) and shall be deemed always to have had the effect of vesting in the State Government such surplus lad, only with effect from the date of the publication of such notification. (2) Anything done or any action taken under the principal Act in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the 1972 Act, shall be re-opened and determined in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as modified by this Act. 6. Vesting of Certain surplus lands and Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, - (a) Where before the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, a notification under sub-section (1) of section 18 of the principal Act has been published the surplus land specified in such notification shall be deemed to have vested in the State Government, with effect from the date of such publication only, and accordingly the provisions of the principal Act, as modified by section 4 of this Act, shall for all purposes apply and be deemed always to have been applied in respect of such surplus lands so vested ; and (b) all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act, on the basis that compensation in respect of Surplus lands referred to in clause (a) shall be payable only according to the rates specified in Schedule III of the principal Act, as in force on the date of publication of the said notification, shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly done or taken in accordance with law, as if section 4 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. 7. Modification of Schedule III, Tamil Nadu Act 58 of 1961 for certain period - The principal Act shall, for the period commencing on the 20th April 1972 and ending with the date immediately preceding the 27th October 1978, have effect, as if, in Schedule III to the principal Act, in Part I - (i) in paragraph 1, for the word "compensation", the word "amount" had been substituted. (ii) in paragraph 6, in the opening portion, the words "of compensation" had been omitted. (iii) in paragraph 7, for the word "compensation" in both the places where it occurs, the word "amount" had been substituted. (iv) in paragraph 8 - (a) for the words "The compensation", the words "The amount" had been substituted. (b) the words "as compensation" had been omitted. (v) in paragraph 9 - (a) in sub-paragraph (a), the words "of compensation" had been omitted. (b) in sub-paragraph (b), - (A) for the words "The compensation", the words "The amount" had been substituted. (B) the words "of compensation" wherever they occur had been omitted. 8. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done and proceedings taken by any officer or authority under the principal Act before the 27th October 1978 on the basis - (a) that "person" referred to in sub-section (1) of section 50 of the principal Act shall include family ; or (b) that the amount payable under sub-section (1) of the said section 50 in respect of any right, title or interest in any land held by a family or deemed to be held by a family under sub-section (2) of section 5 of the principal Act, shall be determined in respect of the whole of such right, title or interest of the family in such land as a unit, whether such right, title or interest was held individually or jointly by some or all the members of that family, shall for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, validly done or taken in accordance with law, as if section 4 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. 9.Savings - Any proceeding taken or order passed under the principal Act which has been disposed of between the 2nd May 1962 and the 27th October 1978, contrary to the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, shall be reopened and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act as so amended. Provided that no such proceeding or order, shall be re-opened under this section after the expiry of a period of five ears from the 27th October 1978. Tamil Nadu Act 59 of 1981. 3. Repeal and Savings - (1) The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Ordinance, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 8 of 1981), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Principal Act, as amended by this Act. Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984. 4. Transfer of pending proceedings in the High Court to the Special Appellate Tribunal - All cases connected with the land reforms dealt with in the principal Act and pending in the High Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, as would have been within the jurisdiction of such Special Appellate Tribunal, if the causes of action on which such proceedings are based had arisen after the said date of commencement, shall stand transferred to the Special Appellate Tribunal with effect from the date of the commencement of this Act. 5.Transfer of pending proceedings in the Land Tribunal consisting of Subordinate Judge to the Land Tribunal consisting of District Revenue Officer - All the appeals and other proceedings connected with the land reforms dealt with in the principal act, and pending before a Land Tribunal consisting of a judicial officer not below the rank of Subordinate Judge immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to such Land Tribunal consisting of a District Revenue Officer, as may be specified by the Land Commissioner by an order made in this behalf with effect from the date specified in such order. Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986. 3. Amendment of Section 4, Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984 - (1) Section 4 of the Amendment Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- (2) All writ petitions (including any petitions and proceedings relating thereto) connected with, or arising out of proceedings under the principal Act and pending in the High Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to the Special Appellate Tribunal, with effect from the date of commencement of this Act and the said writ petition, petitions, and proceedings shall be deemed to be suo motu revision petition under section 83 of the principal Act and the Special Appellate Tribunal shall pass appropriate orders accordingly. (3) All writ appeals (including any petition and proceeding relating thereto), connected with, or arising out of proceeding under, the principal Act and pending in the High Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall be heard and disposed of by the High Court, as if this Act had not been passed. Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. 5. Repeal and Saving - (1) The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Ordinance, 1987 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 4 of 1987), is hereby repeated. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Principal Act, as amended by this Act. Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1996. 5. Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or other authority, all acts done or proceedings taken in respect of cases falling under section 22 of the principal Act by the authorized officer before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, which are in conformity with the provision of section 22 of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, shall, for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, validly done or taken in accordance with law, as if section 22 of the principal Act as amended by section 4 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. 6. Reopening of certain cases - Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or other authority, but subject to the provisions of section 21-A of the principal Act, any proceeding taken or order passed under the principal Act which has been disposed of before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, contrary to the provisions of section 22 of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, shall be reopened and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 22 of the principal Act as so amended. Provided that no such proceeding or order shall be reopened under this section after the expiry of a period of five years from the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. Provided further no such proceeding or order shall be reopened unless the person affected has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard lately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to such Land Tribunal consisting of a District Revenue Officer, as may be specified by the Land Commissioner by an order made in this behalf with effect from the date specified in such order. Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986. 3. Amendment of Section 4, Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984:.(1) Section 4 of the Amendment Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- (2) All writ petitions (including any petitions and proceedings relating thereto) connected with, or arising out of proceedings under the principal Act and pending in the High Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall stand transferred to the Special Appellate Tribunal, with effect from the date of commencement of this Act and the said writ petition, petitions, and proceedings shall be deemed to be suo motu revision petition under section 83 of the rincial Act and the Special Appellate Tribunal shall pass appropriate orders accordingly. (3) All writ appeals (including any petition and proceeding relating thereto), connected with, or arising out of proceeding under, the principal Act and pending in the High Court immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall be heard and disposed of by the High Court, as if this Act had not been passed. Tamil Nadu Act 55 of 1987. 5. Repeal and Saving: (1) The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Ordinance, 1987 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 4 of 1987), is hereby repeated. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Principal Act, as amended by this Act. Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1996. 5.Validation - Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or other authority, all acts done or proceedings taken in respect of cases falling under section 22 of the principal Act by the authorized officer before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, which are in conformity with the provision of section 22 of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, shall, for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been, validly done or taken in accordance with law, as if section 22 of the principal Act as amended by section 4 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. 6. Reopening of certain cases: Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or other authority, but subject to the provisions of section 21-A of the principal Act, any proceeding taken or order passed under the principal Act which has been disposed of before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, contrary to the provisions of section 22 of the principal Act, as amended by section 4 of this Act, shall be reopened and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 22 of the principal Act as so amended. Provided that no such proceeding or order shall be reopened under this section after the expiry of a period of five years from the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. Provided further no such proceeding or order shall be reopened unless the person affected has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard. The words "as Compensation" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "the fair rent for the land calculated in the manner specified in paragraph 4 of Part I Schedule III" by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. Substituted for "compensation", by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979. 
