Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Section 37-A of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 (Tamil Nadu Act 58 of 1961) provides for the grant of permission by the Government to industrial or commercial undertakings to hold or acquire lands in excess of the ceiling area for industrial or commercial purposes. Similarly, section 37-B of the said Act provides for the grant of permission by the Government to Public Trusts to hold or acquire land for educational or hospital purposes. But in many cases, permission was granted to the industrial and commercial undertakings and Public Trusts under the said sections 37-A and 37-B, in respect of lands already purchased by such undertakings and Trusts. 2. The High Court of Judicature at Madras in its judgement dated 8-11-2002 in W.P. No. 29077/2002 etc., observed that no permission could be granted under section 37-B retrospectively by the State nor there could be a post facto permission or approval. The said judgement makes it untenable to grant permission in respect of lands already acquired in excess of the ceiling limit under section 37-B to Public Trusts and in view of that most of the educational institutions are likely to lose the lands, resulting in de-recognition of such educational institutions. The judgement also raises questions about the validity of the post facto approval already given under section 37-B to Public Trusts. The observation of the High Court in the said Judgment is equally applicable in the case of the permission granted to industrial or commercial undertakings, by the Government, under section 37-A of the said Act. 3. In Order to validate the permission already granted in respect of lands already acquired in excess of ceiling limit under the said sections 37-A and 37-B and to empower the Government to grant permission under the said sections in respect of lands already acquired in excess of ceiling limit, and to fix time limit for making application for such permission, the Government have decided to amend the said sections 37-A and 37-B of the said Tamil Nadu Act 58 of 1961, suitably with a Validation provision. 4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. I. PERIASAMY, Minister for Revenue and Housing. MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION Sub-section (1) of section 37-A and sub-section (1) of section 37-B proposed to be substituted by clauses 3 and 4 of the Bill empower the Government to make rules prescribing the particulars which the application referred to therein should contain and to prescribe the time limit within which the application for permission to hold the acquired land should be made. 2. The powers delegated are normal and not of an exceptional character. I. PERIASAMY, Minister for Revenue and Housing. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008. (2) (a) Section 3 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of March 1972. (b) Section 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of July 1987.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles laid down in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution.
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 37-A of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 (Tamil Nadu Act 58 of 1961) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (1) excluding the Explanation thereunder, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) If any industrial or commercial undertaking desires to acquire any land in excess of the ceiling area or desires to hold land acquired in excess of the ceiling area, it shall make an application to the Government for permission to acquire such land or for permission to hold such acquired land as the case may be. Every such application shall be in writing and contain such particulars as may be prescribed. Provided that an application for permission to hold such acquired land shall be made within such period as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 37-B of the principal Act, for sub-section (1) excluding the Explanation thereunder, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, but subject to the provisions of section 73,- (a) if any public trust created before the 1st March 1972 desires to acquire any land in excess of the ceiling area or desires to hold land acquired in excess of the ceiling area; and (b) if any public trust created after the 1st March 1972 desires to acquire any land or desires to hold land acquired, for the purpose of,- (i) establishing any educational institution or hospital; or (ii) expanding any existing educational institution or hospital by way of addition to, alteration of, or improvement to, any educational institution or hospital, it shall make an application to the Government, for permission to acquire such land or for permission to hold such acquired land, as the case may be. Every such application shall be in writing and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed: Provided that an application for permission to hold such acquired land shall be made within such period as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, or in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, every application made by any industrial or commercial undertaking or public trust and every permission granted by the Government under section 37-A or 37-B of the principal Act, before the date of publication of the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008 in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette shall be as valid and effective as if the said sections 37-A and 37-B as amended by the Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Amendment Act, 2008 had been in force at all material times and the said application and permission had been made and granted thereunder. (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
