Madras University Act, 1923_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the reorganization of the Madras University. Whereas it is expedient to reorganize the University of Madras with a view to establishing a 1 [teaching and affiliating University] at Madras while enabling the University to continue to exercise due control over the quality of the teaching given by 2 [colleges which are affiliated to or approved by the University of Madras]; And whereas it is desirable to foster the development of academic life and corporate unity as well in the colleges as in the University by so promoting co-operation among the colleges and between the University and the colleges as to utilize to the full the teaching resources available 3 [within the University]; And whereas it is desirable by the concentration and co-ordination of resources for higher teaching and research at suitable centres 4 [...] to prepare for the institution of new Universities; And whereas the previous sanction of the Governor-General has been obtained for the passing of this Act; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted for the words teaching and residential University by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for the words Colleges which are to constitute the University of Tamil Nadu or are affiliated to it, by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for the words within the limits of the University by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. The words outside the limits of the University. ommited, by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The Madras University Act, 19231 . 2 (2) This section shall come into force at once. The rest of this Act shall come into force on such date or dates as the 3 [State Government] may, by notification, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. Received the assent of the Governor on the 28th February, 1923 and that of the Governor General on the 29th March, 1923; the assent of the Governor General was first published in the Fort St. George Gazette of the 1st May, 1923 Sec. 1 of this Act came into force on the 1st May, 1923. Sections 2 to 10, 13, 41,44, 46 to 51 and 55 were brought into force on the 21st May, 1923 in Law (Education) Department. Notification No. 154, published at Part 1-B of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 15th May, 1923. The remaining sections of this Act were brought into force on the 5th March 1924 in Law (Education) Department Notification No. 68, published at Part I-B of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 4th March, 1924. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937, read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- 1 [(a) Affiliated College means any college affiliated to the University and providing courses of study for admission to the examinations for degrees of the University and includes a college deemed to be affiliated to the University under the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1966; (aa) Approved College means any college approved by the University and providing courses of study for admission to the examinations for titles and diplomas and the pre-University examination of the University and includes a college deemed to be approved by the University under the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1966; 2 [(aaa) Autonomous College means any college designated as an autonomous college by statutes:] 3 [(aaaa) College means any college or any institution maintained or approved by or affiliated to the University and providing courses of study for admission to the examinations of the University and includes constituent colleges]; 4 [(aaaaa) Constituent College means any college or institution specified in Schedule III] 5 [(b)***] 6 [(c) ***] 7 [(cc) ***] (d) Hostel means a unit of residence for students of the University maintained or recognized by the University in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 8 [(e) ***] 9 [(ee) ***] 10 [(e) Post-graduate College means a University College or an affiliated college providing post-graduate courses of study leading up to the post-graduate degrees of the University:]; (f) Prescribed means prescribed by 11 [this Act] or Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations, 12 [(g) Principal means the head of a College]. 13 [(gg) Professional College means a college in which are provided courses of study leading up to the professional degrees of the University] 14 [(h) Registered graduate means a graduate registered under this Act]. 15 [(i) Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations means respectively the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulation of the University made under this Act.] 16 [(j) Teachers means such professors, assistant professors, readers, lecturers, librarians and other like persons as may be declared by the Statutes to be teachers.] (k) Teachers of the University means persons appointed by the University to give instruction on its behalf. (l) University means the University of Madras as reconstituted under this Act. 17 [(m) University Centre means any area within the State of Tamil Nadu, except the area comprising the revenue districts of Madrurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari recognized by the State Government on the recommendation of the University and containing one or more colleges competent to engage in higher teaching and research work and to promote University life in a manner calculated to prepare of the institution of a new University; (n) University College means a college or a college combined with a research institute maintained by the University (whether instituted by it or not) and providing courses of study leading up to the post-graduate and professional degrees; (o) University Laboratory means a laboratory maintained by the University (whether instituted by it or not) and intended for the carrying on and advancement of research work; (p) University Professor, University Reader or University Lecturer means Professor, Reader or Lecturer respectively appointed as such by the University; (q) University Library means a library maintained by the University whether instituted by it or not]. Clauses (a), (aa), (aaa) substituted for the original Cl. (a) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (aaa) re-lettered as clause (aaaa) and before clause (aaaa) as so re-lettered clause (aaa) added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977 Clause (aaa) re-lettered as clause (aaaa) and before clause (aaaa) as so re-lettered clause (aaa) added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977 Inserted by Act 35 of 2002. Clauses (b), (c) , (cc), (ee) and (i) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (b), (c) , (cc), (ee) and (i) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (b), (c) , (cc), (ee) and (i) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (b), (c) , (cc), (ee) and (i) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (b), (c) , (cc), (ee) and (i) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Present Cl. (e) inserted, by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Clause (g) substituted by Act 2 of 1966. This clause was added by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. This clause was substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Original sub-Cl. (i) omitted and the present sub-Cl. (i) inserted, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (j) substituted, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (m), (n), (o), (p) and (q) substituted for the original Cls. (m), (n), (o) and (p), by Tamil Nadu Act (2 of 1966).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The first Chancellor, Pro-Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor of the University and the first members of the Senate, the Syndicate, 1 [and] the Academic Council, 2 [...] and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members so long as they continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the University of Madras. (2) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by the name of the University of Madras. This word was inserted by S.3 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). The words and the Council of Affiliated Colleges were Omitted, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu As from the date on which section 3 and this section are brought into operation the Chancellor shall cease to exercise his functions under any Act or Acts heretofore in force and the Vice-Chancellor and all Fellows and Honorary Fellows of the University of Madras as constituted and incorporated by any Act or Acts heretofore in force shall cease to be the Vice-Chancellor, Fellows and Honorary Fellows of the University, respectively.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 4-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall have the following powers, namely:- (a) to provide for instruction and training in such branches of learning as it may think fit and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge; (2) to establish, maintain and manage Institutes of Research; (3) to make such provision as will enable 2 [Affiliated and approved colleges] to undertake specialization of studies and to organize common laboratories, libraries and other equipment for research work; (4) to institute professorships, readerships, lectureships and any other teaching posts required by the University and to appoint persons to such professorships, readerships, lectureships and other teaching posts; (5) to institute degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (6) to hold examinations and to confer degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic distinctions on persons who- (a) shall have pursued an approved course of study 3 [in a University college or laboratory or] in 4 [an affiliated or approved college], unless exempted therefrom in the manner prescribed by the Statutes and shall have passed the prescribed examinations of the University; or (b) shall have carried on research under conditions prescribed; 5 [(6-A) to confer degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic distinctions on persons who shall have pursued an approved course of study in an autonomous College;] (7) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions under conditions prescribed; 6 [(8) to institute, maintain and manage University colleges, laboratories libraries, museums and other institutions necessary to carry out the object of the University; (9) to affiliate colleges to the University as affiliated, professional or post-graduate colleges under conditions prescribed and to withdraw affiliation from colleges; (9-A) to approve colleges providing courses of study for admission to the examinations for titles and diplomas and the pre-University examination of the University under conditions prescribed and to withdraw such approval); 7 [9-B) to designate any College as an autonomous College with the concurrence of the State Government in the manner and under conditions prescribed and to cancel such designation.] (10) to recommend to the2 8 [State Government] the recognition of 9 [any area within the State of Tamil Nadu except the area comprising the revenue districts of Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari] as a University centre; (11) to establish, maintain and manage hostels, to recognize hostels not maintained by the University and to withdraw recognition therefrom; 10 [(12) to institute and award fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, bursaries, exhibitions, medals and prizes; (12-A) to hold and manage endowments and other properties and funds of the University and to raise loans required for the purposes of this Act]; (13) to fix fees and to demand and receive such fees as may be prescribed; (14) to create and manage an affiliated college fund; (15) to make grants from the funds of the University for the maintenance of a 11 [National Cadet Corps]; (16) to exercise such control over the students of the University through the colleges as will secure their health and well-being; 12 [(16-A) to institute and maintain a University Extension Board;] (17) to institute and provide funds for the maintenance of (a) a Publication Bureau; (b) an Employment Bureau; (c) Students Unions; 13 [(d) University Athletic Clubs; and (e) other similar Associations:] 14 [18) to encourage co-operation among the colleges laboratories and institutes in the University and co-operate with other Universities and other authorities in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine; and] (19) generally to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary or desirable to further the objects of the University; This section was inserted by S. 4 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for constituent, affiliated and Oriental Colleges by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. These words were inserted by S.3 (1) of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943), re-enacted permanently by S.2 of, and the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). Substituted for a constituent affiliated or Oriental Col-lege by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (6-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977. Clauses (8), (9) and (9-A) substituted for the original clauses (8) and (9) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (9-B) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937, read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for the words any local area by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (12) and (12-A) substituted for the original clause (12), by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. This expression was substituted for the expression University Training Corps by section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1952). Clause (16-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Items (d) and (e) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (18) substituted, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall be qualified for election as a member of any of the authorities of the University, if, on the date of nomination or election he is- (a) of unsound mind, a deaf-mute or suffering from leprosy; (b) an applicant to be adjudicated insolvent or an undischarged insolvent; (c) sentenced by a criminal Court to imprisonment for any offence involving moral turpitude. (2) In case of dispute or doubt, the Syndicate shall determine whether a person is disqualified under sub-section (1) and its decision shall be final.] Section 5 substituted Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 5-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 14,18 or 23 no person who has held office as a member for a total period of six years in any one or two of the following authorities, namely- (i) the Senate, (ii) the Syndicate, and (iii) the Academic Council Shall be eligible for election or nomination to any of the said three authorities. Explanation I - For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression period shall include the period held prior to the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1991, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. Explanation II - For the purpose of computing the total period of six years referred to in this sub-section, the period of three years during which a person held office in one authority either by election or by nomination and the period of three years during which he held office in another authority either by election or by nomination shall be taken into account and accordingly such person shall not be eligible for election or nomination to any one of the said three authorities: Provided that for the purposes of this sub-section a person who has held office in any one of the said three authorities in a casual vacancy shall be deemed to have held office for a period of three years in that authority: Provided further that for the purposes of the sub-section, if a person was elected or nominated to one authority and such person became a member of another authority by virtue of the membership in the first mentioned authority, the period for which he held office in the first mentioned authority alone shall be taken into account. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall have application in respect of- (i) ex-officio members referred to in section 14(a) but not including members of the Syndicate who are not otherwise members of the Senate referred to in item (10), (ii) ex-officio members referred to in section 18 (a) and (iii) ex-officio members referred to in section 23 (a), but not including members of the Syndicate who are not otherwise members of the Academic Council referred to in item (5)] Section 5-A inserted by Act 9 of 1992.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No. attendance at instruction given in any 2 [college or institution] other than that conducted, 3 [affiliated or approved by the University ] shall qualify for admission to any examination of the University]. This section was substituted for the original section by section 6 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for institution by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for recognized or approved by the University, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 6-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No college within the University area shall be affiliated to any University established by or under any law in force other than the University of Madras. (2) No institution affiliated to, or associated with, or maintained by, any other University established by or under any law in force shall be recognized by the University for any purpose except with the prior approval of the Government and the concerned University. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any affiliation or recognition granted by any other University established by, or under any law in force to any institution within the University area, prior to the 19th August 1983, shall be deemed to have been withdrawn on and from the said date. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, University area means the area comprising the districts of Madras, Chengalpattu, North Arcot, South Arcot, Salem and Dharmapuri in the State of Tamil Nadu.] S. 6-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 46 of 1983.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 2 [State] Government shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made, by such person or persons as 3 [they may direct], of the University, its buildings, laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipment, and of any institutions maintained, recognized or approved by, or affiliated to, the University and also of the teaching and other work conducted by the University, and to cause an inquiry to be made in respect of any matter connected with the University. The 4 [State] Government shall in every case give notice to the University of 5 [their intention] to cause such inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall be entitled to be represented thereat. (2) The 6 [State] Government shall communicate to the Senate and to the Syndicate 7 [their views] with reference to the results of such inspection or inquiry and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the Senate and the Syndicate thereon, advise the University upon the action to be taken. (3) The Syndicate shall report to the 8 [State] Government the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken, or has been taken upon the results of such inspection or inquiry. Such report shall be submitted with the opinion of the Senate thereon and within such time as the 9 [State] Government may direct. (4) Where the Senate or Syndicate does not within a reasonable time take action to the satisfaction of the 10 [State] Government may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Senate or the Syndicate issue such directions as 11 [they may think fit] and the Senate and the Syndicate shall comply with such directions]. 12 [In the event of the Senate or the Syndicate or both not complying with such directions within such time as may be fixed in that behalf by the State Government, the State Government shall have the power to take such action as they think necessary for securing compliance with such directions.] This section was substituted by the Adaptation Order of 1937, as amended by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words it may direct by section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1951). This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words its intention by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words  its views, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words it may think fit, Adaptation Order of 1950. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The following shall be the officers of the University:- (1) The Chancellor; (2) The Pro-Chancellor ; (3) The Vice-Chancellor (4) The Registrar ; and (5) Such other persons as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.] This section was substituted for the original section by section 8 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) 1 [The Governor of Tamil Nadu shall be the Chancellor of the University]. He shall by virtue of his office be the head of the University and the President of the Senate and shall, when present, preside at meetings of the Senate and at any convocation of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall exercise such powers as may be conferred on him under the provisions of this Act. (3) Where power is conferred upon the Chancellor to nominate persons to authorities, the Chancellor shall, to the extent necessary, nominate persons to represent 2 [interests] not otherwise adequately represented. These words were substituted for the words The Chancellor of the University shall be the Governor of Madras by section 9. of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for communities or interests by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The Minister administering the subject of education 2 [in the State of Tamil Nadu] for the time being shall be the Pro-Chancellor of the University]. (2) In the absence of the Chancellor, or during the Chancellors inability to act, the Pro-Chancellor shall exercise all the functions of the Chancellor. This sub-section was substituted for the original section by S.10 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for in the State of Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every appointment of the Vice-Chancellor shall be made by the Chancellor from out of a panel of three names recommended by the Committee referred to in sub-section (2). Such panel shall not contain the name of any member of the said Commit-tee. 2 [Provided that if the Chancellor does not approve any of the persons in the panel so recommended by the Committee he may take steps to constitute another Committee, in accordance with sub-section (2), to give a fresh panel of three different names and shall appoint one of the persons named in the fresh panel as the Vice-Chancellor]. (2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Committee shall consist of three persons of whom one shall be nominated by the Senate, one shall be nominated by the Syndicate and one shall be nominated by the Chancellor: Provided that the person so nominated shall not be a member of any of the authorities of the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for not more than two successive terms. (4) When any temporary vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-Chancellor or if the Vice-Chancellor is, by reason of absence or for any other reason, unable to exercise the powers and perform the duties of his office, the Syndicate shall, as soon as possible, make the requisite arrangements for exercising the powers and performing the duties of the Vice-Chancellor. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be entitled to such emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be prescribed by the Statutes.] Section 11 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Proviso inserted by Act 1/1993.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive officer of the University and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor and Pro-Chancellor preside at meetings of the Senate and at any convocation of the University. He shall be a member ex-officio and 1 [Chairman of the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee] and shall be entitled to be present at and to address 2 [...] any meeting of any authority of the University but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of the authority concerned. (2) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to ensure that the provisions of this Act, the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations are faithfully observed and carried out and he may exercise all powers necessary for this purpose. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall have power to convene meetings of the Senate, 3 [the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee] 4 [...] (4) (a) In any emergency which in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor requires that immediate action should be taken, he may take such action with the sanction of the Chancellor or Pro-Chancellor and shall as soon as may be thereafter report his action to the officer or authority who or which would have ordinarily dealt with the matter. (b) When action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under this sub-section affects any person in the service of the University, such person shall be entitled to prefer an appeal to the Syndicate within thirty days from the date on which he has notice of such action. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the Syndicate regarding the appointment, dismissal and suspension of the teachers of the University and its servants and shall exercise general control over the affairs of the University. (6) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. Substituted for Chairman of the Syndicate, and of the Academic Council by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. The word at was omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Substituted for the Syndicate and the Academic Council by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. The words and the Council of Affiliated Colleges were omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 12-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time paid officer of the University appointed by the Syndicate for such period and on such terms as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (2) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed]. 2 [(3) In all suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University, the pleadings shall be signed and verified by the Registrar and all processes in such suits and proceedings shall be issued to, and served on, the Registrar]. This section was added by S.13, the words and the Council of Affiliated Colleges were omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Sub-S. (3) of S. 12-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu following shall be the authorities of the University:- (1) The Senate, (2) the Syndicate, (3) the Academic Council, (4) the Faculties, 1 [(4-A) the Finance Committee.] (5) the Boards of Studies, 2 [and] 3 [...] 4 [(6) such other 5 [bodies] as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University. Item (4-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. This word was inserted by S.14 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). The clause (6) the Council of Affiliated Colleges and was omitted, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. The figure (6) was substituted for the figure (7), Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. This word was substituted for the word authorities, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Senate shall consist of the following persons, namely:- Ex-officio Members (1) The Chancellor; (2) The Pro-Chancellor; (3) The Vice-Chancellor; (4) [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1980]. (5) 2 [Director of Collegiate Education, Tamil Nadu;] (6) 3 [Director of School Education, Tamil Nadu;] (7) 4 [The Director of Technical Education, Tamil Nadu] 5 [(7-A) The Director of Medical Education;] (8) The Principals of affiliated Colleges who have served as principals for not less than three years; (9) Every whole-time University Professor in charge of a Department; and (10) Members of the Syndicate who are not otherwise members of the Senate 6 [...] Other Members (1) Twenty members elected by registered graduates from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote; (2) Ten members elected by the Academic Council from among its own body, of whom not less than five shall be teachers of affiliated colleges; (3) Six members elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote; (4) Three members elected by the Members of the Legislative Council of the State of Tamil Nadu from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. (5) Three members elected by the principals of approved colleges from among themselves in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote; (6) One member elected by the headmasters of high schools in each of the following revenue district or groups of revenue districts, from among themselves, namely:- (a) Coimbatore and the Nilgiris; (b) Salem and Dharmapuri ; (c) North Arcot ; (d) Chingleput and Madras; (e) South Arcot ; (f) Thanjavur ; (g) Tiruchirapalli ; (7) One member elected by the councilors of the Municipal Corporation of Madras, from among themselves ; (8) One member elected by the chairmen of municipal councils and of panchayat union councils in each revenue district in the State of Tamil Nadu, except the area comprising the revenue districts of Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari, from among such chair-men and the members of municipal councils, panchayat union councils and panchayat in such revenue district; and (9) Fifteen members nominated by the Chancellor of whom not less than ten shall be nominated to secure the representation of the Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes not otherwise adequately represent [10 to 14 (a) omitted] 7 [(b) save as otherwise provided, elected and nominated members of the Senate shall hold office for a period of three years and such members shall be eligible for not more than another election or nomination] 8 [Provided that a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu shall cease to be a member of the Senate from the date on which he ceases to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu. Provided further that where an elected or nominated member of the Senate is appointed temporarily to any of the offices by virtue of which he is entitled to be a member of the Senate ex-officio he shall, by notice in writing signed by him and communicated to the Vice-Chancellor within seven days from the date of his taking charge of his appointment, choose whether he will continue to be a member of the Senate by virtue of his election or nomination or whether he will vacate office as such member and become a member ex-officio by virtue of his appointment and the choice shall be conclusive. On failure to make such choice he shall be deemed to have vacated his office as an elected or nominated member. Explanation:- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared for the time being in force or in any judgment decree or order of any Court, every person who has been elected to the Senate of Madras University, in his capacity as a member of the Legislative Assembly and who had ceased to be a member of the Legislative Assembly but holding office as a member of the State immediately (before the date of the publication of this Act in Tamil Nadu Government Gazette] (c) When a person ceases to be a member of the Senate he shall cease to be a member of any of the authorities of the University of which he may happen to be a member by virtue of his membership of the Senate. This section was substituted for the original section by S. 15 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929) Clause (a) was substituted for the original sub-clause (a) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 42 of 1979. The heading Life Members and items (1) and (2) thereunder omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1982. Clause (b) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1992. The Provisos and Explanation were substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1991.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Senate shall be the supreme governing body of the University and shall have power to review the action of the Syndicate and of the Academic Council save where the Syndicate and the Academic Council have acted in accordance with powers conferred on them under this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances or the Regulations and shall exercise all the powers of the University not otherwise provided for and all powers requisite to give effect to the provisions of this Act: Provided that if any question arises whether the Syndicate or the Academic Council has acted in accordance with such powers as aforesaid or not, the question shall be decided by a resolution passed by two-thirds of the number of members present and voting at a meeting of the Senate and the decision shall be final]. This section was substituted for the original section by S. 16 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by section 15, the Senate shall have the following powers, namely: (1) to make Statutes and amend or repeal the same; (2) to modify or cancel Ordinances and Regulations in the manner prescribed by this Act; (3) to encourage co-operation among University colleges and laboratories, affiliated colleges and approved colleges; (4) to provide for instruction and trainng in such branches of learning as it may think fit; (5) to institute and maintain institutes of research, University colleges, University laboratories, libraries and museums; (6) to prescribe in consultation with the Academic Council the conditions for approving colleges or institutions in which provision is made for courses of study for admission to the Pre-University examination or for the preparation of students for titles or diplomas of the University and to withdraw such approval; (7) to provide for research and advancement and dissemination of knowledge; (8) to institute, after consultation with the Academic Council, professorships, readerships, lectureships, and any other teaching posts required by the University; (9) to prescribe after consultation with the Academic Council, the conditions for affiliating colleges to the University and to withdraw affiliation from colleges; 2 (9-A) to prescribe in consultation with the Academic Council, the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a college may be designated as an autonomous College and such designation may be cancelled.] (10) to provide, after consultation with the Academic Council such lectures and instructions for students of University colleges, affiliated colleges and approved colleges as the Senate may determine and also to provide for lectures and instructions to persons not being students of colleges and to grant diplomas to them; (11) to provide for the inspection of all colleges and hostels; (12) to institute degrees, titles, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (13) to confer degree, title, diplomas and other academic distinctions on persons who- (a) shall have pursued an approved course of study in a University college or laboratory or in an affiliated or approved college or have been exempted therefrom in the manner prescribed and shall have passed the prescribed examinations of the University; or (b) shall have carried on research under conditions prescribed; (14) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions on the recommendation of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Syndicate; (15) to establish and maintain hostels; (16) to institute, after consultation with the Academic Council, fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, bursaries, exhibitions, medals and prize; (17) to prescribe the fees to be charged for the approval and affiliation of colleges, for admission to the examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University, for the registration of graduates, for the renewal of such registration and for all or any of the purposes specified in section 4-A. (18) to consider and take such action as it may deem fit on the annual report, the annual accounts and the financial estimates; (19) to institute, after consultation with the Academic Council, a University Extension Board and to maintain it; (20) to institute, after consultation with the Academic Council, a Publication Bureau, Students Unions, Employment Bureau and University Athletic Clubs and other similar Association and to maintain them; (21) to enter into any agreement with the Central or any State Government or with a private management for assuming the management of any institution and for taking over its properties and liabilities or for any other purposes not repugnant to the provisions of this Act; (22) to make Statutes regulating the method of election to the authorities of the University and the procedure at the meeting of the Senate, the Syndicate and other authorities of the University and the quorum of members required for the transaction of business by the authorities of the University other than the Senate; (23) to recommend to the State Government the recognition of any area within the State of Tamil Nadu except the area comprising the revenue districts or Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari as a University Centre; (24) to co-operate with other Universities other academic authorities and colleges in such manner and for such purposes as it may determine; and (25) to delegate such of its powers as it may deem fit to any authority or authorities of the University constituted under this Act ] Section 16, substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (9-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The Senate shall meet at least twice a year on dates to be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor. One of such meetings shall be called the annual meeting. The Senate may also meet at such other times as it may, from time to time, determine.] (2) 2 [Twenty-five members] of the Senate shall be the quorum for a meeting of the Senate; 3 [Provided that such quorum shall not be required at a convocation of the University or a meeting of the Senate, held for the purpose of conferring degrees, titles, diplomas or other academic distinctions.] (3) The Vice-Chancellor may, whenever he thanks fit, and shall, upon a requisition in writing signed by not less than 35 members of the Senate, convene a special meeting of the Senate. This sub-section was substituted for the original sub-sections by S. 18 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for Thirty-five members by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. This proviso was added by S. 2 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1942 (Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1942) re-enacted permanently by S.2 of and the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) The Syndicate shall, in addition to the Vice-Chancellor consist of the following persons, namely:- 2 [The Secretary to Government in-charge of Education] 3 [(1-A) The Secretary to the Government in-charge of Health & Family Welfare. (1-AA) The Secretary to the Government in-charge of Law; (1 -AAA) The Director of Higher Education, Chennai. (2) The Director of Technical Education, Chennai. (3) The Director of Medical Education, Chennai. (4) The Director of Legal Studies (aa) In case the Secretary to Government in-charge of (Higher) Education, or the Secretary to Government in-charge of Health and Family Welfare or the Secretary to Government in-charge of Law is unable to attend the meetings of the Syndicate for any reason, he may depute any officer of his Department not lower in rank than that of Deputy Secretary to Government to attend the meetings.] Other Members. (1) Six members elected by the Senate from among its members; (2) five members elected by the Academic Council from among its members of whom four shall be teachers of affiliated colleges and the remaining shall be a teacher of an approved college; and (3) three members nominated by the Chancellor: Provided that no whole-time University Professor, University Reader, University Lecturer or whole-time teacher of the University shall be eligible for election or nomination as a member of the Syndicate.] 4 [(b) Save as otherwise provided, elected and nominated members of the Syndicate shall hold office for a period of three years and such members shall be eligible for election or nomination. Provided that where an elected or nominated member of the Syndicate is appointed temporarily to any of the offices by virtue of which he is entitled to be a member of the Syndicate ex-officio he shall, by notice in writing signed by him and communicated to the Vice-Chancellor within seven days from the date of his taking charge of his appointment, choose whether he will continue to be a member of the Syndicate by virtue of his election or nomination or whether he will vacate office as such member and become a member ex-officio by virtue of his appointment and the choice shall be conclusive. On failure to make such choice, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office as an elected or nominated member: 5 [Provided also that a member of the Syndicate, he shall cease to be a member if he subsequently becomes a whole - time University Professor, University Reader, University Lecturer or whole-time teacher of the University.] (c) When a person ceases to be a member of the Syndicate he shall cease to be a member of any of the authorities of the University of which he may happen to be a member by virtue of his membership of the Syndicate]. The paragraphs of S.18, except the last paragraph were re-lettered as sub-section (a) of S. 18 by S. 19 (1) of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). The present sub-section (a) was substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Item (1) re-numbered as item (1-A) and before the item so re-numbered item (1) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1980. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 75 of 1986. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1998. Proviso substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1994.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Syndicate shall have the following powers namely:- (a) to make Ordinances and amend or repeal the same; (b) to hold control and administer the properties and funds of the University; (c) to direct the form, custody and use of the common seal of the University; (d) to regulate and determine all matters concerning the University in accordance with this Act, the Statutes, the Regulations and the Ordinances; (e) to frame the financial estimates of the University and submit the same to the Senate; (f) to administer all properties and funds placed at the disposal of the University for specific purposes; (g) to appoint the University 2 [ Professors, Readers and Lecturers] and the teachers and servants of the University, fix their emoluments, if any, define their duties and the conditions of their service; and provide for the filling up of temporary vacancies; (h) to suspend and dismiss the University 3 [Professors, Readers and Lecturers] and the teachers and servants of the University; 4 [(i) to accept on behalf of the University endowments, bequets, donations, grants and transfers of any moveable and immovable properties made to it provided that all such endowments, bequets, donations, grants and transfers shall be reported to the Senate at its next meeting:] 5 [(j) to raise on behalf of the University loans required for the purposes of this Act from the Central or any State Government nor the University Grants Commission or any Corporation owned or controlled by the Central or any State Government; (jj) to affiliate colleges to the University and to recognize colleges as approved colleges; 6 [jjj) to designate any college as an autonomous College with the concurrence of the State Government and to cancel such designation;] 7 [(jjjj) to recognize hostels not maintained by the University and to suspend or withdraw recognition of any hostel which may not be conducted in accordance with the Ordinances and the conditions imposed thereunder; (k) to arrange for and direct the inspection of all University colleges, affiliated and approved colleges, and hostels; (l) to prescribe in consultation with the Academic Council the qualifications of teachers in University colleges, affiliated and approved colleges and hostels;] (m) to award fellowships, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, bursaries, exhibition medals and prizes in accordance with the statutes; (n) to charge and collect such fees as may be prescribed; (o) to conduct the University examinations and approve and publish the results thereof; (p) to make Ordinances regarding the admission of students to the University or prescribing examinations to be recognized as equivalent to University examinations; (q) to appoint members to the Boards of Studies; (r) (i) to appoint examiners after consideration of the recommendations of the Boards of Studies; and (ii) to fix their remuneration; (s) to supervise and control the residence and discipline of the students of the University and make arrangements through the colleges for securing their health and well being; 8 [(t) to manage University Centres, University colleges and laboratories, libraries, museums, institutes of research and other institutions established or maintained by the University;] (u) to manage hostels instituted by the University; 9 [(v) 10 [(w) to regulate the working of the University Extension Board; (ww) to manage any Publication Bureau, Students, Unions, Employment Bureau and University Athletic Clubs and other similar associations instituted by the University; (www) to review the instruction and teaching of the University; (wwww) to promote research within the University and to require reports from time to time of such research;] (x) to exercise such other powers and performs such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by this Act or the Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations ; and (y) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor or to a Committee from among its own members or to a Committee appointed in accordance with the Statutes ) This section was substituted for the original section by S.20 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for Professors and Readers by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for Professors and Readers by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (f) substituted, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (j), (jj), (jjj), (jjjj), (k) and (1) were substituted for the original clauses (j) (k) and (1), Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (jjj) re-lettered as clause (jjjj) and before the clause as so re-lettered clause (jjj) added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977. Clause (jjj) re-lettered as clause (jjjj) and before the clause as so re-lettered clause (jjj) added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977. Cl. (t) was substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966 for the previous C1 (t) with had been substituted for the original Cl. (t) by S. 5 (ii) of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943), re-enacted permanently by S.2 of and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). This clause was omitted by S.5 (iii) of Act, 27 of 1943, referred to above. Cls. (w), (ww), (www) and (wwww) were substituted for clause (w) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The annual report of the University shall be prepared by the Syndicate and shall be submitted to the Senate on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and shall be considered by the Senate at its next annual meeting. The Senate may pass resolutions thereon and communicate the same to the Syndicate which shall take action in accordance there with. The Syndicate shall inform the Senate of the action taken by it. A copy of the report with a copy of the resolutions thereon, if any, of the Senate shall be submitted to the 1 [State Government] for information. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937, read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The annual accounts of the University shall be prepared by the Syndicate and shall be submitted to such examination and audit as the State Government may direct. (2) The University shall settle objections raised in such audit and carry out such instructions as may be issued by the State Government on the audit report. (3) The accounts when audited shall be published by the Syndicate in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances and copies thereof shall be submitted to the Senate at its next meeting and to the State Government within three months of such publication. (4) The Syndicate shall also prepare before such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes the financial estimates for the ensuing year. (5) The financial estimates prepared by the Syndicate together with the remarks of the Finance Committee thereon and the annual accounts shall be placed before the Senate for approval at its annual meeting and the Senate may pass resolutions with reference thereto and communicate the same to the Syndicate which shall take action in accordance therewith.] S. 21 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Academic Council shall be the academic authority of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, have the control and general regulation of teaching and examination within the University and be responsible for the maintenance of the standards thereof and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) The Academic Council shall, in addition to the Vice-Chancellor, consist of the following persons, namely:- Ex-Officio Members 1. 2 [Director of Collegiate Education, Tamil Nadu;] 2. 3 [Director of School Education, Tamil Nadu;] 3. 4 [Director of Technical Education, Tamil Nadu;] 5 [(3-A) The Director of Medical Education;] (4) The Heads of University Departments of Study and Research; (5) Members of the Syndicate who are not otherwise members of the Academic Council; (6) The Librarian of the University Library; (7) The principals of post-graduate colleges and professional colleges excluding training colleges ; (8) The principals of all other affiliated colleges excluding training colleges who have served as principals for not less than three years. Other Members. (1) Five members elected by the Senate from among its members who are not engaged in teaching; (2) Five members elected by the principals of affiliated training colleges from among themselves ; (3) Five members elected by the teachers of affiliated training colleges, including physical directors and excluding principal, tutors, demonstrators and physical instructors of such college from among themselves; (4) Three members elected by the teachers of approved colleges including principals and physical directors but excluding tutors, demonstrators and physical instructors of such colleges, from among themselves of whom two shall be from colleges providing courses of study for admission to the examinations for titles and diplomas of the University and the remaining shall be from colleges providing courses of study for admission to the pre-University examination of the University; (5) One member from each post-graduate college who is not the principal of such college, elected by the teachers of the college, including physical directors but excluding the principal, tutors, demonstrators and physical instructors, from among themselves; (6) One member from each professional college, not being an affiliated training college, who is not the principal of such college elected by the teachers of the college including physical directors but excluding the principal, tutors, demonstrators and physical instructors from among themselves: (7) One member from each affiliated college other than a post-graduate college or a professional college including an affiliate training college who is not the principal of such college elected by the teachers of the college, including physical directors but excluding the principal, tutors, demonstrators and physical instructors, from among themselves; (8) One member elected by headmasters of high schools in each of the following revenue districts or groups of revenue districts, from among themselves, namely:- (a) Coimbatore and the Nilgiris, (b) Salem and Dharmapuri, (c) North Arcot, (d) Chingleput and Madras, (e) South Arcot, (f) Thanjavur, (g) Tiruchirappalli ; (9) Six members nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor to represent Tamil, Sanskrit, Hindi and other languages; and (10) One member nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor to represent physical education]. 6 [(b) (i) Save as otherwise provided, elected and nominated members of the Academic Council shall hold office for a period of three years and such members shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination (ii) Where a member is elected or nominated to the Academic Council to a casual vacancy, the period of office held for not less than one year by any such member shall be constituted as a full period of three years for the purpose of this clause. Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, the expression period shall include the period to the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1991, in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette] 7 [Provided that where a member is elected or nominated to the Academic Council to a casual vacancy, the period of office held by any such member shall be construed as a full period of three years for the purpose of this clause:] Provided also that where an elected or nominated member of the Academic Council is appointed temporarily to any of the offices by virtue of which he is entitled to be a member of the Academic Council ex-officio he shall by notice in writing signed by him and communicated to the Vice-Chancellor within seven days from the date of his taking charge of his appointment, choose whether he will continue to be a member of the Academic Council by virtue of his election or nomination or whether he will vacate office as such member and become a member ex-officio by virtue of his appointment and the choice shall be conclusive. On failure to make such choice, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office as an elected or nominated member. 8 [Provided also that a member elected by the Senate from its own body who is not engaged in teaching shall cease to be a member of the Academic Council if he subsequently becomes engaged in teaching.] 9 [Explanation - For the purpose of this clause, the expression period shall include the period held prior to the 1st December, 1981.] (c) When a person ceases to be a member of the Academic Council he shall cease to be a member of any of the authorities of the University of which he may happen to be a member by virtue of his membership of the Academic Council.] This sections was substituted for the original by S.22 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 Tamil Nadu Act (12 of 1929). The marginal note and sub-S. (a) were substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Substituted by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1970. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 42 of 1979. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1992. Substituted, Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1982. Third proviso to sub-Cl. (b) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Explanation added by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1982.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Academic Council shall have the following powers, namely:- (a) to make regulations and amend or repeal the same ; (b) to advise the Senate and the Syndicate on all academic matters; (c) to make proposals to the Senate and the Syndicate for the institution of professorships, readerships, lectureships, or other teaching posts and in regard to the duties and emoluments thereof; (d) to make regulations regarding the special courses of study or division of subjects in 2 [University colleges and laboratories and] 3 [affiliated and approved colleges]; (e) to make regulations for the encouragement of co-operation and reciprocity among 4 [University colleges and laboratories and] 5 [affiliated and approved colleges] with a view to promoting academic life; (f) to make regulations regarding courses of study examinations and the conditions on which students 6 [of University colleges and laboratories and] or 7 [affiliated and approved colleges] shall be admitted to examination of the University; (g) to constitute Faculties in Arts, Science, Law, Medicine, Engineering, Technology, Teaching, Agriculture, 8 [Commerce, Indian and other languages, Indian System of Medicine Veterinary Science, Fine Arts] and such other subjects as may be prescribed; (h) to make proposals to the Syndicate for the framing of Ordinances for the management of University 9 [colleges and] laboratories, libraries and institutes of research 10 [...] hostels instituted by the University and other institutions established by the University; (i) to recommend to the Senate schemes for the constitution or reconstitution of departments of teaching; 11 [(j) to advise the Syndicate on the promotion of research in the University; (jj) to receive and to call for and to consider reports from the Syndicate reviewing the instruction and teaching of the University and the research work done in the University; and (k) to appoint a Standing Committee of which not less than one-third shall be members of the Academic Council who are Principals or teachers of affiliated colleges and to delegate to it such of its powers as it may deem fit.] This section was substituted for the original section by S. 23 of the Tamil Nadu University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). These words were inserted by section 6 (i) of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943), re-enacted permanently by section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). Substituted for constituent, affiliated and Oriental Colleges by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. These words were inserted by section 6 (i) of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943), re-enacted permanently by section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948). Substituted for constituent, affiliated and Oriental Colleges by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. These words were, inserted by section 6 (iii) of Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943 supra. Substituted for constituent, affiliated and Oriental Colleges by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for Commerce, Oriental Learning, Indian System of Medicine, Fine Arts by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. These words were inserted by section 6 (iv) of Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943. The words constituent colleges were omitted, Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943. Clauses (j) and (jj) substituted for original clause (j) by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The University shall include Faculties of Arts, Science, Law, Medicine, Engineering, 2 [Technology, Teaching, Agriculture, Commerce, Indian and other languages, Indian System of Medicine, Veterinary Science, Fine Arts] and such other Faculties as may be prescribed by the Statutes. Each Faculty shall comprise such departments of teaching as may be prescribed by the Ordinances. The constitution and functions of the Faculties shall in other respects be prescribed by the Regulations: Provided that not less than three fourths of the total number of members of every Faculty shall be members of the Academic Council.] 3 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Academic Council may on the recommendaiton of the Syndicate, appoint any teacher of the University as a member of a Faculty.] This section was substituted for the original section by section 24 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted for Teaching, Agriculture, Commerce, Oriental Learning, Fine Arts by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Sub-S. (2) inserted, Teaching, Agriculture, Commerce, Oriental Learning, Fine Arts by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966, the original section being re-numbered as sub-section (1).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 25-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu There shall be Boards of Studies attached to each department of teaching. The constitution and powers of the Boards of Studies shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.] This section was inserted by Section 25 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following five members namely:- (i) The Vice-Chancellor; 2 [(ii) The Secretary to Government in-charge of Finance (or any officer nominated by him.] (iii) Three members nominated by the Syndicate from among its members. (2) If for any reason the officer referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (1) is unable to attend any meeting of the Finance Committee, he may depute any officer of the Department to attend such meeting. The officer so deputed shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Committee and shall have the right to vote. (3) (i) The Syndicate shall, in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances, prepare the financial estimates of the University and place the same before the Finance Committee. (ii) The Finance Committee shall then scrutinise the said estimates and may make such modifications therein as it considers necessary. (iii) The said estimates, as modified by the Finance Committee, shall then be laid before the Syndicate for consideration. The Syndicate may accept the modifications made by the Finance Committee and place the estimates as so modified before the Senate for approval. If the Syndicate does not accept the modifications, it shall place before the Senate the estimates, the modifications made or the objections raised by the Finance Committee and the reasons for the non-acceptance. The Senate shall consider the estimates so laid before it and shall sanction the same either without modifications or with such modifications as it thinks fit: Provided that the Senate shall not make any modifications in the estimates which have the effect of increasing the estimates of expenditure or reducing the estimates of income.] The present S. 26 inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. The original S. 26 as also the original S. 27 had been omitted by S. 26 of the Madras University(Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1980.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Omitted by S.26 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The constitution of such other 1 [bodies] as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University shall be provided for in the manner prescribed. This word was substituted for the word authorities by S. 27, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the constitution, 1 [or reconstitution], powers and duties of the authorities of the University; (b) the conditions of recommendation by the Senate of 2 [any area within the State of Tamil Nadu except the area comprising the revenue districts of Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari] to be recognized by the Government as 3 [University centre]. 4 [(c) the reconditions of recognition of approved colleges and of affiliation to the University of affiliated colleges;] 5 [(cc) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a College may be designated as an autonomous College or the designation of such College may be cancelled and the matters incidental to the administration of autonomous college including the constitution or reconstitution, powers and duties of academic council, staff council, boards of studies and boards of examiners;] (d) the institution and maintenance of 6 [University colleges and laboratories] and hostels; 7 [(e) the powers, duties and conditions of service of the officers of the University other than the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor:] 8 [(f) the holding of convocations to confer degrees; 9 [(g) the conferment of honorary degrees; 10 [(h) the administration of endowments and the institution and conditions of award of fellowship, travelling fellowships, scholarships, studentships, bursaries, exhibitions, medal sand prizes;] 11 [(i) the classification and the mode of appointment of the teachers of the University ]; 12 [(j) the institution of pension 13 [gratuity] or provident fund for the benefit of the teachers of the University or its servants ] 14 [(k) the maintenance of a register of registered graduates; 15 [and] 16 [(1) all matters which by this Act may be prescribed by the Statutes. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for the words local areas, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Substituted for University Centres Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Cl. (c) substituted, Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (cc) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977. These words were substituted for the words constituent colleges by S. 7 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943), re-enacted permanently by section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu) Act 8 of 1948). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clauses (e) and (m) were omitted and clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1) and (n) were re-lettered as (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k) and (1) respectively and for clauses (e) and (h) as so re-lettered existing clauses (e) and (h) were substituted and the words and at the end of clause (k) inserted by section 28 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 30--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The Senate may of its own motion take into consideration the draft of any Statute, provided that in any such case before a Statute is passed affecting the powers or duties of any officer or authority, the opinion of the Syndicate and a report from the person or authority concerned shall have been taken into consideration by the Senate. 2 [(2)] The Syndicate may propose to the Senate the draft of any Statute. Such draft may be considered by the Senate at its next succeeding meeting. The Senate may approve such draft and pass the Statute or may reject it or return it to the Syndicate for reconsideration either in whole or in part together with any amendments which the Senate may suggest. After any draft so returned has been further considered by the Syndicate together with any amendments suggested by the Syndicate, it shall be again presented to the Senate with the report of the Syndicate thereon and the Senate may then deal with the draft in any manner it thinks fit. 3 [(3) 4 [Where any Statute has been passed by the Senate or a draft of a Statute recommended by the Syndicate has been rejected by the Senate] it shall be submitted to the Chancellor who may refer the Statute or draft back to the Senate for further consideration or in the case of a Statute passed by the Senate assent thereto or withhold his assent. A statute passed by the Senate shall have no validity until it has been assented to by the Chancellor. 5 [(4)] The Syndicate shall not propose the draft of any Statute or of any amendment to a Statute- (a) affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion upon the proposal; any opinion so expressed shall be in writing and shall be considered by the Senate and shall be submitted to the Chancellor; or 6 [(b) affecting the conditions of affiliation or approval of affiliated or approved colleges, with the University or by the University, as the case may be; [or] 7 [(c) affecting the conditions of designation of any college as an autonomous college;] except after consultation with the Academic Council.] Sub-Ss. (1) and (2) were omitted and sub-Ss. (3) to (6)were re-numbered as (1) to (4) respectively by section29 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Sub-Ss. (1) and (2) were omitted and sub-Ss. (3) to (6)were re-numbered as (1) to (4) respectively by section29 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Sub-Ss. (1) and (2) were omitted and sub-Ss. (3) to (6)were re-numbered as (1) to (4) respectively by section29 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Substituted for the words where any statute has been passed by the Senate or a draft of a statute has been rejected by the Senate by Tamil Nadu Act 2 1966. Sub-Ss. (1) and (2) were omitted and sub-Ss. (3) to (6)were re-numbered as (1) to (4) respectively by section29 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Clause (b) substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. The words or at the end of clause (b) and clause (c) added by Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1977.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 31--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the admission of students to the University and the levy of fees in 1 [University Colleges and laboratories]; 2 [(b) the conditions of residence of the students of the University and the levy of fees for residence in hostels maintained by the University; 3 [(c)] the conditions of recognition of hostels not maintained by the University; 4 [(d)5 [...] qualifications and emoluments of teachers of the University; 6 [(e)] the fees to be charged for courses of teaching given by teachers of the University 7 [and] for tutorial and supplementary instruction given by the University, 8 [...] 9 [(f) the conditions subject to which persons who may hereafter be permanently employed may be recognized as qualified to give instruction in 10 [affiliated and approved colleges] colleges and hostels; 11 [(g)] the appointment and duties of examiners; 12 [(h)] the conduct of examinations; and 13 [(i)] all matters which by this Act or by the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances. These words were substituted for the words constituent colleges by S. 7 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1943 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1943) re-enacted permanently by section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. II) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu) Act 8 of 1948). Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (c) to (j) were re-lettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clause (c) was substituted for the original clause (c) as re-lettered, Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929 Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (c) to (j) were re-lettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). The word number was omitted, Tamil Nadu Act 12. Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (c) to (j) were re-lettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). This word was inserted, Tamil Nadu Act 12. The words for admission to the examinations degrees and diplomas of the University and for the registration of graduates were omitted Tamil Nadu Act 12. Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (e) to (j) were relettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). These words were substituted for constituent, affiliated and Oriental Colleges by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (e) to (j) were relettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (e) to (j) were relettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929). Clause (b) was omitted and clauses (e) to (j) were relettered as (b) to (i) respectively by S. 30 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 32--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) In making Ordinances the Syndicate shall consult-(i) the Boards of Studies when such Ordinances affect the appointment and duties of examiners, and (ii) the Academic Council when they affect the conduct or standard of examinations, or the conditions of residence of students]. (2) All Ordinances made by the Syndicate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted as soon as may be to the Chancellor and the Senate and shall be considered by the Senate at its next succeeding meeting. The Senate shall have power by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present at such meeting to cancel or modify any such Ordinance. (3) The Chancellor may direct that the operation of any ordinance shall be suspended until such time as the Senate has had an opportunity of considering the same. Sub-S. (1) was substituted for the original sub-section by S. 31 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 33--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Academic Council may make Regulations consistent with this Act and the Statutes to carry out the duties assigned to it thereunder. All such Regulations shall have effect from such date as the Academic Council may direct, but every Regulation so made shall be submitted as soon as may be to the Senate who shall consider it at its next meeting. The Senate shall have power, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present at such meeting to cancel or modify any such Regulation.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 34--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every student of the University 1 [other than the non-collegiate students] shall reside in a hostel or under such other conditions as may be prescribed. These words were inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 35--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No candidate shall be admitted to any University examination unless he is enrolled as a member of a University college or laboratory or of an affiliated or approved college and has satisfied the requirements as to the attendance required under the regulations for the same or unless he is exempted from such requirement of enrolment or attendance or both by an order of the Syndicate passed on the recommendation of the Academic Council made under the Regulations prescribed. Exemptions granted under this section shall be subject to such condition as the Syndicate may think fit. S. 35 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 36--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall be admitted to the pre-University course or other entrance courses of study in the University unless he- (i) has passed the Matriculation examination; or (ii) holds the Secondary School Leaving Certificate and has been declared eligible by the Syndicate under conditions prescribed by the University authorities concerned for such course or courses of study; or (iii) has passed an examination of any other University or authority recognized by the Syndicate as equivalent to the examinations specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) and (iv) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Syndicate. (2) No person shall be admitted to a course of study in the University for admission to the examination for degrees of the University in Arts and Science unless he- (i) has passed the pre-University examination of the University; or (ii) has passed an examination of any other University or authority recognized by the Syndicate as equivalent to the examination referred to in clause (i); and (iii) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Syndicate. (3) No person shall be admitted to a course of study in the University for admission to the examination for a professional degree of the University unless he- (i) has passed the relevant examination percentage therefor by the Syndicate; (ii) has obtained such minimum percentage of marks in such subjects in the relevant examination as may be prescribed by the Syndicate; and (iii) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Syndicate. (4) No person shall be admitted to any course of study for admission to the examinations for titles, diplomas or certificates of the University unless he- (i) has passed the entrance test prescribed therefor by the Syndicate and (ii) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Syndicate. (5) Every candidate for a University examination shall, unless exempted from the provisions of this sub-section by a special order of the Syndicate made on the recommendation of the Academic Council, be enrolled as a member of a University college or laboratory or of an affiliated or approved college. Any such exemption may be made subject to such conditions as the Syndicate may think fit. (6) Students exempted from the provisions of sub-section (5) and students admitted in accordance with the conditions prescribed to courses of study other than courses of study for a degree shall be non-collegiate students of the University]. S.36 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 37--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in section 36 at any time after the passing of this Act if the 1 [State Government] 2 [are satisfied] that other adequate arrangements have been made for the supervision and control of institution preparing candidates for the entrance examination to the University, the 3 [State Government] may by notification direct that the said University shall cease to exercise any control over the recognition of such institutions and from the date of such notification the University shall cease to exercise such control. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937, read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order 1950. These words were substituted for the words is satisfied by S.3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1951). The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937, read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for word Provincial by the Adaptation Order 1950.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 38--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-officio members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled as soon as conveniently may be by the person or body who or which nominated or elected the member whose place has become vacant and the person nominated or elected to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member. Provided that vacancies arising by efflux of time among elected members of any authority or other body of the University may be filled at elections which may be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor to take place on such days not earlier than two months from the date on which the vacancies arise, as he thinks fit: Provided further that no casual vacancy shall be filled if such vacancy occurs within six months before the date of the expiry of the term of the members of any authority or other body of the University. S. 38 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 39--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act or proceeding of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of any vacancy or of any defect or irregularity in the election or appointment of a member of any authority or other body of the University or of any defect or irregularity in such act or proceeding not affecting the merits of the case or on the ground only that the Senate did not meet twice in any year. Ss. 39 and 40 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 40--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Senate may,- (a) on the recommendation of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Syndicate remove by an order in writing made in this behalf the name of any person from the register of graduates; or (b) remove by an order in writing made in this behalf any person from membership of any authority of the University by a resolution passed by a majority of the total membership of the Senate and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the Senate present and voting at the meeting, if such person has been convicted by a criminal Court for an offence which in the opinion of the Senate involves moral turpitude or if he has been guilty of gross misconduct and for the same reason, may withdraw any degree or diploma conferred on, or granted to, that person by the University. (2) The Senate may also by an order in writing made in this behalf remove any person from the membership of any authority of the University if he becomes of unsound mind or deaf-mute or suffers from leprosy or has applied to be adjudicated or had been adjudicated as an insolvent. (3) No action under this section shall be taken against any person unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity to show cause against the action proposed to be taken. (4) A copy of every order passed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be, shall as soon as may be after it is so passed, be communicated to the person concerned in the manner prescribed by Regulations.]
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 41--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any question arises whether any person has been duly elected or nominated as or is entitled to be a member of 1 [any authority or other body of the University] the question shall be referred to the Chancellor whose decision thereon shall be final. Substituted for any authority of the University by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 42--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All the authorities of the University shall have power to appoint committees and to delegate to them such of their powers as they deem fit; such committees shall, unless there be some special provision in this Act to the contrary, consist of such members of the authority concerned and of such other persons, if any, as the authority in each case may think fit.] This section was substituted for the original section by S. 35 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 43--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Save as otherwise provided, every salaried officer and teacher of the University shall be appointed under a written contract. The contract shall be lodged with the Registrar of the University and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the officer or teacher concerned. (2) Any member of the public services in India whom it is proposed to appoint to a post in the University shall, subject to the approval of such appointment by 1 [the Government concerned] have the option- (i) of having his services lent to the University for a specific period and remaining liable to recall to Government service at the 2 [option] of 3 [the Government concerned] at the end of that period, or (ii) of resigning Government service on entering the service of the University: Provided however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the employment of a member of the public services as a part time servant of the University with the approval of 4 [the Government concerned] These words were substituted for the words the Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937. This word was substituted for the word discretion, by the Adaptation Order of 1937. These words were substituted for the words the Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937. These words were substituted for the words the Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 44--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall have a fund to which shall be credited- (1) its income from fees, endowments, grants, donations and gifts, if any; and (2) any contribution by the Central Government, any State Government, the University Grants Commission or like authority, any local authority or any other corporation owned or controlled by the Central or any State Government.] S. 44 substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 45--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State Government] may at anytime after the passing of this Act transfer to the University the control and management of any of 2 [their institutions ] on such terms and conditions as 3 [[they may deem proper]. 4 [...] The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937 read with the Adaptation (Amendment Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words its institutions by S. 3 of and the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act 1951, (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1951). These words were substituted for the words it may deem proper, by S. 3 of and the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act 1951, (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1951). The second sentence of S. 45 was omitted by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 45-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Statutes, Regulations, Ordinances and Orders made there under, on and from the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2007 the colleges and institution specified in schedule III shall cease to be constituent colleges of the University and the control and management of those colleges and institution shall stand transferred to the Government.] Chapter - IX-A. 2 [Omitted] Section 45-A was newly inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 2008. Chapter IX-A omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 2008.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 46--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the Ordinances any student of a college affiliated to the University of Madras established under Act 27 of 1867, who was studying for any examination of the said University, shall be permitted to complete his course in preparation therefor and the University shall hold for such students examinations in accordance with the curricular of studies of that University for such period as may be prescribed.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 47--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1) of section 11, within three months after the passing of this Act the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor on a salary to be fixed by him for a period not exceeding three years and on such other conditions as he thinks fit.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 48--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to make arrangements for constituting the Senate, the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Council of Affiliated Colleges within six months after the date of his appointment or such longer period not exceeding one year as the 1 [State Government] may be notification direct. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall with the assistance of an advisory committee nominated by the Chancellor draw up any rules that may be necessary for regulating the method of election to those authorities subject to the provisions of the Act and the approval of the Chancellor. (3) The authorities constituted under sub-section (1) shall commence to exercise their functions on such date or dates as the 2 [State Government] may by notification direct. (4) The Regulations of the University of Madras in force at the time of the coming into operation of sections 3 and 4 of this Act shall, so far as they may be applicable, continue to be in force until they are replaced by the Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be framed under this Act. (5) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to draft such Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations as may be necessary and submit them to the respective authorities competent to deal with them for their disposal. Such Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations when framed shall be published in the 3 [Official Gazette]. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937 read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937 read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words Fort St. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 49--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Vice - Chancellor shall have power (1) to appoint such advisory committees as he may think fit; and (2) to appoint such clerical and menial staff as may be necessary subject to the sanction of the Chancellor.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 50--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any difficulty arises as to the first constitution or reconstitution of any authority of the University after the commencement of this Act, or otherwise in first giving effect to the provisions of this Act the 1 [State Government] as occasion may require, may by order do anything which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 2 [(2) Every order issued under sub-section (1) shall as soon as possible after it is issued be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modifications in any such order or both Houses agree that the order should not be issued, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order]. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937 read with the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The original S. 50 renumbered as sub-S. (1) and sub-S. (2) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 51--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All 1 [properties] all rights of whatever kind used, enjoyed, or possessed by and all interests of whatever kind owned by or vested in, or held in trust, by or for, the University of Madras as constituted under the Indian Universities Act, 1904 as well as all liabilities legally subsisting against the said University shall pass to the University as constituted under this Act. This word was substituted for the word property by section 37 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 52--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where a pension or provident fund has been instituted by the Senate for the benefit of the offices, teachers or servants of the University, the 1 [State Government] may declare that the provisions of the Provident Fund Act, 1897 shall apply to such fund as if the University were a local authority and the fund a Government Provident Fund. The words Provincial Government were substituted for the words Local Government by the Adaptation Order of 1937 read with the Adaptation (Amendment)Order of 1940 and the word State was substituted for Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 53--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Senate shall, at the end of every five years from the date of the commencement of the Madras University (Amendment) Act, 1966 submit a report to the State Government on the condition of affiliated and approved colleges. The State Government shall lay the report on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and shall take such action on it as they deem fit. The present Ss. 53,54 and 54-A were substituted for S. 53 by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1966. There had been a previous S. 54 which had been omitted by S. 38 of the Madras University (Amendment) Act 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929).
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 54--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the State Government may by order in writing call for any information from the University on any matter relating to the affairs of the University and the University shall if such information is available with it, furnish the State Government with such information within a reasonable period: Provided that in the case of information which the University considered confidential, the University may inform the State Government that such information cannot be made available to the State Government and shall place the same before the Chancellor.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 54-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person ordinarily resident in the State of Tamil Nadu except the area comprising the revenue districts of Madurai, Ramanathapuram, Tirunelveli and Kanyakumari, who- (i) has been for at least three years a graduate of any University in the territory of India; Or (ii) is a registered graduate of any University in the territory of India, shall be entitled to have his name entered in the register of graduates maintained under this Act for a period of five years on payment of such fee and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (2) All applications for registration under sub-section (1) shall be sent to the Registrar to-gether with the prescribed fee and such proof of qualifications as may be prescribed by the Statutes. (3) The Registrar shall, on receipt of an application made under sub-section (2) and after making such enquiry as he deems fit, enter in the register of graduates the name of the applicant. (4) Every person whose name has been entered in the register of graduates under sub-section (3) shall be entitled to have such entry renewed every five years on application made in that behalf to the Registrar within such time, in such manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed by the Statutes.]
Madras University Act, 1923_Section 55--> State(s): Tamil Nadu As from the date on which sections 3 and 4 are brought into operation the enactments specified in Schedule II shall be repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof.
Madras University Act, 1923_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Schedule - I ***]1 Schedule - II Enactments Repealed (See section 55) Year. Number Short title Extent of repeal. 1957 XXVII The Madras University Act, 1857 So much as is unrepealed 1904 VIII The Indian Universities Act, 1904 In Sub-section (1) of section 6, the word Madras.  In sub-section (a) of section 12, the word Madras  In the first schedule the heading The University of Madras and the entries under that heading. [Schedule-III]2 [See Sec-2 (aaaaa)] Sl. No. Name of the College 1 Presidency College (autonomous), Chennai. 2 Govt. Arts College for Men, Nandanam, Chennai. 3 Dr. Ambedkar Govt. Arts College, Vysarpadi, Chennai. 4 Queen Marrys College (autonomous), Chennai. 5 Bharathi Womens College (autonomous), Chennai. 6 Quaide-Millet Govt College for Women, Anna Salai, Chennai. 7 Institute of Advance Study in Education, Saidapet, Chennai. 8 Lady Willington Institute of Advance Study in Education, Chennai. 9 Rajeswari Vedachalam Govt. Arts College, Chengalpattu. 10 Loganatha Narayanaswamy Govt. Arts College, Ponneri. 11 Sri Subramaniaswamy Govt. Arts College, Tiruttani. Sch. I was omitted by S. 39 of Tamil Nadu Act 12 of 1929. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 35 /2002 
