Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the payment from municipal funds of a portion of the cost of the police force employed in the City of Madras and in all municipal towns within the Presidency of Fort St. George. Whereas it is expedient that a portion of the cost of the Police employed in the City of Madras, and in every town brought under the operation of the Towns Improvement Act. Madras Act III of 1871. - 1871 (Madras), shall be defrayed from municipal funds; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act shall come into force on the first day of April 1879.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Rep. By the Repealing and Amending Act, 1901 (Central Act XI of 1901).
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Municipal Commissioners for the City of Madras shall annually set apart, and pay to the State Government in equal monthly instalments, out of the funds raised under the Madras Municipal Act, 1867, or any other corresponding law for the time being in force such sum not exceeding fifty per centum of the total cost of the Police force, other than the Marine Police, employed by [the State Government] in the said city, as may be annually fixed by the State Government.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In every town in which the Town Improvement Act, 1871 (Madras), or any other corresponding law for the time being in force is in operation, the Municipal Commissioners for such town shall annually set apart, and pay to the State Government in equal monthly instalments out of the funds raised under the said Act or law, such sum not exceeding seventy-five per centum of the total cost of the Police force employed in such town as may be annually fixed by the State Government.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All sums payable under this Act shall be paid by the Municipal Commissioners for such city or town as aforesaid at such times and to such persons as the State Government may from time to time direct.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Commissioner of Police for the City of Madras shall, on or before the first day of August in each year, furnish to the Municipal Commissioners for the city of Madras, a statement of all sums received and expended by him in the past official year in respect of the Police force, other than the Marine Police, employed in the said city, and a statement or estimate showing the probable expenditure to be incurred in the ensuing official year in respect of the said Police force.
Madras Municipal Police Act, 1878_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every District Superintendent of Police shall at such periods as the State Government may from time to time direct, furnish to the Municipal Commissioners for every town in his district in which the Towns Improvement Act, 1871 (Madras), or any other corresponding law for the time being in force, is in operation, statements containing similar information to that mentioned in the preceding paragraph, in respect of the Police force employed in every such town. 
