Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to prevent the indiscriminate destruction of private forests and interference with customary and prescriptive rights therein and for certain other purposes. Whereas it is necessary pending further legislation, to prevent the indiscriminate destruction to private forests and interference with customary and prescriptive rights therein; it is hereby enacted as follows:-
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949. (2) It applies - (i) to private forests in the districts of Malabar and South Kanara having a contiguous area exceeding 100 acres 1 [x x x x]. 2 [Explanation:- Nothing in this clause shall be deemed to apply to any land which was brought under fugitive or other cultivation prior to the 14th December, 1949, by an owner or any person claiming under him;] (ii) to forests situated in estates as defined in the Madras Estates Land Act, 1908 (Madras Act I of 1908) in the 3 [Malabar District]. (iii) to private forests situated in other areas in the 4 [Malabar District] and having a contiguous area exceeding 100 acres which may be declared by the 5 [State] Government to be forests for the purposes of this be Act by notification in the 6 [Kerala Government Gazette], but does not apply to reserved forests constituted under the Madras Forest Act, 1882 (Madras Act V of 1882) and lands at the disposal of the Government as defined in that Act. 7 [Explanation:- A private forest exceeding 100 acres in extent shall not cease to be such by reason only of the fact that, in a portion thereof, trees or shrubs are felled with or without the permission of the District Collector, or lands are cultivated, or rocks, roads, tanks, rivers or the like exist; nor shall the area of such forest cease to be contiguous by reason only of the existence of all or any of the aforesaid circumstances]. (3) It shall come into force at once and shall remain in force up to and inclusive of the 8 [31st December, 1967]. (4) Upon the expiry of this Act, the provisions of section 8 of the Madras General Clauses Act, 1891 (Madras Act 1 of 1891) shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Madras Act. Omitted by section 2 (a) of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954 (Madras Act XVIII of 1954). Tills Explanation was added by section 2 (a) of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954. Substituted for the words "State of Madras" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Substituted for the words "State of Madras" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Substituted for the words "Fort St. George Gazette" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Added by Section 2 (b) of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954 (Madras Act XVIII of 1954). Substituted by section 2 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Amendment) Act, 1965.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) 'forest' includes waste or communal land containing trees and shrubs, pasture land and any other class of land declared by the 1 [State] Government to be a forest by notification in the 2 [Kerala Government Gazette.] Explanation:- For the purposes of this clause, 'communal land' means any land of the description mentioned in sub-clause (a) of sub-clause (b) of clause (16) of section 3 of the Madras Estates Land Act, 1908 (Madras Act I of 1908); (b) 'owner' in relation to a forest includes a mortgagee, lessee or other person having right to possession and enjoyment of the forest; (c) 'person' includes a Hindu undivided family, a Marumakkathayam tarwad or tavazhi and an Aliyasantana family or branch; 3 [(d) the expressions 'Forest Officer, 'tree', 'timber', 'forest produce' 'cattle', 'Magistrate' and 'Imprisonment' shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in section 2 of the Madras Forest Act, 1882 (Madras Act V of 1882). Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for the words "Fort St. George Gazette" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956. Added by section 3 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Amendment) Act, 1955 (Madras Act XXXV of 1955)
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) (a) No owner of any forest shall, without the previous sanction of the District Collector, sell, mortgage, lease or otherwise alienate the whole or any portion of the forest. Explanation:- Nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as preventing the owner from selling or otherwise dealing with the right to gather and remove forest produce other than trees and timber in the usual or customary manner, for a period of not exceeding two years. 1 [(b) Any alienation in contravention of clause (a) shall be null and void- (i) if the alienation is of any forest declared by the State Government to be a forest under clause (iii) of section 1 (2) or of any portion of such a forest, and is made on or after the date on which the declaration takes effect; (ii) if the alienation is of any forest in the districts of Malabar and South Kanara having a contiguous area exceeding 100 acres (not being a forest owned by a single person or by more than one person jointly before the commencement of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954,) or of any portion of such a forest, and is made on or after the 24th June, 1953. (iii) if the alienation is of any other forest, or of any portion of such a forest, and is made on or after the 16th, August, 1946]. (2) No owner of any forest, and no person claiming under him, whether by virtue of a contract, licence or any other transaction entered into before or after the commencement of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946 (Madras Act XVIII of 1946), or any other person shall, without the previous permission of the District Collector, cut trees or do any act likely to denude the forest or diminish its utility as a forest: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the removal of dead or fallen trees or to any act done for the usual or customary domestic or for making agricultural implements. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 2 [State] Government may exempt any forest or class of forests or class of trees therein from all or any of the provisions of this section. Substituted by section 3 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954 (Madras Act XVIII of 1954). Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any person aggrieved by an order under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 3 or under sub-section (3) or under sub-section (2) of that section in regard to the sanction or permission referred to in that clause or sub-section may, within two months of the receipts of such order, prefer an appeal in writing to the 1 [State] Government. The 2 [State] Government shall pass such orders on the appeal as they may think fit. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) All suits, proceedings in execution of decrees or orders and other proceedings including proceedings by way of appeal or revision, in which a claim to customary or prescriptive rights in a forest is involved and all criminal proceedings in respect of offences which are of the nature described in Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860) and arise out of any act done in exercise or assertion of such customary or prescriptive rights, and which stood stayed up to the commencement of this Act or which may be instituted alter such commencement, shall continue to stand stayed, or shall stand stayed, as the case may be, and shall not be proceeded with until after the expiration of this Act. 1 [Explanation:- Sub-section (1) shall be construed- (a) in the case of any private forest declared by the State Government to be a forest under clause (iii) of section 1(2), as if for the words 'which may be instituted after such commencement' occurring in that sub-section, the words, brackets and figures 'which are pending on, or may be instituted after, the date on which the declaration under clause (iii) of section 1 (2) takes effect' had been substituted: and (b) in the case of any private forest in the districts of Malabar and South Kanara having a contiguous area exceeding 100 acres (not being a forest owned by a single person or by more than one person jointly before the commencement of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954), as if for the words 'which may be instituted after such commencement' occuring in that sub-section, the words, brackets and figures "which are pending on, or may be instituted after, the commencement of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954' had been substituted]. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 2 [State] Government may direct that any suit or proceeding or class or classes thereof stayed under sub-section (1) shall be proceeded with from the stage which had been reached when the suit or proceeding was stayed. Added by section 4 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Second Amendment) Act, 1954 (Madras Act XVIII of 1954). Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If, in the opinion of the 1 [State] Government, it is necessary for the preservation of a forest or forests, they may, by notification in the 2 [Kerala Government Gazette]. (i) prohibit or regulate the doing of any act likely to be detrimental to the preservation of such forest or forests: (ii) regulate the exercise of customary or prescriptive rights in such forest or forests. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for the words Fort St. George Gazette" by the Kerala Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 6A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of Chapter VII of the Madras Forest Act, 1882 (Madras Act V of 1882), shall apply to offences punishable under this Act subject to the following modifications, namely:- (i) in section 41, the proviso shall be omitted: (ii) in section 42, after the words "the Magistrate shall", the expression "subject to the provisions of section 8 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949" shall be inserted: (iii) in section 44, the words "shall, if it is the property of the Central or State Government or has been confiscated, be taken possession of by or under the authority of the District Forest Officer; and in any other case" shall be omitted; (iv) in section 45 and 49, for the words "the District Forest Officer", the words "the District Collector" shall be substituted; (v) in section 50,- (a) clause (a) shall be omitted; (b) clause (c), the word 'or' occurring at the end shall be omitted; and (c) clause (d) shall be omitted; (vi) Section 56 shall be omitted. Inserted by section 4 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Amendment) Act, 1955 (Madras Act XXXV of 1955).
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3 1 [or any of the terms and conditions subject to which a permission has been granted under sub-section (2) of section 3] or any of the terms of a notification under section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act V of 1898), if shall be lawful for any Magistrate of the First Class, specially empowered by the 2 [State] Government in this behalf, to impose a sentence of fine exceeding one thousand rupees. Inserted by section 3 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests (Amendment) Act, 1963 (Kerala Act 36 of 1963). Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No prosecution shall be instituted against any person without the sanction of the District Collector.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No order of the 1 [State] Government or the District Collector under this Act and no notification issued by the 2 [State] Government under section 6 shall be liable to be questioned in any court of law. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State] Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) the classes or kinds of trees which may be permitted to be cut and the girth of such trees; (b) the terms and conditions subject to which permission may be granted; (c) the procedure to be followed by the District Collector before granting permissions. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All suits and proceedings stayed under this Act shall, after expiration of this Act, be proceeded with, subject to the provisions of any law which may then be in force, from the stage which had been reached when the suit or proceeding was stayed.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 1 [State] Government may, as occasion may arise, by order do anything which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaption Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any rule or order made or purporting to have been made, any notification issued or purporting to have been issued, any decision or direction given or purporting to have been given, any action or proceeding taken or purporting to have been taken, or anything done or purporting to have been done - (a) under any provisions of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946 (Madras XVIII of 1946) (hereinafter in this section and in section 14 referred to as the said Act) and in force immediately before the 3rd December, 1948, or (b) on or after the 3rd December, 1948, under any provision of the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time, or (c) under any provision of the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Ordinance, 1949 (Madras Ordinance VIII of 1949) (hereinafter in this section referred to as the said Ordinance). shall, subject to any subsequent modification or cancellation thereof purporting to have been made on or after that date under the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time or under the said Ordinance, be deemed to be a rule or order made, notification issued, decision, or direction given, action or proceeding taken, or thing done under the corresponding provision of this Act. (2) Any liability or penalty incurred or purporting to have been incurred, any punishment awarded or purporting to have been awarded, and any prosecution commenced or purporting to have been commenced. (a) under any provision of the said Act before the 3rd December, 1948, or (b) on or after the 3rd December, 1948, under any provision of the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time, or (c) under any provision of the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been incurred, or commenced under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie in any court against any officer or servant of the 1 [State] Government or any person acting under his direction aiding or assisting him - (a) for, or on account of, or in respect of, any sentence passed, or any Act ordered or done by him, in exercise of any jurisdiction or power purporting to have been conferred on him by the said Act, or (b) for carrying out any sentence passed by any court in exercise of any such jurisdiction or power as aforesaid. (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 2 [State] Government for, or on account of, or in respect of, any Act, matter or thing whatsoever purporting to have been done in pursuance of or under the said Act. (3) Sub-sections (1) and (2) shall have effect although the said Act was not or might not have been in force at the relevant time. Substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaption Order of 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Madras Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946, (Madras Act XVIII of 1946) and the Madras Preservation of Private Forests Ordinance, 1949 (Madras Ordinance VIII of 1949) are hereby repealed. 
