Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to make provision for the levying of landing and shipping fees within the outports of the Presidency of Fort St. George. Whereas it is expedient to make rules and regulations for the levying of landing and shipping fees within the outports of the Presidency of Fort St. George; it is enacted as follows:-
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885. It shall come into force in any port within the Presidency of Fort St. George from such date as the Governor in Council may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, direct.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Act No. III of 1883 (the Cocanada Port-dues Act, 1883) shall be repealed on and from the date on which this Act is brought into force in the port of Cocanada, save so far as relates to offences committed, acts done and penalties incurred before this Act came into force.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there shall be something repugnant in the subject or con text,- (1) "port" means the space within such limits as may from time to time be defined by the Government for the purposes of this Act by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, and until a notification is so issued within such limits as may have been defined by the Government under the provisions of Act XII of 1875 (Indian Ports Act): (2) "Vessel" denotes anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or property: (3) "owner" when used in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for the sale, custody, landing or shipping of such goods: (4) "Goods" the word "goods" includes wares and merchandise of every description.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Landing and shipping fees, according to the rates which may be fixed by the Governor in Council from time to time may be levied upon all goods, carts, carriages, animals, baggage and other articles laded from or shipped into any vessel lying or being within the limits of any port within the Presidency of Fort St. George to which this Act may be applied. Such fees shall be payable in addition to all tolls and charges now lawfully levied within such port: Provided that the Governor in Council may, by general or special order, exempt any class or classes of goods from payment of fees under this Act, and may, in special cases, remit the whole or any portion of any charge levied under this section.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Such rate shall be notified in the Fort St. George Gazette at least one month before the date from which the same shall become payable, and shall be legibly painted in the English, Tamil, Telugu, and Hindustani languages on boards exhibited at the places appointed under section 6.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) appointing places where goods intended for shipment or landed from ships within the port are to be placed for the purpose of assessing the fees payable under this Act; (b) regulating the manner in which such fees shall be assessed and the time when they shall be paid. Such rules and any alteration or cancellation thereof shall be published in the Fort St. George Gazette, and shall thereupon have the force of law.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Governor in Council shall appoint an officer of Government to levy and receive all fees payable under this Act, and to pay the same into such treasury, and keep such accounts as the Government may from time to time prescribe. The officer so appointed may, with the sanction of the Government, appoint such persons as he shall think fit to assist him in carrying out the provisions of this Act, all of whom shall wear a distinguishing badge of a kind to be prescribed by such officer.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be lawful for the officer of Government appointed under this Act or any of his assistants to detain any such goods until the lawful fees are paid: It shall be the duty of such officer to give notice in writing to the owner or consignee if known, stating the amount of fees and charges payable in respect of such goods, and, in the event of such payment being refused or delayed for the space of fourteen days from the date of such notice, if the owner or consignee of such goods shall be in the port concerned, or otherwise, for the space of one calendar month from the date on which such fees are payable, it shall be lawful for such officer of Government to sell or cause to be sold by public auction the said goods, and, after paying the expenses of such detention and sale and double the amount of the fees by way of a fine, to pay the surplus, if any, of the proceeds of the sale to the owner or consignee or other person entitled thereto, if claimed within six months from the date of sale: Provided that, if the goods are of a perishable nature, the said officer of Government may sell the same or cause them to be sold at such earlier period being not less than twenty-four hours after the landing of the goods as he shall think fit.
Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees Act, 1885_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever removes, or attempts to remove, or abets within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code the removal of any goods, with the intention of evading payment of any fees payable under this Act, and whoever willfully infringes or acts in contravention of any rule made under section 6, shall on conviction before a Magistrate be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or in default of payment to simple or rigorous imprisonment as defined in the Indian Penal Code for a term which may extend to two months. 
