Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to alter the name of the State of Madras. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows; -
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968. (2)It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 14-1-1969 ; vide Statutory Orders (S.O.) 4653 ,dated the 30 December ,1968 ,Gazette of India, 1968, Extraordinary ,Pt.II, Section 3(ii), p.1511
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- (a) "appointed day" means, the date appointed under sub-section (2) of section 1 for the coming into force of this Act. (b) "appropriate Government" means, as respects a law relating to a matter enumerated in List 1 in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution , the Central Government, and as Respects any other law, the State Government; (c) "law" includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the whole or any part of the State of Madras.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu As from the appointed day, the State of Madras shall be known as the State of Tamil Nadu.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of article 31A, in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of article 168 and in article 290A of the Constitution , for the :Madras", the words "Tamil Nadu" shall be substituted.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)In the First Schedule to the Constitution , under the heading "I.THE STATES", for the figures and word "7,.Madras", the figure and words "7.Tamil Nadu" shall be substituted. (2)In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution , for the Figure and word "8.Madras", the figure and words "8, Tamil Nadu" shall be substituted.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the State of Madras by section 3, the appropriate Government may before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made. (2)Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to prevent a competent Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under the said sub-section.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under section 6 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to enforce such law may construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.
Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are pending to which the State of Madras is a party, the State of TamilNadu shall be deemed to be substituted for the State of Madras in those proceedings. 
