Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the maintenance of a special Police-force in the Ports of the Presidency of Fort St. George. Whereas it is expedient to make special provision for the security of the traffic between the shore and shipping in the ports of the Presidency of Fort St. George and to make the said traffic contribute towards the cost thereof; It is enacted as follows:-
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Madras Ports Police Act, 1881. Scope of Act. - It shall take effect in such port or ports in the Presidency of Fort St. George and from such date as the [State Government] may from time to time direct by notification in the Official Gazette.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu To meet the expense of the Police-force, established under the provisions of Act XXIV of 1859 (an Act for the better regulation of the Police within the territories subject to the Presidency of Fort St. George) and Madras Act VIII of 1867(an Act to incorporate the Police of the Town of Madras with the General Police of the Madras Presidency, etc.) which may be necessary for the purpose of this Act, the [State Government] may, from time to time, by notification in the [Official Gazette], fix such sum as may suffice at each port on an annual estimate to cover the cost of such special force to be charged and taken by the owner of every boat employed to convey goods to or from any ship or vessel in any port in the Presidency of Fort St. George in which this Act may take effect, in addition to the hire payable under Act IV of 1842 (for the better management of boats and catamarans in the Madras Roads and for the amendment of certain Harbour Regulations) or under Act IX of 1846 (an Act for authorising the Government of Fort St. George to provide Regulations for the several ports and places of anchorage within the territories subject thereto) or under any act that may be hereafter enacted for the like purpose.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No goods of any description shall be conveyed in any boat to or from any ship or vessel in any port in which this Act may take effect unless an Officer of the Police-force is present on board such boat; and it shall be the duty of the Commissioner or Superintendent of Police to provide every such boat with an officer of the Police-force for such purpose.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The owner of every boat and the tindal and boatmen for the time being employed in any boat in which any goods shall with the connivance of such boat-owner, tindal or boat-men be conveyed to or from any ship or vessel in any port in which this Act may take effect without having an Officer of the Police-force on board of such boat, shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be liable as follows:- every boat-owner to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees; every tindal to a fine not exceeding twenty rupees; every boatman to a fine not exceeding five rupees.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every boat-owner, tindal or boatman of any boat who shall hinder any such officer from proceeding on board such boat or shall obstruct him in the performance of his duty when in any such boat, shall on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable as follows:- every boat-owner to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees; every tindal to a fine not exceeding thirty rupees or to corporal punishment not exceeding fifty lashes with a cat-o' nine tails; every boatman to a fine not exceeding fifteen rupees or to corporal punishment not exceeding thirty lashes with a cat-o' nine tails
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every boat-owner shall on every Monday make or cause to be made.- to the Commissioner of Police, or to the Superintendent of Police, or to such other person as the said Commissioner or Superintendent of Police shall appoint to receive the same, or to the Port-officer of any port in which this Act may take effect, if such Port-officer shall be appointed to such duty by the [State Government]. a return in writing, signed by such boat-owner or his agent of the number of trips made by each of his boats on each day during the preceding week.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every boat-owner who shall neglect to make the return required by section 6 shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable for a first offence to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees, and for a second or any subsequent offence to a fine not exceeding one hundred rupees; and every boat-owner who shall knowingly make a false return shall be liable to a fine not exceeding three hundred rupees and a forfeiture of all licences which he may hold under the provisions of Act IV of 1842 or LX of 1846.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every boat-owner shall on every Monday pay or cause to be paid- to the said Commissioner of Police, or to the Superintendent of Police, or to such other person as the said Commissioner of Superintendent of Police shall appoint to receive the same, or to the Port officer of any port in which this Act may take effect, if such Port-officer shall be appointed to such duty by the [State Government], the regulated sum as provided under section 2 for every trip made by any boat belonging to him employed in conveying goods, according to the weekly return made by him as hereinbefore directed: Procedure on default. - and, in default of such payment, one or more of the boats of any boat-owner making such default may be seized and sold by virtue of a warrant under the hand and seal of a Magistrate until the amount so due by such boat-owner and the expenses of sale shall be realized; and such amount when realised shall be forthwith paid to the said Commissioner or Superintendent of Police or other officer appointed as aforesaid. Any surplus arising from such sale shall, provided application be made within three months from the date of such sale, be paid to such boat-owner.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All moneys paid or received by the Commissioner or Superintendent of Police, or other officer as aforesaid under this Act. shall be paid by such officer at least once a month into the public treasury.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act shall not apply to any boat which shall convey mails exclusively to or from any ship or vessel in any port in which this Act may take effect.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu From and after the passing of this Act, it shall be lawful for all Police-officers appointed under Act XXIV of 1859 or Madras Act VIII of 1867 to exercise within the limits of any port in which this Act may take effect all powers given to them by the said Acts, respectively.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Presidency Magistrates Act shall apply to all fines and punishments awarded under this Act.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may from time to time, by notification in the Officer Gazette, apply the provisions of this Acts to boats conveying passengers to or from any vessel in all or any ports in which this Act shall take effect under section 1.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be competent to the [State Government of Madras] to withdraw from the operation of this Act, by notification in the official Gazette, any port, or ports in which this act may take effect.
Madras Ports Police Act, 1881_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [Repeal of enactment] Rep. by the Repealing and amending Act, 1901 (Central Act XI of 1901). 
