Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Amendment Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Act, 1982. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Sub-section (1) of Section 6 of the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Act, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 33 of 1982), empowers the Government to establish one or more Boards for one or more employments specified in the Schedule to that Act for administering the Scheme made under that Act by the Government for the said scheduled employments. Sub-section (3) of the said Section 6 provides that the Board shall consist of members nominated, from time to time, by the Government representing the employers, the manual workers and the Government. Sub-section (4) of the said Section 6 provides that the members representing employers and manual workers shall be equal in number, and the members representing the Government shall not exceed one third of the total number of members representing employers and manual workers. 2. In many of the scheduled employments, there is no employer and employee relationship and the manual workers engaged in those scheduled employments are mostly self-employed. In these circumstances, the Government considered that the provisions contained in sub-section (3) of the said Section 6 is sufficient for the purpose and accordingly decided to omit sub-section (4) of Section 6 of the said Act. 3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. T.M. Anbarasan, Minister for Labour. M. Selvaraj, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Amendment Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Amendment Act, 2006. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Amendment Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu ln section 6 of the Tamil Nadu Manual Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Work) Act, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 33 of 1982), sub-section (4) shall be omitted. (By Order of the Governor) S. Dheenadhayalan, Secretary to Government-in-charge, Law Department 
