Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation Act 1983. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object At present, "mechanized fishing vessels" upto a length of fifteen metres in length and fitted with mechanical means of propulsion having an engine of not less than fifteen Horse Power but not more than one hundred and twenty Horse Power, are covered under the definition which is provided in clause (g) of section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1983) and the term "deep sea fishing vessel" is also defined in the said clause to cover the vessels fitted with mechanical means of propulsion having an engine of not less than one hundred and twenty Horse Power and measuring in length of not less than fifteen metres. Now, the Government of India have issued the revised guideline in respect of "deep sea fishing vessels" to cover only the fishing vessels with a length of twenty metres and above. 2. In view of the revised guidelines issued by the Government of India, the Government have decided to amend clause (g) of section 3 or :l.e said Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1983 so as to cover the fishing vessels in length of not less than ten metres and not more than twenty metres, which are fitted with mechanical means of propulsion having an engine of not less than twenty horse power but not exceeding one hundred and fifty horse power and consequent to this, it is also to modify the definition of the "deep sea fishing vessels" in the said clause. 3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. K.P.P. Samy, Minister for Fisheries. M. Selvaraj, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Marine Fishing Regulation Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1983), for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- (g) "mechanized fishing vessel" means a ship or boat fitted with mechanical means of propulsion having an engine of not less than twenty Horse Power but not more than one hundred and fifty Horse Power and measuring in length not less than ten metres and less than twenty metres, but does not include a deep sea fishing vessei. and'a "deep sea fishing vessel" means a ship or host fitted with mechanical means of propulsion having an engine of more than one hundred and fifty Horse Power and measuring in length not less than twenty metres;". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
