Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the better administration and Governance of the Mettur Township. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the better administration and governance of the Mettur Township; 1 [it is hereby enacted as follows] These words were substituted for the paragraph containing the enacting formula and the paragraph preceding that paragraph by S. 5 of the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No. 11) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1948)
Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Mettur Township Act, 1940.
Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) As soon as may be after the passing this Act, the 1 [State] Government shall, by notification 2 [...] and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute a committee, to be called the Mettur Township Committee (hereinafter referred to as the Township Committee), for the purpose of administering the municipal affairs of the Mettur township. (2) The Township Committee shall be a body corporate, having a perpetual succession and a common seal, and subject to any restrictions or qualifications imposed by or under this or any other enactment, shall be vested with the capacity of suing and being sued in its corporate name, of acquiring, holding and transferring property, movable or immovable, or entering into contracts, and of doing all things necessary, proper or expedient for the purposes for which it is constituted. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' and "Province" as the case may be, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "in the Fort St. George Gazette" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1973.
Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The Township Committee shall consist of the following members, namely:- (a) Members of the House of the People and Members of the Legislative Assembly chosen to represent a constituency which consists of, or comprises, or which relates to, the township or any portion thereof, and Members of the Legislative Council who ordinarily reside in the township; and (b) Such officers of the State Government, and such other persons, of whom one shall be a representative of industrial interests in the township and two of labour interest therein, as the State Government may appoint. (1-A) Where a person ceases to be a Member of the House of the People or a Member of the State Legislature, he shall cease to be member of the Township Committee from the date on which he ceases to be such Member.] (2) The 2 [State] Government shall appoint one of the members of the Township Committee to be its Chairman and another person (whether a member of the Committee or not) to be its Executive Officer. 3 (2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no member of the Township Committee, who is a Member of the House of the People or a Member of the State Legislature shall be appointed by the State Government, to be its Chairman or Executive Officer]. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1973. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' and "Province" as the case may be, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Sub-section (2-A) inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1973.
Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) 1 [State] Government may, by notification 2 [...] direct that any of the provisions of the 3 [Tamil Nadu] District Municipalities Act 1920, or of any other enactment for the time being in force elsewhere in the 4 [State] of 5 [Tamil Nadu] but not in the township, shall apply to the township to such extent and subject to such modifications, additions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, such notification may authorize- (a) the Township Committee to levy all or any of the taxes and fees which may be levied by virtue of the provisions applied to the township under this section and; (b) the Executive Officer of the Township Committee to exercise and perform in regard to the township, the powers and duties assigned to the executive authority of a municipality under the provisions applied as aforesaid, subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions and to such control, if any, as may be specified in the notification. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' and "Province" as the case may be, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "in the Fort St. George Gazette" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1973. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' and "Province" as the case may be, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Mettur Township Act, 1940_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State] Government may, by notification 2 [...] define the boundaries of the Mettur township for the purposes of this Act, and may from time to time by a like notification, alter such boundaries. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' and "Province" as the case may be, by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "in the Fort St. George Gazette" omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1973. 
