Motor Transport Workers (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 in its application to the State of Tamil Nadu. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Motor Transport Workers (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Motor Transport Workers (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2008. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Motor Transport Workers (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 1 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (Central Act 27 of 1961) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) It applies to every motor transport undertaking employing motor transport worker.".
Motor Transport Workers (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "32-A. Compounding of offences:- (1) Any offence punishable under section 29 or section 32 may, either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the Commissioner of Labour or any other officer as may be authorised in this behalf by the Commissioner of Labour, on payment, for credit to Government, of such sum as the Commissioner of Labour or the officer authorised by him may specify: Provided that the sum payable under this sub-section shall not exceed the maximum amount of fine which may be imposed for the offence so compounded. (2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no further proceeding shall be taken against him, in respect of such offence.". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
