Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act for the Registration of Medical Practitioners. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the registration of medical practitioners in the State of Tamil Nadu; it is hereby enacted as follows:
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of Section 4 shall come into force on such date as the State Government may notify in this behalf. The rest of this Act shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) The British Medical Act means Statute 21 and 22 Victoria, Chapter 90 (The Medical Act), and any Act amending the same; (2) Council means the Medical Council established by this Act; (3) hospitals, asylums, infirmaries, dispensaries, lying in-hospitals means institutions the methods of treatment carried on in which are approved by the Medical Council established by this Act; (4) Prescribed means prescribed b rules or b-laws made under this Act. (5) Registered practitioner means any person registered under the provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any enactment, rule, by-law on any other provision of law- (1) No certificate required by law to be given by a medical practitioner on officer shall be valid unless signed b a registered practitioner. (2) Except with the special sanction of the State Government no one other than a registered practitioner shall be competent to hold any appointment as physician, surgeon on other medical officer in any hospital, asylum, infirmary, dispensary on lying-in-hospital not supported entirely by voluntary contributions or as Medical Officer of health.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A Medical Council shall be established for the State of Tamil Nadu, consisting of the following fifteen members, namely: (a) One member elected by the 2 [Senate] of the University of Madras from among the members of the Faculty of Medicine of that University; (b) One member elected by the 3 [Senate] of the Andhra University from among the members of the Faculty, of Medicine of that University; (c) One member elected from amongst themselves by such members of the staff of the Medical College at Madras, as are registered practitioners; (d) One member elected from amongst themselves by such members of the staff of the Medical College at Vizagapatnam, as are registered practitioners; (e) One member elected from amongst themselves by such members of the staff of the Stanley Medical College, Madras. as are registered practitioners; (f) Seven members elected by the registered practitioners from amongst themselves; and (g) Three members nominated by the State Government. (2) In making nominations under clause (g) of sub-section (1) the State Government shall have due regard to the claims of women, of medical missions and of other groups of practitioners, representatives of whom have not been elected by the electorates referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of that sub-section. (3) The President of the Council shall be elected by the members of the Council from amongst themselves in the prescribed manner; Provided that for a period of four years from the date of the reconstitution of the Council under the Madras Medical Registration (Amendment) Act, 1938, the President shall be a person nominated by the State Government and holding office during their pleasure, and where he is not already a member, shall ex officio be a member of the Council in addition to the members specified in sub-section (1). (4) The Vice-President shall be elected by the members of the Council from amongst themselves in the prescribed manner. Substituted by the T.N. Act 16/38, Substituted for the words Academic Council by T.N. Act 4 of 1943. Permanently re-enacted by Section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting and Repealing (No. 1) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1948). Substituted for the words Academic Council by T.N. Act 4 of 1943. Permanently re-enacted by Section 2 of, and the First Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting and Repealing (No. 1) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1948).
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall be eligible to be a member of the Council unless he is a registered practitioner. 1 [...] Omitted by T.N. Act 16 of 1938.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A member of the Council other than a nominated President who is a member ex-officio, shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of his election or nomination and shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination.] Substituted by T.N. Act 16 of 1938.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A member of the Council shall be deemed to have vacated his seat: (1) on sending his resignation in writing to the President or registrar; (2) on his absence without excuse sufficient in the opinion of the Council from three consecutive meetings of the Council; (3) on his absence out of India for six consecutive months; (4) on removal of his name from the register; (5) on his being declared as an insolvent by any competent Court; (6) on expiry of the term mentioned in Section 7; [...]. 1 [(7) in case he was elected under 2 [clause (a) or clause (b)] of sub-section (1) of Section 5, also on his ceasing to be a member of the Faculty of Medicine of the University concerned]. 3 [(8) in case he was elected under clause (c), clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 and has ceased to be a member of the staff of the Medical College concerned, also on the expiry of three months from the date of such cessation or on the election of his successor, whichever occurs earlier]. Added by T.N. Act 21 of 1935. Substituted by T.N. Act 16 of 1938. Added by T.N. Act 4 of 1943 and permanently re-enacted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When the seat of any member becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be filled up by election or nomination, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 9-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Council, consisting of its President and vice-president, ex-officio, and three other members of the Council who shall be elected every year in the prescribed manner by the Council at its first meeting held in that year. (2) (a) Every member of the Executive Committee so elected shall hold office as such until the next annual election; and if any casual vacancy occurs before such election, the Executive Committee shall fill that vacancy by electing a member of the Council; Provided that if before the vacancy is so filled, a meeting of the Council has been called for, the vacancy shall be filled by the Council by electing one of its members. (b) A member of the Committee elected to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office as such only until the next annual election. (3) The Council may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, delegate any of its powers and duties of the Executive Committee. (4) The State Government shall have power to cancel any delegation made under sub-Section (3). (5) No business shall be transacted at a meeting of the Executive Committee unless at least three members thereof are present. All questions which may come before the Executive Committee shall be decided in accordance with the votes of the majority of the members present and voting at the meeting. In the case of an equality of votes, the President, vice-President or any council or presiding at the meeting shall have a casting vote.] Inserted by T.N. Act 4 of 1943 and re-enacted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Council shall appoint a registrar who shall act as secretary of the Council and who shall also act as treasurer, unless the Council shall appoint another person as treasurer. Every person so appointed shall be removable at the pleasure of the Council. (2) The Council may also employ such other persons as it may deem necessary for the purposes of this Act. (3) All persons appointed or employed under this section shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. (Central Act 45 of 1860).
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be the duty of the registrar to keep a register of medical practitioners and from time to time to revise the register and publish it in the prescribed manner. 1 [The names of the medical practitioners shall be arranged in the register in the alphabetical order, an asterisk being placed against the names of those who are entitled to vote at elections to the Medical Council of India under Section 3(1)(c) of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933]. Such register shall be deemed to be a public within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, and may be proved by a copy published in the Official Gazette. Inserted by T.N. Act 16 of 1938.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Except as otherwise provided in this Act, no business shall be transacted at a meeting of the Council unless at least seven members are present. All questions which may come before the Council shall be decided in accordance with the votes of the majority of the members present and voting at the meeting. In the case of an equality of votes the member presiding at the meeting shall have a casting vote.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of Section 14, every person who- (a) Is for the time being registered under the British Medical Act; or (b) Is possessed of any of the qualifications described in the Schedule shall be entitled to be registered on furnishing to the registrar proof of such registration or qualification whether or not such person practices or intends to practices the allopathic or any other system of medicine; Provided that the State Government may, after consulting the Council, permit the registration of any person who shall furnish to the registrar proof that he is possessed of a medical degree, diploma or certificate of any University, medical college or school approved by the Council, other than those described in the Schedule. 1 [Where such person is, at the time of his registration under this proviso, employed in a hospital, asylum, infirmary, dispensary or lying-in-hospital managed by a Mission, the State Government shall have power to direct that the registration shall be in force only so long as he continues to be employed in any such hospital, asylum, infirmary, dispensary or lying in-hospital;] Provided further that the Council may refuse to permit the registration of any person who has been convicted of any such offence as implies in the opinion of the Council a defect of character or who, after an enquiry at which opportunity has been given to the candidate to be heard in person or by pleader, has been held by the Council to have been guilty of infamous conduct in any professional respect. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1941. Permanently re-enacted T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)1 Every person who applies to be registered under this Act shall pay a registration fee of 2 [twenty rupees]. 3 [Provided that any person whose name has been registered under any Act for the registration of medical practitioners for the time being in force in any other part of [...]14 India shall be required to pay a registration fee of only five rupees if the Act aforesaid provides for the registration of persons registered under this Act without the payment of any fee or on payment of a fee not exceeding five rupees]. 4 [(2)] Every registered practitioner who applies to the registrar for registration 5 [under a new name, or] in respect of any additional qualification obtained subsequent to registration under this Act shall a fee of five rupees. 6 [(3) ***] Renumbered as sub-section (1) and (2) of section 14 by T.N. Act 10 of 1929. Substituted for the words fifteen rupees by T.N. Act 4 of 1943, re-enacted permanently by T.N. Act 7 of 1948. Added by T.N. Act 4 of 1943, re-enacted permanently by T.N. Act 7 of 1948. Renumbered as sub-section (1) and (2) of section 14 by T.N. Act 10 of 1929. Sub-section (3) inserted by T.N. Act 10 of 1929, was omitted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948. Inserted by T.N. Act 4 of 1943, re-enacted permanently by T.N. 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 14-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Registrar may, by order in writing, amend the medical register by deleting therefrom the name of any person who, by reason of the alteration of Boundaries under the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959, has ceased to reside or practise in the State of Tamil Nadu. The Registrar may likewise amend the Medical register by adding thereto the name of any person whose residence or place or practice has, by reason of the said alteration of boundaries, become part of the State of Tamil Nadu; Provided that the Registrar may, before passing an order, make such inquiry as he deems necessary. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may appeal to such authority and within such time, as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government and such authority shall pass such other order on the appeal as it thinks fit. (3) An order of the Registrar under sub-section (1), or where an appeal has been preferred against it under sub-section (2), the order of the appellate authority, shall be final. (4) The provisions of this section shall cease to be in force from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An appeal shall lie to the Council against any order of the registrar under Section 13 or Section 14. The said appeal shall be preferred within three months from the date of the order appealed against.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Council may, if it sees fit and after giving due notice to the person concerned and inquiring into his objections, if any, order that any entry in the register which shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Council to have been fraudulently or incorrectly made or brought about be cancelled or amended. (2) The Council may direct the removal altogether or for a specified period from the register of the name of any registered practitioner for the same reasons for which registration may be refused by the Council under Section 13 and the second proviso thereto shall apply to any inquiry under this section. The Council may also direct that any name so removed shall be restored; 1 [Provided that no medical practitioner shall be removed from the register on the ground of his association in any professional respect, with a qualified practitioner of India Medicine such as Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha or an unregistered practitioner if such unregistered practitioner: (a) Is possessed of any of the qualifications described in the Schedule, and (b) Is not a person whose name the Council has refused to register under the second provision to Section 13 or whose name the Council has removed from the register under this sub-section. Explanation - The expression qualified practitioner shall, for the purposes of this proviso, mean a practitioner qualified under rules made by the State Government] in this be-half. 2 [(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall relieve a registered practitioner of any obligations or code of ethics which may be imposed upon registered practitioners generally by the Council]. 3 [(4) Any registered practitioner may make an application to the Council for the deletion of his name from the medical register, and the Council may, on such application and subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government, direct such deletion. Any such practitioner may apply for such registration under Section 13]. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1932. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1932. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1932.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) An inquiry under Section 13 or Section 16 may be held by a committee consisting of three members of the Council elected for the purpose by the Council. The Council or the committee, as the case may be, may at its discretion hold such inquiry in camera. 1 [When the inquiry is held by a committee, it shall make a report to the Council which shall pass orders under Section 13 or Section 16, as the case may be]. (2) For the purpose of any such inquiry or of any appeal under Section 15, the Council or any committee thereof elected as aforesaid shall be deemed to be a Court within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and shall exercise all the powers of a Commissioner appointed under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850; and such inquiries and appeals shall be conducted, as far as may be, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5 and Sections 8 to 20 of the said Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1950. Substituted for the sentences The decision of the committee shall be deemed to be deemed to be the decision of the Council by T.N. Act 4 of 1943, re-enacted permanently by T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An appeal shall lie to the State Government against every decision of the Council under Section 13 or Section 16. Such appeal shall be preferred within three months from the date of the Councils decision.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act done in the exercise of any power conferred 1 [by or under this Act] on the State Government or the Council 2 [or the Executive Committee] or the registrar shall be questioned in any civil Court. The words by or under this Act were substituted for the words by this Act and the words or the Executive Committee were inserted by T.N. Act 4 of 1943. Permanently re-enacted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948. The words by or under this Act were substituted for the words by this Act and the words or the Executive Committee were inserted by T.N. Act 4 of 1943. Permanently re-enacted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be lawful for the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette to alter the Schedule; Provided that no medical degree, diploma or certificate granted in any British Colony or foreign country which does not recognize the medical degrees, diplomas or certificates of any Government or University in India shall be included in the Schedule.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Council shall have power to call on the governing body or authorities of any University, medical college or school included in or desirous of being included in the Schedule: (a) to furnish such reports, returns or other information as the Council may require to enable it to judge of the efficiency of the instruction given therein in medicine and surgery and midwifery; and (b) to provide facilities to enable any member of the Council deputed by the Council in this behalf to be present at the examinations held by such University, college or school. If the said body of authorities refuse to comply with any such demand, the State Government may upon report by the Council remove such University, college or school from the Schedule or refuse to include it in the Schedule.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If at any time it shall appear to the State Government that the Council has neglected to exercise or has exceeded or abused any power conferred upon it under this Act or has neglected to perform any duty imposed upon it by this Act, the State Government may notify the particulars of such neglect, excess or abuse to the Council; and, if the Council fails to remedy such neglect, excess or abuse within such time as may be fixed by the State Government in this behalf, the State Government may, for the purpose of remedying such neglect, excess or abuse, cause any of the powers and duties of the Council to be exercised and performed by such agency and for such period as the State Government may think fit
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person who falsely pretends to be a registered practitioner shall, whether any person is actually deceived by such pretence or not, be liable to be punished on conviction by a Presidency Magistrate or a magistrate of the first class with fine that may extend to three hundred rupees.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may after previous publication make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the State Government may make rules,- (i) For the election of members to the Council under 1 [Section 5]; (ii) For the 2 [election and term of office of the President and vice-president] of the Council; 3 [(ii-a) for the election of the members of the Executive Committee]; (iii) To regulate the procedure at an inquiry held under Section 13 or Section 16; (iv) For the institution, hearing and disposal of appeal under Section 15 or Section 18; (v) For the compilation and publication of the register; (vi) For the disposal of fees received under this Act. (2) The Council may, with the previous sanction of the State Government make by-laws; (i) for the convening of meetings of the Council 4 [and of the Executive Committee]; (ii) For the conduct of business at such meetings; (iii) For the appointment, control, pay and allowances of the establishment employed under Section 10. Substituted for the expression Sections 5 and 6 by T.N. Act 16 of 1938. Substituted for the words election of the vice-president, by T.N. Act 16 of 1938. Inserted by T.N. Act 4 of 1943, re-enacted permanently by T.N. Act 7 of 1948. Added by T.N. Act 4 of 1943 and permanent re-enacted by T.N. Act 7 of 1948.
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [...]
Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Schedule 1 [(1) The degree of Doctor, Bachelor and Licentiate of Medicine and Master, Bachelor and Licentiate of Surgery of the University of Madras, the Andhra University, the Osmania University and the Universities of Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta, Lahore, Lucknow, Mysore and Rangoon.] (2) A diploma or certificate granted by any Government in India 2 [the Government of Burma] or the Government of Ceylon to any person trained in a medical college or school declaring him to be qualified to practise medicine, surgery and midwifery. 3 [(3) The diploma of Fellow and Member and the Licentiate certificate granted by the State Medical Faculty of Bengal and the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Bombay]. 4 [(4) A diploma granted by the Government of Hyderabad or of Andhra Pradesh] to any person trained in the Hyderabad Medical School declaring him to be qualified to practise medicine, surgery and midwifery. 5 [(5) The diploma of Licensed Medical Practitioner granted by His Highness the Maharaja of Mysores Medical School 6 [or the University of Mysore]. Substituted by the Notification No. 1451, published at the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 20th November 1934. Inserted by the A.O. of 1937. Added by Notification No. 26 published at Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 19th December 1916. Added by Notification No. 27 published at Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 26th March 1918. Added by Notification No. 15, published at Part 1 of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 6th January 1925. Inserted by the Health Department Notification No. 297, published at Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 22nd July 1953. 
