Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 An Act further to amend the laws relating to the Municipal Corporations and the Municipalities in the State of Tamil Nadu. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 307, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Wednesday, September 7, 2011, Aavani21, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042 The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 6th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:- Statement of Object The. next ordinary election to the Municipal Corporations, Municipalities and town Panchayats have to be conducted before 24th day of October 2011. The question of fixation of ward strength with reference to 2001 population census figures and consequent delimitation of wards was taken up by the Commissioners of Municipal Corporations and Executive officers of Municipalities and Town Panchayats. However, the delimitation work has yet to be completed in respect of Tirunelveli and Salem Municipal Corporations and in respect of majority of Municipalities and in all town Panchayats in this State. As such, the delimitation work cannot be completed within the time available before 25th October 2011. The Government have, therefore, decided to conduct the said ordinary election, based on the existing territorial area of the divisions or wards, total number of wards and total number of Councillors, or members to be returned from such wards/divisions, in respect of urban local bodies for which delimitation work has not yet been completed and to amend relevant urban local bodies Acts, suitably in this regard. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decisions. K.P. MUNUSAMY, Minister for Municipal Administration and Rural Development. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 307, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Wednesday, September 7, 2011, Aavani21, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042 The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 6th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 6 of the Tirunelveli City Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1994), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "6-A. Special provision relating to election:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the 1981 Act or the rules made or orders issued thereunder, for the first election to the council, to be held immediately after the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011, the territorial area of the divisions of the city, the total number of divisions and the total number of councillors to be returned from such divisions shall be the same as they exist on the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 6 of the Salem City Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 1994), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "6-A. Special provision relating to election:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the 1981 Act or the rules made or orders issued thereunder, for the first election to the council, to be held immediately after the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011, the territorial area of the divisions of the city, the total number of divisions and the total number of councillors to be returned from such divisions shall be the same as they exist on the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 43-AA of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "43-AAA. Special provision relating to election:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made or orders issued under this Act, for the first election to th^ municipal councils except the municipal councils of Pudukottai, Karur, Kancheepuram, Hosur/Namakkal, Villupuram, Tirupathur and Nagercoil municipalities, to be held immediately after the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011, the territorial area of the wards of the municipal councils, the total number of wards and the total number of councillors or members, as the case may be, to be returned from such wards shall be the same as they exist on the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2011.". (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government. Law Department. 
