Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 2 An Act further to amend the laws relating to the Municipal Corporations and the Municipalities in the State of Tamil Nadu. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object At present, differently abled persons with total disability in one or both the hands l)gs, spastics, totally dumb or deaf persons or totally blind persons alone are exempted from the payment of profession tax, as per the provisions of the Urban Local Bodies Acts. In the absence of specific definition of disability in the said Acts, all tie differently abled persons are not in a position to avail the said benefit. The Government have, therefore, decided that all differently abled persons shall be exempted from the payment of profession tax and in order to achieve the same, the 3ovemment have decided to amend the Urban Local Bodies Acts so as to exempt persons with disability as defined in the Persons with Disabilities (Equal ortunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1 996) and also dumb persons from the tax on profession. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. K. P. MUNUSAMY, Minister for Municipal Administration and Rural Development. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. LA. Bill No. 16 of 2012, published in T. N. Govt Gazette, Extra., dated 2.05.2012. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 31st May 2012 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 138-H of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919), for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) persons with disability, suffering from not less than forty per cent of such disability, as certified by a Registered Medical Practitioner in the service of the Government not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon. Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause, "disability" shall have the same meaning assigned to it under clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1 of 1996) and also includes dumbness.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 169-H of the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1971), for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) persons with disability, suffering from not less than forty per cent of such disability, as certified by a Registered Medical Practitioner in the service of the Government not below the rank of a Civil .Surgeon. Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause, "disability" shall have the same meaning assigned to it under clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1of 1996) and also includes dumbness.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 169-H of the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1981), for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) persons with disability, suffering from not less than forty per cent of such disability, as certified by a Registered Medical Practitioner in the service of the Government not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon. Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause, "disability" shall have the same meaning assigned to it under clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1 of 1996) and also includes dumbness.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 124-J of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920), for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(c) persons with disability, suffering from not less than forty per cent of such disability, as certified by a Registered Medical Practitioner in the service of the Government not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon. Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause, "disability" shall have the same meaning assigned to it under clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1 of 1996) and also includes dumbness.". (By order of the Governor) G. Jayachandran, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
