Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the laws relating to the Municipal Corporations and the Municipalities in the State of Tamil Nadu. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The 'Digital Banners' are presently covered under the definition of 'Hoarding' in the Urban Local Bodies Acts. As the digital banners and placards are used for specific purpose for a specified period, the Government have decided that a separate provision may be made in respect of digital banners and placards and in order to effectively regulate the erection of digital banners and placards, suitable provisions for obtaining prior permission from the authorities, period of display, removal of such unauthorized structures, safe and proper removal and disposal of such materials after the expiry of the period for which permission has been granted, etc., may be made in the Urban Local Bodies Acts. Accordingly, it has been decided to amend the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919), the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1971), the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1981) and the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920) suitably for the above purpose. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. M.K. STALIN, Deputy Chief Minister. MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION. New section 326-BB proposed to be inserted in the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919) by clause 3 and section 326-G proposed to be amended in that Act by clause 5, of the Bill; new section 410-BB proposed to be inserted in the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1971) by clause 10 and section 410-G proposed to be amended in that Act by clause 12, of the Bill; new section 410-BB proposed to be inserted in the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1981) by clause 17 and section 410-G proposed to be amended in that Act by clause 19, of the Bill; new section 285-BB proposed to be inserted in the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920) by clause 24 and section 285-G proposed to be amended in that Act by clause 26, of the Bill, authorise the Government to make rules for the purposes specified therein. 2. The powers delegated are normal and not of an exceptional character. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 326-A of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919) (hereafter in this Part referred to as the 1919 Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "326-A. Definitions:- In this Chapter,- (a) "hoarding" means any screen of boards other than digital banner and placard, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting advertisement, including the frame work or other support, erected, wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure, visible to public wholly or partly; (b) "digital banner" means any screen of boards, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology; (c) "placard" means any screen of boards, the size of which is not exceeding eight feet in height and four feet in breadth, at any place, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 326-B of the 1919 Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "326-BB. Regulation of erection of digital banners and placards:- (1) No digital banner or placard for exhibiting any advertisement or information for a period not exceeding six days shall be erected by any person without obtaining prior permission from the District Collector. (2) Every application for permission under sub-section (1), shall be made, in writing, to the District Collector fifteen days prior to the date of erection of digital banner or placard in such form, containing such particulars and with such fee, as may be prescribed. (3) The permission for erection of digital banner or placard may be granted for such purpose and for such period, not exceeding six days and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the District Collector. (4) The District Collector may refuse to grant permission for the reasons to be recorded in writing. (5) Every person who has erected the digital banner or placard after obtaining the permission, shall, on expiry of such permission remove the Same and dispose it, without causing any hazard to health or environment, in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 326-E of the 1919 Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "326-E. Removal of unauthorized hoarding, digital banner or placard:- Any hoarding erected without a licence or any digital banner or placard erected without a permission, shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without giving any notice.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 326-G of the 1919 Act, for the expression "hoarding" in four places where it occurs, the expression "hoarding or digital banner or placard" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 326-H of the 1919 Act, in sub-section (1), after the expression "suspending a licence", the expression "or refusing to give permission" shall be inserted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu To section 326-I of the 1919 Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that whoever erects any digital banner or placard without the permission of the District Collector, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 326-J of the 1919 Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression, "hoardings", the expression "hoardings, digital banners or placards" shall be substituted; (2) section 326-J, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section; (3) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Where the District Collector is satisfied that the erection of any digital banner or placard visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic, he shall not grant permission under section 326-BB.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 410-A of the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1971)(hereafter in this Part referred to as the 1971 Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "410-A. Definitions:- In this Chapter,- (a) "hoarding" means any screen of boards other than digital banner and placard, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting advertisement, including the frame work or other support, erected, wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure, visible to public wholly or partly; (b) "digital banner" means any screen of boards, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology; (c) "placard" means any screen of boards, the size of which is not exceeding eight feet In height and four feet in breadth, at any place, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 410-B of the 1971 Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "410-BB. Regulation of erection of digital banners and placards:- (1) No digital banner or placard for exhibiting any advertisement or information for a period not exceeding six days shall be erected by any person without obtaining prior permission from the District Collector. (2) Every application for permission under sub-section (1) shall be made, in writing to the District Collector fifteen days prior to the date of erection of digital banner or placard in such form, containing such particulars and with such fee, as may be prescribed. (3) The permission for erection of digital banner or placard may be granted for such purpose and for such period, not exceeding six days and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the District Collector. (4) The District Collector may refuse to grant permission for the reasons to be recorded in writing. (5) Every person who has erected the digital banner or placard after obtaining the permission, shall, on expiry of such permission remove the same and dispose it, without causing any hazard to health or environment, in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 410-E of the 1971 Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "410-E. Removal of unauthorized hoarding, digital banner or placard:- Any hoarding erected without a licence or any digital banner or placard erected without a permission, shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without giving any notice.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-G of the 1971 Act, for the expression "hoarding" in four places where it occurs, the expression "hoarding or digital banner or placard" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-H of the 1971 Act, in sub-section (1), after the expression "suspending a licence", the expression "or refusing to give permission" shall be inserted
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu To section 410-I of the 1971 Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that whoever erects any digital banner or placard without the permission of the District Collector, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-J of the 1971 Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression, "hoardings", the expression "hoardings, digital banners or placards" shall be substituted; (2) section 410-J, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section; (3) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Where the District Collector is satisfied that the erection of any digital banner or placard visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic, he shall not grant permission under section 410-BB.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 410-A of the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1981) (hereafter in this Part referred to as the 1981 Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "410-A. Definitions:- In this Chapter,- (a) "hoarding" means any screen of boards other than digital banner and placard, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting advertisement, including the frame work or other support, erected, wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure, visible to public wholly or partly; (b) "digital banner" means any screen of boards, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology; (c) "placard" means any screen of boards, the size of which is not exceeding eight feet in height and four feet in breadth, at any place, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 410-B of the 1981 Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "410-BB. Regulation of erection of digital banners and placards:- (1) No digital banner or placard for exhibiting any advertisement or information for a period not exceeding six days shall be erected by any person without obtaining prior permission from the District Collector. (2) Every application for permission under sub-section (1) shall be made, in writing to the District Collector fifteen days prior to the date of erection of digital banner or placard, in such form, containing such particulars and with such fee, as may be prescribed. (3) The permission for erection of digital banner or placard may be granted for such purpose and for such period, not exceeding six days and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the District Collector. (4) The District Collector may refuse to grant permission for the reasons to be recorded in writing. (5) Every person who has erected the digital banner or placard after obtaining the permission, shall, on expiry of such permission remove the same and dispose it, without causing any hazard to health or environment, in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 410-E of the 1981 Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "410-E. Removal of unauthorized hoarding, digital banner or placard:- Any hoarding erected without a licence or any digital banner or placard erected without a permission, shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without giving any notice.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-G of the 1981 Act, for the expression "hoarding" in four places where it occurs, the expression "hoarding or digital banner or placard" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-H of the 1981 Act, in sub-section (1), after the expression "suspending a licence", the expression "or refusing to give permission" shall be inserted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu To section 410-I of the 1981 Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that whoever erects any digital banner or placard without the permission of the District Collector, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 410-J of the 1981 Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression, "hoardings", the expression "hoardings, digital banners or placards" shall be substituted; (2) section 410-J, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section; (3) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Where the District Collector is satisfied that the erection of any digital banner or placard visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic, he shall not grant permission under section 410-BB.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 285-A of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920) (hereafter in this Part referred to as the 1920 Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "285-A. Definitions:- In this Chapter,- (a) "hoarding" means any screen of boards other than digital banner and placard, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting advertisement, including the frame work or other support, erected, wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure, visible to public wholly or partly; (b) "digital banner" means any screen of boards, at any place, whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology; (c) "placard" means any screen of boards, the size of which is not exceeding eight feet in height and four feet in breadth, at any place, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for exhibiting any advertisement or any information in connection with marriage, religious ceremony, birth or death anniversary or meeting or conference of any political, religious or communal organization, designed and printed using electronic printing technology.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 285-B of the 1920 Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "285-BB. Regulation of erection of digital banners and placards:- (1) No digital banner or placard for exhibiting any advertisement or information for a period not exceeding six days shall be erected by any person without obtaining prior permission from the District Collector. (2) Every application for permission under sub-section (1), shall be made, in writing, to the District Collector fifteen days prior to the date of erection of digital banner or placard in such form, containing such particulars and with such fee, as may be prescribed. (3) The permission for erection of digital banner or placard may be granted for such purpose and for such period, not exceeding six days and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the District Collector. (4) The District Collector may refuse to grant permission for the reasons to be recorded in writing. (5) Every person who has erected the digital banner or placard after obtaining the permission, shall, on expiry of such permission remove the same and dispose it, without causing any hazard to health or environment, in such manner as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 285-E of the 1920 Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "285-E. Removal of unauthorized hoarding, digital banner or placard:- Any hoarding erected without a licence or any digital banner or placard erected without a permission, shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without giving any notice.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 285-G of the 1920 Act, for the expression "hoarding" in four places where it occurs, the expression "hoarding or digital banner or placard" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 285-H of the 1920 Act, in sub-section (1), after the expression "suspending a licence", the expression "or refusing to give permission" shall be inserted.
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu To section 285-I of the 1920 Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that whoever erects any digital banner or placard without the permission of the District Collector, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.".
Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 285-J of the 1920 Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression, "hoardings", the expression "hoardings, digital banners or placards" shall be substituted; (2) section 285-J, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section; (3) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Where the District Collector is satisfied that the erection of any digital banner or placard visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic, he shall not grant permission under section 285-BB ". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
