Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the registration of nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais in the State of Tamil Nadu. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the registration of nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais in the State of Tamil Nadu; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926. (2) it shall extend to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu. 1 (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. The Act came into force on the 14th February 1928
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) 'Council' means 'the Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Council established under this Act'. (b) 'Dhai' means 'an untrained woman practicing the profession of midwifery'. (c) 'Nurse' includes a male nurse. (d) 'Prescribed' means 'prescribed by rules or by-laws made under this Act. 1 [(e) 'Register' means a register maintained under this Act and 'registered' means registered or deemed to be registered under this Act]. Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A Council, called the Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Council, shall be constituted for the State of Tamil Nadu, consisting of- 1 [(a) the Director of Medical Services; (b) three officers of the Public Health Department of Government, nominated by the State Government of whom one shall be nurse;] 2 [(bb) an officer of the Medical Department of Government, nominated by the State Government]; 3 [(c)] the 4 [Dean] of the General Hospital, Madras; 5 [(d)] the Superintendent of the Government Hospital for Women and Children Madras; 6 [(e)] one Registered Medical Practitioner nominated by the State Government; 7 [(f)] 8 [one Registered Medical Practitioner], nominated by the Medical Council established under sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914; Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1914. 9 [(g) the 10 [Nursing] Superintendent of the General Hospital, Madras, and the 11 [Nursing] Superintendent of the Government Hospital for Women and Children, Madras]; 12 [(h)] 13 [two registered nurses] elected by the registered nurses and one registered midwives elected by the registered midwives in the manner prescribed: 14 [...] 15 [(i) one member, being a person registered under this Act, elected in the manner prescribed by such of the members of the Trained Nurses' Association of India as are so registered; 16 [(j)] one member, being a person registered under this Act, elected in the manner prescribed by such of the members of the Nurses' Auxiliary of the Christian Medical Association of India (South India Branch) as are so registered; and] 17 [(k)] two non-officials, not of the classes referred to above, one of whom shall be a woman, nominated by the [State Government]. 18 [The Director of Medical Services] shall be the President of the Council. 19 [...] (2) The members of the Council other than members ex-officio shall hold office for a term of three years 20 [...] "Provided that for a period of one year from the commencement of this Act, the two matrons referred to in clause(f) shall be nominated by the Surgeon General, and the nurse and the midwife referred to in clause(g) shall be nominated by the Local Government". (3) If the place of a member of the Council becomes vacant by the expiration of his term of office or by death, or by resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided for the filling of the vacancy by sub-section (1). (4) An outgoing member of the Council shall be eligible for re-election or re-nomination. (5) The powers of the Council may exercised notwithstanding any vacancy in the Council. Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60 Inserted by TN Act 26 of 60 and re-enacted permanently by TN Act 7 of 1948 Re-lettered by TN Act 7 of 1934 Substituted by TN Act 26 of 1960 Re-lettered by TN Act 7 of 1934 Re-lettered by TN Act 7 of 1934 Re-lettered by TN Act 7 of 1934 Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60 Substituted by TN Act 16 of 1941 and re-enacted by TN Act 7 of 1948 Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60 Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60 Re-lettered by TN Act 7 of 1934 Substituted by TN Act 16 of 1941 and re-enacted by TN Act 7 of 1948 Omitted by TN Act 7 of 1934 Inserted by TN Act 7 of 1934 Omitted by TN Act 16 of 1941 and re-enacted by TN Act 7 of 1948 Added by TN Act 7 of 1948 Substituted by TN Act 26 of 60 Omitted by TN Act 7 of 1934 Omitted by TN Act 7 of 1934
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Council shall cease to be a member unless restored by the Council at its next meeting.
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Council shall maintain a register of nurses, midwives, health visitors and auxiliary nurse-midwives and in such register shall be entered the names of all nurses, midwives, health visitors and auxiliary nurse-midwives, who have undergone the courses of training and passed the examinations and fulfill the conditions prescribed. (2) The register referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of such parts and shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by TN Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 5-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any person registered: under the Travancore-Cochin Nurses and Midwives Act, 1953 (Travancore Cochin Act 10 of 1953), who, immediately before the first day of November 1956, was holding any appointment as nurse or midwife in any hospital, dispensary or infirmary not supported entirely by voluntary contributions in the transferred territory or who, immediately before the said day, was practicing as nurse or midwife in that territory shall, subject to the provisions of Section 7, be deemed to be registered as a nurse or, as the case may be, a midwife under this Act. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression 'transferred territory' shall mean the Kanyakumari district and the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district. (2) The Council shall, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, enter in the register referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 5 the name of any person, who, under sub-section (1) of this section, is deemed to be registered under this Act. Inserted by TN Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Council shall maintain a register of dhais, admission to which shall be regulated by such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be prescribed, the Council may refuse to enter the name of 1 [any nurse, midwife, health visitor, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] in the register or remove the name of 2 [any nurse, midwife, health visitor, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] from the register or restore thereto the name of 3 [any nurse, midwife, health visitor, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] so removed. Substituted by T.N. Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by T.N. Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by T.N. Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 7-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Council may, by order in writing, amend the register of nurses, register of midwives or register of dhais by deleting there from the name of any person who, by reason of the alteration of boundaries under the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 (Central Act 56 of 1959), has ceased to reside or practice in the State of Tamil Nadu. The Council may likewise amend the said register by adding thereto the name of any person whose residence or place of practice has, by reason of the said alteration of boundaries become art of the State of Tamil Nadu; Provided that the Council may, before passing an order, make such inquiry as it deems necessary. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may appeal to such authority and within such time, as may be specified in this behalf by the State Government and such authority shall pass such order on the appeal as it thinks fit. (3) An order of the Council under sub-section (1), or where an appeal has been preferred against it under sub-section (2) the order of the appellate authority shall be final. (4) The provisions of this section shall cease to be in force from such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint.
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) 1 [Any nurse, midwife, health visitor, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] aggrieved by an order of the Council under Section 7 may, within three months from the date on which notice of such order is given, appeal against the order of the Council. (2) Such appeal shall be heard by a Tribunal of three persons selected in rotation- (a) One from a panel of not less than six persons of not less than twelve years experience as a Magistrate or Civil Judge nominated by the State Government]; (b) One from a panel of not less than six registered medical practitioners selected in the prescribed manner by the Medical Council established under sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914; and (c) One from a panel of not less than six registered nurses holding both general and maternity certificates and selected in the prescribed manner by the registered 2 [nurses, midwives, health visitors and auxiliary nurse-midwives]. (3) The order of the Tribunal shall be final. Substituted by T.N. Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by T.N. Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Council to approve any institution or person under any rules relating to training made under this Act, may appeal against the refusal to the State Government and the State Government may give such directions as they think proper and the Council shall comply with the directions so given.
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Except with the special sanction of the State Government, no person shall, after the expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act, be competent to hold any appointment as nurse, midwife, health visitor or auxiliary nurse-midwife in any hospital, dispensary, or infirmary not supported entirely by voluntary contributions unless such person is registered as 1 [nurse, midwife, health visitor or auxiliary nurse-midwife] under this Act. 2 [Explanation - In relation to a health visitor or auxiliary nurse-midwife, the expression 'commencement of this Act' in this sub-section shall be construed as referring to the date of the coming into force of the Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives (Amendment) Act, 1960]. (2) After the expiry of one year from the commencement of this Act, no subsidy shall be paid by the State Government or by a local authority to any medical practitioner who employs a dhai other than a registered dhai. Substituted for the words "nurses or Midwives" by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Added by section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, after previous publication, make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act not inconsistent therewith (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, they may make rules- (a) regulating the conduct of the elections of members of the council; (b) regulating the conditions of admission to the register; 1 [(bb) prescribing the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Council shall enter in the register referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 5, the name of any person under sub-section (2) of Section 5-A;] (c) regulating the conduct of any examinations which may be prescribed as a condition of admission to the register, and any matters ancillary to or connected with such examinations; (d) prescribing the causes for which, the conditions under which and the manner in which, the 2 [nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais] may be removed from the register and the procedure for restoration to the register of 3 [nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais] who have been removed there from; (e) regulating the selection of the panels and the constitution of the Tribunal specified in sub-section (2) of Section 8 and the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal; (f) prescribing the fees to be paid in respect of an appeal under this Act; (g) determining the manner in which all fees levied under this Act and all moneys received by the Council shall be applied for the purposes of this Act. 4 [(3) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after they are made, be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and shall be subject to such modifications by way of amendment or repeal as the Legislature may make either in the same session or in the next session.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted for the words "nurses, midwives and dhais" by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted for the words "nurses, midwives and dhais" by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Added by TN Act 26/60
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Council may make by-laws not in-consistent with this Act or any other law- (a) for regulating the compilation, maintenance and publication of the register; (b) for regulating and supervising the practice of their profession by registered 1 [nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais]; (c) for regulating the publication of the names of registered 2 [nurses, midwives, health visitors, auxiliary nurse-midwives and dhais] and their residences; (d) for prescribing the rates of fees to be charged for examinations prescribed for admission to the register and for registration; (e) for regulating the summoning of meetings of the Council and its proceedings; and (f) for regulating the expenditure of the Council and providing for the audit thereof. (2) No by-law made by the Council shall come into force until it has been confirmed by the State Government with or without modification or amendment. (3) Every such by-law shall, when so confirmed, be published. Substituted by TN ACT 26/60 Substituted by TN ACT 26/60
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 12-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Save as provided in this Act or the rules or by-laws made there under, no person shall confer, grant or issue or hold himself out as entitled to confer, grant or issue any degree, diploma, license, certificate or other document stating or implying that the holder, grantee or recipient is qualified to practice the profession of a registered nurse, midwife, health visitor, auxiliary or dhai. (2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees; and if the person so contravening is an association, every member of such association who knowingly and willfully authorizes or permits the contravention, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any person who- (a) dishonestly makes use of any certificate of registration issued under the provisions of this Act to him or to any other person, (b) procures or attempts to procure registration under the provisions of this Act by making or producing or causing to be made or produced any false or fraudulent declaration, certificate or representation whether in writing or otherwise, or (c) willfully makes or causes to be made any false representation in any matter relating to the register or the certificates issued under the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees.
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person, who, not being a 1 [registered nurse or health visitor] takes or uses the name or title of 2 [registered nurse or health visitor] or uses any name, title, description, uniform, badge or signboard, with the intention that it may be believed or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed that such person is a 3 [registered nurse or health visitor] shall be punishable with fine not exceeding one hundred rupees. (2) Any person, who, not being a 4 [registered midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] takes or uses the name or title of 5 [registered midwife, auxiliary nurse midwife or dhai] or uses any name, title, description, uniform, badge or signboard, with the intention that it may be believed or with the knowledge that it is likely to be believed that such person is a 6 [registered midwife, auxiliary nurse-midwife or dhai] shall be punishable with fine not exceeding fifty rupees. Substituted Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1960
Tamil Nadu Nurses and Midwives Act, 1926_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No magistrate other than a Presidency Magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall take cognizance of or try any offence under this Act. 
