Tamil Nadu Open University (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Open University Act, 2002 Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to L.A. Bill No.4 of 2006 (Published in TNGG, Extra-ord No.18,IV-1,dt.21-1-06) is reproduced below:- Many Laws governing Universities in this State contain a provision enabling the Vice-Chancellor to be eligible for re-appointment for a further periof of three years. But, in the case of Tamil Nadu Open University, the Vice-Chancellor shall not be eligible for a second term. It has been decided to amend the Tamil Nadu Open University Act, 2002 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 2002) so as to enable the Vice-Chancellor to be eligible for re-appointment for a further period of three years. It has also been decided that a provision shall be made to enable the Syndicate of the University to make requisite arrangements for exercising the powers and performing the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor whenever temporary vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-Chancellor. 2. The Government have decided to amend sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 10 of the said Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 2002 suitably for the purpose in view. 3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decisions. C.Ve. Shanmugam, Minister for Education and Commercial Taxes. V. Rajaraman, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Open University (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Open University (Amendment) Act, 2006.
Tamil Nadu Open University (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 10of the Tamil Nadu Open University Act, 2002 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 2002),- (1) in sub-section (3), for the expression "shall not be eligible for a second term", the expression "shall be eligible for re-appointment for a further period of three years" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (4), for the expression "the senior-most Professor of the University shall exercise the powers and perform the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor", the expression "the Syndicate shall, as soon as possible, make the requisite arrangements for exercising the powers and performing the current duties of the Vice-Chancellor" shall be substituted. (By Order of the Governor) L. Jayasankaran, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
