Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries Act, 1951. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The Government have decided to,- (a) enhance the salary of each of the Members of the Legislative Assembly from Rs. 3,000/- to Rs.8,000/- per mensem; (b) enhance the vehicle allowance of each of the Members of the Legislative Assembly from Rs. 5,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- per mensem; (c) enhance the pension to the former Members of the Legislative Assembly or of the Legislative Council from Rs. 8,000/- to Rs. 10,000/- per mensem; (d) remove the existing classification in the matter of family pension paid in accordance with the period of services rendered by the former members of the Legislature and to enhance the family pension to the legal heirs of those former Members at a uniform rate of Rs. 5,000/- per mensem; (e) to make eligible for accommodation free of charge and also to provide medical treatment to the legal heirs of the deceased Members of the Legislative Assembly or of the Legislative Council in the hospitals maintained by the State Government. 2. The Government have also decided to enhance the aforesaid allowances and salary with effect from 1 st April 2009. 3. To give effect to the above decisions, the Government have decided to amend the Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XX of 1951), suitably. 4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decisions. M. KARUNANIDHI, Chief Minister. FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM The Bill when enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State. The additional expenditure to be incurred as a result of the proposed legislation will be approximately Rs. 7,49,76,000/- (Rupees Seven crores forty nine lakhs and seventy six thousand only) per annum. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April 2009.
Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 12 of the Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XX of 1951) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (1) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the expression "three thousand rupees per mensem", the expression "eight thousand rupees per mensem" shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(4) Subject to such conditions and during such period as may be determined by rules made by the State Government,- (a) every Member referred to in sub-section (1) and members of his family; (b) every person who had been a Member of the Legislative Assembly or of the Legislative Council or of both, but ceased to be such Member at any time and members of his family; and (c) the members of the family of the deceased Member of the Legislative Assembly or of the Legislative Council or of both; shall be entitled free of charge to accommodation in the hospitals maintained by the State Government and also to medical treatment "; (3) in sub-section (4-E), for the expression "rupees five thousand per mensem", the expression "rupees twenty thousand per mensem" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Payment of Salaries (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 12-B of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1),- (a) for the expression "eight thousand rupees per mensem", the expression "ten thousand rupees per mensem" shall be substituted; (b) the expression "for one term" at the end shall be omitted; (c) the second proviso shall be omitted; (2) sub-section (2-BB) including the Explanation thereunder, sub-section (2-C) and sub-section (2-CC) including the Explanation thereunder shall be omitted: (3) the Explanation -I shall be omitted. (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
