Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the Inspection and Licensing of Places of Public Resort and Entertainment. Whereas it is expedient to provide for the inspection of places of public resort and entertainment, and for the licensing of the same by competent authority; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888. (2) (a) It shall come into force at once in every municipality constituted or deemed to have been constituted under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 ( Tamil Nadu Act 5 of 1920). (b) The State Government may, by notification, extend all or any of the provisions of this Act to any other local area in the State except the City of Chennai from such date as may be specified in such notification and may cancel or modify any such notification. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- (a) "building" includes any house, hut, shed or roofed enclosure; (b) 'executive authority' means the executive authority as defined in clause (8-C) of Section 3 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act 5 of 1920). "Chairman of a Municipal Council" means the Chairman of a Municipal Council appointed under Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1884, 2 or other Act relating to District Municipalities in the State of Tamil Nadu for the time being in force. "Magistrate" means a Magistrate appointed under the Code of Criminal Procedure3 . "Building" includes any house, hut, shed or roofed enclosure. Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960. Now Tamil Nadu Act 5 of 1920. Now Central Act 2 of 1974.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any area in which this Act is in force, no enclosed place or building, whether permanent or temporary, shall be used for public resort or entertainment in the following cases, unless a licence has been obtained in respect thereof under this Act:- (a) In every case where the area within the enclosed place or occupied by the building is five hundred square feet or more; (b) In case the area aforesaid is less than five hundred square feet, if the place or building is situated within the jurisdiction of a municipal council or 2 [of a panchayat classified as a Class I Panchayat under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the 3 [Tamil Nadu] Village Panchayats Act, 1950 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1950) or as a town-panchayat under the 4 [Tamil Nadu] Panchayats Act, 1958 (35 of 1958) and the public are allowed to take part in any game or competition therein]. This section was substituted for the original section by S.2 of the Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort (Amendment) Act, 1949 (Tamil Nadu Act 38 of 1949). Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When any person desires to obtain a licence to use any enclosed place or building for public resort or entertainment, or to construct any enclosure or building for such purpose, he shall send an application to the authority named in Section 5 setting forth the name of the owner of the place or building, its situation, size and description, the material of which the enclosure or building is made or proposed to be made, whether it is or is proposed to be permanent or temporary, and the purpose for which it is proposed to be used.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 4A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no application for licence under Section 4 shall be entertained unless the following conditions are complied with by the applicant, namely:- (a) the applicant shall give an undertaking in writing to the authority or officer referred to in Section 5 that the enclosed place or building shall not be used for the purpose of displaying any indecent or obscene play or dance of other like performance or for the activities such as ring-throwing, arrow or pin-throwing or any other activity of a gambling nature as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf; (b) the applicant shall, in the undertaking referred to in clause (a) agree to abide with the provisions of the law relating to the maintenance of law and order and decency in public places; (c) the applicant shall along with the undertaking referred to in clause (a) also furnish security deposit for such sum as specified in the Schedule and in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf, for the due observance of the terms and conditions laid down in the said undertaking or the licence to be granted and in the event of non-compliance with any of the terms and conditions of the said undertaking or licence, the sum so deposited as security deposit shall be forfeited to the State Government: Provided that no such forfeiture of the security deposit shall be made unless the applicant had been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard: Provided further that the forfeiture of the security deposit under this clause shall not be a bar for proceeding against the holder of the licence under the provisions of Section 9.] Section 4-A inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 54 of 1981.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Such application shall be made to the 2 [executive authority], if the enclosed place or building is within a municipal town, and in every other case 3 [to any revenue officer not below the rank of Tahsildar] having jurisdiction over the local area in which the place or building is situated. Please see in this connection S.198 of the Tamil Nadu District Boards Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1920), according to which when the Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1888), is extended to a non-panchayat area, the authority to whom application for a licence shall be made and who may grant or refuse the licence shall be the executive authority of the District Board. Similarly under S.94 of the Tamil Nadu Village Panchayats Act, 1950 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1950), when the Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1888) is extended to any village or part thereof the said authority shall be the executive authority of the Panchayat. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Upon the receipt of any such application, the authority to whom application is made shall inspect the place or building in respect of which a licence is required, and may call on the applicant, by notice in writing, to make any alteration or addition in the material or arrangement of the enclosure or building, or in the precautions for the safety of the public to be assembled therein, and may refuse to grant a licence until the alteration or addition is made.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [If the authority, after consulting such authority or officer as the State Government may from time to time by rule direct, is satisfied]- (a) that no objection, arising from its situation ownership, or the purpose proposed exists. (b) that no objection, arising from its situation, ownership, or the purpose proposed exists, 2 [(c) that the applicant has duly given the undertaking and furnished the security deposit referred to in Section 4-A] he shall give to the applicant a written licence, signed by him, specifying the enclosure or building and the purpose for which it is to be used. Such licence shall be in such form and subject to such fee and conditions as the 3 [State Government] may from time to time by rule direct. If the authority is not satisfied as aforesaid, he may refuse to grant a licence, recording his reasons for refusal in writing. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1965. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 54 of 1981. The words 'Provincial Government' were substituted for the words 'Governor-in-Council' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'Estate' was substituted for 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every licence granted under this Act shall state the period for which it is to continue in force, and shall cease to be in force on the expiration of that period.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) Any authority granting a licence under this Act may, for reasons recorded in writing, revoke or suspend the same when he has reason to believe- (a) that the licence has been fraudulently obtained; (b) that the enclosed place or building has been used for other purposes of public resort or entertainment than that for which the licence was granted; (c) that the place or building can no longer be safely used for the purpose for which the licence was granted. 2 [(d) that any condition of the licence 3 [or the undertaking referred to in Section 4-A] has been contravened.] 4 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), in so far as it relates to suspension of any licence granted under this Act, where a prima facie case has been made out, the authority may, at any time and for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend any licence granted under this Act in such a case, no show cause notice is necessary.] Section 9 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section and sub-section (2) added by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1981. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 54 of 1981. Section 9 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section and sub-section (2) added by Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1981.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any applicant for a licence under this Act may appeal from any order made under Section 6, 7 or 9 unless such order has been made by the 1 [Collector] of the district. (2) The appeal shall be made within thirty days from the day on which the applicant received the order appealed against. (3) In a municipal town the appeal shall lie to the Municipal Council, and in every other local area to the 2 [Revenue Divisional Officer or if the original order was made by a Revenue Divisional Officer to the Collector of the district.] (4) The appellate authority shall have the same power to inspect and to require alteration or addition in the enclosed place or building as the authority to whom application is made under Section 5, and may either grant or withhold the licence or make such other order as it thinks fit. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960. Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be lawful for 1 [any Revenue Officer not below the rank of a Tahsildar or any Officer of Police], in charge of a station or of higher rank than head constable to enter at any time any enclosure or building for which licences is required under this Act, to inspect the licence if any has been issued, and, if there is no licence or if the conditions of the licence are not observed and if he sees reason to apprehend imminent danger to the public, to prevent the further use of such enclosure or building as a place of public resort or entertainment. Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [Collector of the District] may call for and examine the record of any proceeding taken under this Act. Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 12A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any entertainment (including a cinematograph exhibition, dance or drama) to which members of the public are admitted, whether on payment or not, is held in an enclosed place or building, then, no person shall, during the prohibited period as defined in sub-section (2) smoke either- (a) on the stage except in so far as smoking may be part of the entertainment, or (b) in the auditorium that is to say, in that portion of the enclosed place or building in which accommodation is provided for members of the public: Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette exempt any class of entertainments from the provisions of this sub-section. (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1) 'prohibited period' means so much of the period commencing thirty minutes before the beginning of the entertainment and ending with the termination thereof, as may fall within the hours which the State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette specify in this behalf for entertainments generally or any class of entertainments (3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of this section shall be liable to be ejected summarily from the enclosed place or building by any Police Officer and shall also be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees. (4) A person ejected under sub-section (3) shall not be entitled to the refund of any payment made by him for admission to the entertainment or to any other compensation.] This section was inserted by S.3 of the Tamil Nadu City Police and Places of Public Resort (Amendment)Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act 13 of 1951).
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person who, having the immediate control of any enclosed place or building, permits it to be used for, public resort or entertainment without having obtained a licence or, having obtained a licence under this Act, permits such use in contravention of 1 [any of the conditions of such licence or of the undertaking referred to in S.4-A shall be liable on conviction before a Magistrate, to fine which may extend, to five hundred rupees and in addition, in the case of a continuing contravention, with the additional fines which may extend to fifty per centum of the fine first imposed for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 54 of 1981.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 13A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provision of this Act shall apply to all areas situated within a distance of three miles from the limits of any municipality, as if such areas formed part of such municipality: Provided that this section shall not apply to- (i) areas for the time being included within the limits of some other municipality, or (ii) areas to which this Act has been, or may be, extended by a notification under section 1 sub-section 2 [(2) (b)] so long as such notification remains in force. Ss. 13-A to 13-C were inserted by S.2 of the Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort (Amendment) Act, 1947 (Tamil Nadu Act 23 of 1947). Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 13B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where, by virtue of Section 13-A, a municipal council drives any income under this Act from any area outside the municipal limits, such income shall be distributed between the municipal council and the local authority or authorities having jurisdiction over such area, in such manner as the 1 [State] Government may specify in rules made under this Act. The word 'State' was substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 13C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where by virtue of any notification issued under section 1, sub-section 1 [(2) (b)], or otherwise, jurisdiction under this Act over any area stands transferred from one officer or authority to another officer or authority, all licences granted, all orders passed, and all proceedings commenced, in respect of places, buildings and enclosures in such area, by or before the officer or authority having jurisdiction prior to such transfer, shall be deemed to have been granted, passed, or commenced by or before the officer or authority having jurisdiction subsequent to such transfer. Amended by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 13D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing in this Act shall apply to any church, temple, mosque or other place of public worship.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State Government] may, at anytime after the passing of this Act, and from time to time, make rules consistent with this Act, for carrying out the purposes thereof, and may amend or cancel the same. All such rules shall be published in the 2 [Official Gazette] and shall come into force on the day on which they are so published or on such later date as may be specified in the notification publishing them. 3 [(2) All rules made under this Act, shall as soon as possible after they are made, be placed on the table of the Legislative Assembly and shall be subject to such modifications by way of amendment or repeal as the Legislature may make either in the same session or in the next session. The words 'Provincial Government' were substituted for the words 'Governor-in-Council' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'Estate' was substituted for 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words 'Fort St. George gazette' by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1960.
Tamil Nadu Places of Public Resort Act, 1888_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Scheule1 [See clause (c) of Section 4-A] Area Amount of Security Deposit (1) (2) Rs. (i) City of Coimbatore and City of Madurai 10,000 (ii) Municipalities, Special Grade 8,000 (iii) Municipalities, and Townships, Selection Grade 6,000 (iv) Municipalities, and Townships, First Grade 5,000 (v) Municipalities, and Township, Second Grade 4,000 (vi) Municipalities, and Township, Third Grade 3,000 (vii) Pnachayat Towns and Panchayat Villages 2,000 Schedule added by Tamil Nadu Act 54 of 1981. 
