Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 so as to preserve the cultural heritage of the State of Tamil Nadu and to ensure the survival and wellbeing of the native breeds of bulls. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of January 2017.
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 2 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act,1960 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(dd) "Jallikattu" means an event involving bulls conducted with a view to follow tradition and culture on such days from the months of January to May of a calendar year and in such places, as may be notified by the State Government, and includes "manjuviratu", "vadamadu" and "erudhuvidumvizha".".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 3 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), conduct of 'Jallikattu', subject to such rules and regulations as may be framed by the State Government, shall be permitted.".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after clause (e), the following clause shall be added, namely:- "(f) the conduct of 'Jallikattu' with a view to follow and promote tradition and culture and ensure preservation of native breeds of bulls as also their safety, security and wellbeing.".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The following proviso shall be added to section 22 of the principal Act, namely:- "Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to conduct of 'Jallikattu'.".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 27 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following clause shall be added, namely:- "(c) the conduct of 'Jallikattu' with a view to follow and promote tradition and culture and ensure survival and continuance of native breeds of bulls.".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "28-A. Saving in respect of 'Jallikattu'. - Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to 'Jallikattu' conducted to follow and promote tradition and culture and such conduct of 'Jallikattu' shall not be an offence under this Act.".
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Ordinance, 2017 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. (By order of the Governor) (S. S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government-in-charge, Law Department. 
