Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to prevent the indiscriminate destruction of private forests and interference with customary and prescriptive rights therein and for certain other purposes WHERE it is necessary to prevent the indiscriminate destruction of private forests and interference with customary and prescriptive rights therein. It is here by enacted as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu preservation of Private Forests Act, 19492 . (2) It applies- 3 [(i)* * *] (ii) to forests situated in estates as defined in the 4 [Tamil Nadu] Estate Land Act, 1938, in the 5 [State] of Tamil Nadu. (iii) to private forests situated in other areas in the State of [Tamil Nadu] and having a contiguous area exceeding 6 [2 hectares] which may be declared by the 7 [committee: ] to be forests for the purposes of this Act, by notification, in the District Gazette) but does not apply to reserved forests constituted under the Tamil Nadu Forest Act, 1882, and lands at the disposal of the Government as defined in that Act. Explanation - A private forest exceeding 8 [2 hectares] in extent shall not cease to be such by reason only on the fact that, in a portion thereof, 9 [trees, shrubs or reeds are felled or cut] with or without the permission of the committee or lands are cultivated, or rocks, roads, tanks, rivers or the like exist; nor shall the area of such forest cease to be contiguous by reason only of the existence of all or any of the aforesaid circumstances.] (3) It shall come into force at one. 10 [...] Amended by T.N. Act 32 of 1965. Received the assent of the Governor-General on the 10th December 1949; first published in the Fort ST. George Gazette Extraordinary on the 14th December 1949 Omitted by T.N. Act 15 of 1957. Substituted by T.A.O. 1969. Substituted by T.A.O. 1950. Substituted T.N. 68 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. Act 68 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. 68 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. Act 12 of 1965. Omitted by T.N. Act 12 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- 1 [(a) Committee means any Committee constituted under Section 2-A, and having jurisdiction.] 2 (aa) Forest includes waste or communal land containing 3 [trees shrubs and reeds]] pasture land and any other class of land declared by the 4 [State] Government to be a forest by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette. Explanation - For the purposes of this clause, communal land means- (i) beds and bunds of tanks and of supply, drainage surplus or irrigation channels; (ii) threshing-floor, cattle-stands, village-sites and other lands which are set apart for the common use of the villager.] (b) Owner in relation to a forest includes a mortgagee, lessee or other person having right to possession and enjoyment of the forest; (c) Person includes a Hindu undivided family a Marumakkattayam tarwad or tavazhi and an Aliyasantana family or branch; 5 [(d) forest offence means as offence punishable under this Act; and (e) in expression Forest officer, Trees, timber, forest produce cattle, Magistrate, and imprisonment shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in Section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Forest Act, 1882]. Amended by T.N. Act 68 of 1979. Amended by T.N. Act 68 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. Act 12 of 1975. Substituted by A.O. 1950. Clauses (d) & (e) added by T.N.Act 35of 1955.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 2-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, by notification with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute for each district a committee for the purpose of this Act, consisting of the following members, namely - (a) the District Collector as Chairman of the Committee. (b) the District Forest officer having jurisdiction over district; (c) the Tahsildar having jurisdiction over the area; (d) the Executive Engineer of the Agriculture Department in charge of soil conservation; (e) the Personal Assistant (General) to the collector of the district who shall be the Secretary of the committee.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 2-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Committee may meet as often as may be necessary and shall, subject to the provision of sub-section (2) and (3), observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be prescribed by the State Government under this Act provided that not more than two months shall elapse between one meeting of the committee and another. (2) The Chairman of the committee or in his absence any member nominated by him in that behalf shall preside at a meeting of the committee. (3) All questions at a meeting of the committee shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman of the committee or in his absence the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 2-C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act or proceedings of the committee shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy in the committee or any defect in the nomination of a member thereto or on the ground only that more than two months have elapsed between one meeting of the committee and another.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) (a) No owner of any forest shall, without the previous sanction of the Committee sell, mortgage, lease or otherwise alienate the whole or any portion of the forest. Explanation - Nothing in the sub-section shall be construed as preventing the owner from selling or otherwise dealing with the right together and remove forest produce other than 1 [trees, timber and reeds] in the usual or customary manner for a period not exceeding two years. 2 (b) Any alienation in contravention of clause (c) shall be null and void- (i) if the alienation is of any forest declared by 3 (District Collector) to be a forest under clause (iii) of Section 1(2) or of any portion of such a forest, and is made on or after the date on which the declaration takes effect; (ii) 4 [ ...] (iii) if the alienation is of any forest or of any portion of such a forest, and is made on or after the 16th August 1946. 5 [(2) No owner of any forest and no person claiming under him, whether by virtue of a contract, licence or any other transaction entered into before or after the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946, or any other person shall without the previous permission of the Committee 6 [cut trees or reeds] or any Act likely to denude the forest or diminish its utility as such. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the removal of dead or fallen trees or to any act done for the usual or customary domestic purposes or for making agricultural implements. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the 7 [State Government may exempt any forest or class of forests or class of trees there in from all or any of the provisions of this section. Substituted by T.N. Act 12 of 1965. Substituted by T.N. Act 36 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. Act 22 of 1960. Omitted by T.N. Act 15 of 1957. Substituted by Act 36 of 1979. Substituted by T.N. Act 12 of 1965. Substituted by A.O. 1950.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any person aggrieved by an order under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 8 or under sub-section (2) of that section in regard to the sanction or permission referred to in that clause or sub section may, within two months of the receipt of such order prefer an appeal in writing to the State Government. The State Government shall pass such orders on the appeal as they may think fit.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Section 5 omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If, in the opinion of the 1 [State] Government, it is necessary for the preservation of a forest or forests, they may, by notifications2 [...]:- (i) prohibit or regulate the doing of any act likely to be detrimental to the - preservation of such forest or forests; (ii) regulate the exercise of customary or prescriptive rights in such forest or forests. Substituted by A.O. 1950. Omitted by Act 36 of 1979.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 6-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of Chapter VII of The Tamil Nadu Forest Act, 1882, shall apply to offence punishable under this Act subject to the following modifications namely:- (i) in Section 41 the proviso shall be omitted; (ii) in Section 42, after the words the Magistrate shall, the expression subject to the provisions of Section 8 of the Madras Preservation of Private Forest Act, 1949, shall be inserted; (iii) in Section 44, the words shall, if it is the property of the Central or State Government or has been confiscated, be taken possession of by or under the authority of the District-Forest Officer; and in any other case shall be omitted (iv) in Section 45 and 49, for the words the District Forest Officer, the words the District Collector shall be substituted; (v) in Section 50- (a) clause (a) shall be omitted; (b) in clause (c), the word or occurring at the end shall be omitted; and (c) clause (d) shall be omitted; (iv) Section 56 shall be omitted.) Inserted by T.N. Act 35 of 1954.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of Section 3 or any of the terms of a notification under Section 6 shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 32 of the Code of Criminal procedure, 1973 it shall be lawful for any magistrate of the first class, specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf to impose a sentence of fine exceeding one thousand rupees.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No prosecution shall be instituted against any person without the sanction of the District Collector.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No order of the 1 [State] Government or the District Collector under this Act and no notification issued by the 2 [State] Government under Section 6 shall be liable to be questioned in any Court of law. Omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965. Omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State] Government may make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) the classes or kinds of trees which may be permitted to be cut and the girth of such trees; (b) the classes or kinds of trees to which permission may be granted. (c) the procedure to be followed by the District Collector before granting permission. Omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [ * * * * *]1 Omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 1 [State] Government may, as occasion may arise by orders to anything which appears to them necessary for the purpose of removing the difficulty. Omitted by T.N. Act 32 of 1965.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 12-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) (a) All rules made under this act, and all orders made under Section 12 shall be published in the Fort St. George Gazette and unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are published. (b) All notification issued under this Act shall unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, come into force on the day on which they published. (2) Every rule made or notification issued under this Act, shall as soon as possible after it is made or issued, be placed on the Table of the Legislative Assembly, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session the Legislative Assembly agrees in making any modification in any such rule or notification or the Legislative Assembly agrees that the rule or notification should not be made or issued the rule or notification shall there after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.] Inserted by T.N. Act 12 of 1956.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any rule or order made purporting to have been made, any notification issued or purporting to have been issued, any decision or direction given or purporting to have been given, any action or proceeding taken or purporting to have been taken or anything done or purporting to have been done- (a) under any provision of the Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946 (hereinafter in this section and in Section 14 referred to as the said Act) and in force immediately before the 3rd December 1948, or (b) on or after the 3rd December 1948 under any provision of the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time, or (c) under any provision of the Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Ordinance, 1949 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the said Ordinance), shall subject to any subsequent modification or cancellation thereof purporting to have been made on or after that date under the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time or under the said Ordinance, be deemed to be a rule or order made, notification issued, decision or direction given, action or proceeding taken or thing done under the corresponding provision of this Act, (2) Any liability or penalty incurred or purporting to have been incurred, any punishment awarded or purporting to have been awarded and any prosecution commenced or purporting to have been commerced- (a) under any provision of the said Act before the 3rd December 1948, or (b) on or after 3rd December 1948 under any provision of the said Act on the footing that the said Act was in force at the relevant time, or (c) under any provision of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been incurred or commenced under the corresponding provision of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie in any Court against any officer or servant of the 1 [State Government] or any person acting under his direction or aiding or assisting him- (a) for or on account of or in respect of any sentence passed or any act ordered or done by him in exercise of any jurisdiction or power purporting to have been conferred on him by the said Act, or (b) for carrying out any sentence passed by any Court in exercise of any such jurisdiction or power as aforesaid. (2) no suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government for or on account of or in respect of any act, matter or thing whatsoever purporting to have been done in pursuance of or under the said Act. (3) sub-section (1) and (2) shall have effect although the said Act was not or might not have been in force by the relevant time. Inserted by A.O. 1950
Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1946 and the Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forest Ordinance, 1949 are hereby repealed. 1. Certain provisions of the Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests (Continuance) Act, 1965 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1965) not incorporated in the principal Act. 2. Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1949 to be permanent Act. The Tamil Nadu Preservation of Private Forests Act, 1949 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1949 here in after referred to as the principal Act) shall as amended by this Act become a Permanent Act. 
