Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 346, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Saturday, September 17, 2011, Aavani31, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 17th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:- Statement of Object Following the replacement of the multi-member wards with the single member ward in the Village Panchayats, an elaborate exercise on delimitation of wards in village panchayats, based on the 2001 population census figures was taken up by the District Collectors / Inspectors of Panchayats in the last one year and the same has been completed recently. Further, due to expansion of the territorial areas of certain Municipalities and Municipal Corporations, corresponding delimitation of rural local bodies have also been done and both the said exercises have been completed recently. Now a fresh delimitation of all the Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats, based on 2001 census figures have to be undertaken and this process cannot be completed before the next ordinary elections to the rural local bodies which is scheduled to be conducted before 24th October 2011. The Government, have therefore decided to conduct the said ordinary election to the rural local bodies based on the existing territorial area of wards of the panchayats, number of wards, the number of members to be returned from such wards and to amend the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, suitably, for the said purpose. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. K.P. MUNUSAMY, Minister for Municipal Administration and Rural Development. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 346, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Saturday, September 17, 2011, Aavani31, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 17th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 28-A of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "28-AA. Special provision relating to election:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made or orders issued under this Act, for the first election for the village panchayats, panchayat union councils and District Panchayats to be held immediately after the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011, the territorial area of wards, the number of wards in every village panchayat, panchayat union and district panchayat and the number of members to be returned by each such wards shall be the same as they exist on the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Amendment) Act, 2011.". (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
