Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to amend the Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1975. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object At present, wakf properties do not fall within the meaning of the term "public premises" as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the.. Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1976). The Tamil Nadu Wakf Board has requested the Government to amend the said Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1976 so as to include the wakf properties within the definition of the term "public premises", in order to protect wakf properties from the hands of unscrupulous encroachers and antisocial elements. The Government have, therefore, decided to amend the said Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1976 suitably, for the said purpose. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. I. PERIASAMY, Minister for Revenue and Housing. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1976), in clause (e),- (1) in sub-clause (1), in item (ii), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be omitted; (2) in sub-clause (2), the word "and" shall be added at the end; (3) after sub-clause (2), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely:- "(3) any premises belonging to a wakf. registered with the Tamil Nadu Wakf Board;" (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
