Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the settlement of inams in the merged territory of Pudukkottai in the State of Tamil Nadu. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the settlement of inams in the merged territory of Pudukottai in the State of Tamil Nadu: Be it enacted in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955. (2) It shall come into force on 1 [such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, appoint. Came into force on 1st March 1960.
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of section 3, all inams in the merged territory of Pudukkottai which were granted, confirmed or recognized by any former Ruler of that territory and which have continued as inams up to the commencement of this Act are hereby recognized and confirmed as inams by the State Government.
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1)] Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder 2 [such inams] shall be settled in accordance with the principles laid down in the rules and orders contained in the Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue and for the time being applicable to the settlement of inams in the rest of the 3 [State of Tamil Nadu]: Provided that- (a) all personal inams other than those granted for religion or charitable purposes, shall be enfranchised or freed from the conditions subject to which they are held; (b) all religious, artisan and charitable inams shall be continued by the State Government, only so long as the terms and conditions subject to which they are held are fulfilled. 4 [(2) After the completion of the settlement of every inam under the provisions of sub-section (1) the particulars of such settlement shall be published in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed. Came into force on 1st March 1960. Section 3 was renumbered as sub-section (1) and the words such inams were substituted for the words all lands held on inam tenure at the commencement of this Act in the merged territory of Pudukkottai by S. 2 (i) of the Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 36 of 1956). Substituted for "Madras State" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Sub-section (2) was added by section2(ii) of the Puddukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Second Amendment Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 36 of 1956).
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, they may make rules providing for such adaptation, exceptions and modifications as they may deem necessary for the purpose of applying the rules and orders contained in the Standing Orders of the Board of Revenue to any inam or inams in the merged territory of Pudukkottai.
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Pudukkottai Inam Rules, 1888, and all the orders and rules relating to inams issued or made by the former Pudukkottai Durbar shall in relation to any inam, stand repealed from the date on which the settlement of that inam is published under sub-section (2) of section 3.
Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Act, 1955_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [...] Section 6 was omitted by S.2 of the Pudukkottai (Settlement of Inams) Amendment Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1966) 
