Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The term of office of the Special Officers appointed under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994) in respect of the Yercaud Panchayat union council and certain village panchayats under the panchayat union was due to expire on the 5th March 2006. The ordinary election to the said Panchayat union council and to the said village panchayats could not be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the said Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994 and the rules made thereunder before the expiry of the term of office of the said Special Officers, since the proposal for reservation of seats for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled tribes and for women including the women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes based on the population as published in 2001 census is still under consideration. Hence, it became necessary to extend the term of office of the said Special Officers to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the said panchayat union council and village panchayats. The Government, therefore, decided to extend the term of office of the said Special Officers of the Yercaud panchayat union council and certain village panchayats for a period of six months, that is upto the 5th September 2006 and accordingly, issued orders in G.O. Ms. No.25, Rural Development Department, dated the 3rd March 2006, pending amendment to the said Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994, 2. The ordinary election to all panchayats in the State will have to be conducted before the 24th October 2006. Therefore, the Government have now decided to extend the term of the said Special Officers for a further period of two months beyond the 5th September 2006 and in the aggregate for a period of eight months with effect on and from the 6th March 2006 or until the day on which the first meeting of the Panchayat union council, or as the case may be, the village panchayat concerned is held after election, whichever is earlier. 3. To give effect to the orders issued in the aforesaid Government order, and the above decision it has been decided to amend sub-section (2) of section 9-B and sub-section (2) of section 1 8-B of the said Act, suitably and also to validate anything done or any action taken by such Special Officers on or after the 6th March 2006. 4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. M.K. Stalin, Minister for Rural Development and Local Administration. M. Selvaraj, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of March 2006.
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 9-B of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for the words, "twelve months", the words "one year and eight months" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 18-B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "twelve months", the words "one year and eight months" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Panchayats (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, any person exercising the powers and discharging the functions of the village panchayats specified in Schedule VII to the principal Act or of the Yercaud panchayat union council on the 6th day of March 2006 shall be deemed to have been appointed as Special Officer under sub-section (1) of section 9-B, or, as the case may be, under sub-section (1) of section 18-B of the principal Act, as amended by this Act and anything done or any action taken by such Special Officer, during the period commencing on the 6th day of March 2006 and ending with the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. (By Order of the Governor) S. Dheenadhayalan, Secretary to Government-in-Charge, Law Department. 
