Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to amend the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 in its application to the State of Tamil Nadu. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of January 2014.
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after section 105, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "105-A. Provisions of this Act not to apply to certain Tamil Nadu Acts or to apply with certain modifications. - (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the provisions of this Act shall not apply to the enactments relating to land acquisition specified in the Fifth Schedule. (2) The State Government shall, by notification, within one year from the date of commencement of this Act, direct that any of the provisions of this Act, relating to the determination of compensation in accordance with the First Schedule and rehabilitation and resettlement specified in the Second and Third Schedules, being beneficial to the affected families, shall apply to the cases of land acquisition under the enactments specified in the Fifth Schedule or shall apply with such exceptions or modifications that do not reduce the compensation or dilute the provisions of this Act relating to compensation or rehabilitation and resettlement as may be specified in the notification, as the case may be. (3) A copy of the notification proposed to be issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid in draft before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu and if the Legislative Assembly agrees in disapproving the issue of the notification or the Legislative Assembly agrees in making any modifications in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such modified form as may be agreed upon by the Legislative Assembly."
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Tamil Nadu Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be added, namely:- Schedule (By Order of the Governor) (G. Jayachandran) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
