Tamil Nadu Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-eighth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975,- (a) in item 1, for the words "Two thousand rupees", the words "Four thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (b) for item 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall, respectively, be substituted, namely:- "2. (1) For filing of any document during the first financial year of the society. Two hundred rupees. (2) For filing of any document from the second financial year of the society,- (i) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year does not exceed one lakh rupees; One hundred rupees. (ii) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year exceeds one lakh rupees but does not exceed five lakh rupees; Two hundred rupees. (iii) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year exceeds five lakh rupees but does not exceeds ten lakh rupees; Three hundred rupees. (iv) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year exceeds ten lakh rupees but does not exceed fifteen lakh rupees; Four hundred rupees. (v) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year exceeds fifteen lakh rupees but does not exceed twenty lakh rupees; Five hundred rupees. (vi) when the annual receipt or expenditure of the society during the preceding financial year exceeds twenty lakh rupees; Six hundred rupees."; (c) in item 3, for the words "Two hundred and fifty rupees", the words "Four hundred rupees" shall be substituted; (d) in item 4, for the words "Two hundred and fifty rupees", the words "Five hundred rupees" shall be substituted; (e) in item 5, for the words "Ten rupees per page", the words "Twenty rupees per page" shall be substituted; (f) in tem 6, for the words "One hundred rupees", the words "Two hundred rupees shall be substituted; (g) in item 7, for the words "One thousand rupees", the words "Two thousand rupees" shall be substituted; (By order of the Governor) (S.S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
