Tamil Nadu State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1988_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to confer on the President the power of the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu to make laws. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-- Statement of Object Under the proclamation issued by the President on the 30th January, 1988, the powers of the Legislature of the State of Tamilnadu are now exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament. Such legislative measures as may be necessary for such State can be taken up by Parliament only by postponing its business; and even then, its likely that Parliament may not have time to deal with all the legislative measures for the State. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament should, in accordance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Art.357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the powers of the Legislature of the State of Tamilnadu to make laws for the State. The present Bill is intended to give effect to this proposal.
Tamil Nadu State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1988_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1988.
Tamil Nadu State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1988_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, "Proclamation" means the Proclamation issued on the 30th January, 1988 under article 356 of the Constitution , by the President and published with the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, No.G.S.R.66(E) of the said date.
Tamil Nadu State Legislature (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1988_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The power of the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu to make laws, which has been declared by the Proclamation to be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby conferred on the President. (2) In the exercise of the said power, the President may, from time to time, whether Parliament is or is not is session, enact, as a President's Act, a Bill containing such provisions as the considers necessary : Provided that before enacting any such Act, the President shall, whenever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee constituted for the purpose, consisting of forty members of the House of the People nominated by the Speaker and twenty members of the Council of States nominated by the Chairman. (3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) shall, as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of Parliament. (4) Either Home of Parliament may, by resolution passed within thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under sub-section (3), which period may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Act and if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament during the session in which the Act has been so laid before it or the session succeeding such modifications shall be given effect to by the President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2) " Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended. 
