Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council (Repeal) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 An Act to Repeal The Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council Act, 2009. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object To regulate agricultural practice and to provide for the establishment of Agricultural Council and the maintenance of register of persons of having qualification of Agriculture or Horticulture and for matters connected therewith, the Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council Act, 2009 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2009) was enacted. But the farmers' representatives and Members of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly expressed reservation against the said Act as detailed below:- Any advice regarding the Organic Farming can be given only by the members of the Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council. The said Act will prevent the activities of sharing or advising to the farmers by the people who have traditional knowledge and by the Non-Governmental Organisations. The said Act will not allow the peoples' right over seeds and sharing of the traditional knowledge between the farming community. In our State those who qualify in Agriculture or Horticulture do not practice the same or take up farming activities, as in the case of those who qualify in Medicine or Law. Only traditional farmers do the farming activities. Hence, it is natural among the farmers to share their knowledge. The said Act will prevent these activities of the farmers. The said Act will not include farmers who do not possess agricultural qualification or their representatives in the above Council. Ultimately the said Act will prevent natural way of farming, the independence of farming community and the education of agriculture will rest in the hands of private entrepreneurs. 2. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to repeal the Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council Act, 2009 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2009). The Government have decided to undertake a legislation for the purpose. 3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. K.A. SENGOTTAIYAN, Minister for Agriculture. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 28th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council (Repeal) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council (Repeal) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council (Repeal) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu State Agricultural Council Act, 2009 (Tamil Nadu Act 19 of 2009) is hereby repealed. (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
