Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1939. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970. (2) Section 3 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st April, 1958, and the rest of this Act shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1939 (Tamil Nadu Act VI of 1939) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "determine the amount of the tax due", the words "determine to the best of his judgment the amount of the tax due" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "7-A. Sales escaping assessment - (1) (a) Where, for any reason, any sale of motor spirit effected by an importer or wholesale dealer has escaped assessment to tax under section 3, the Commercial Tax Officer may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) and at any time within a period of eight years from the expiry of the period to which the tax relates, assess to the best of his judgment the amount of the tax due on such sales under section 3, after making such enquiry as he may consider necessary and after giving the importer or wholesale dealer, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity to show cause against such assessment and the amount so assessed shall be paid by the importer or wholesale dealer into a Government treasury within fourteen days after demand is made therefor. (b) Where, for any reason, any sale of motor spirit effected by an importer or wholesale dealer has been assessed at a rate lower than the rate at which it is assessable under section 3, the Commercial Tax Officer may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), and at any time within a period of eight years from the expiry of the period to which the tax relates, reassess the amount of the tax due on such sales under section 3, after making such enquiry as he may consider necessary and after giving the importer or wholesale dealer, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity to show cause against such reassessment, and the amount so reassessed less the sum, if any, already paid by him shall be paid by the importer or wholesale dealer into a Government treasury within fourteen days after demand is made therefor. (2) In making an assessment or reassessment under sub-section (1), the Commercial Tax Officer may, if he is satisfied that due to wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts by the importer or wholesale dealer, as the case may be, the tax has not been levied or has been levied at a rate lower than the rate at which it is leviable, direct the importer or wholesale dealer, as the case may be, to pay in addition to the amount of the tax assessed or reassessed under sub-section (1), a penalty not exceeding one and a half times the amount of the tax so assessed or reassessed and the penalty so imposed shall be paid by the importer or wholesale dealer into a Government treasury within fourteen days after demand is made therefor : Provided that no penalty under this sub-section shall be imposed unless the importer or wholesale dealer affected has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such imposition. (3) In default of payment within the period specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the amount of tax or penalty due shall be recovered from the person from whom the tax or penalty is due as if it were an arrear of land revenue. (4) The powers under sub-section (1) may be exercised by the Commercial Tax Officer even though the original order of assessment, if any, passed in the matter has been the subject-matter of an appeal or revision. (5) In computing the period of limitation for assessment or reassessment under this section, the time during which the proceedings for assessment or reassessment remained stayed under the orders of a civil court of other competent authority shall be excluded."
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In clause (d) of section 10 of the principal Act, for the expression "section 7, sub-section (1)", the expression "sub-section (1) of section 7 or sub-section (1) of section 7-A" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 17 of the principal Act, for the words "offences against this Act", the words "offences against this Act or the rules made thereunder" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 20 of the principal Act, for the words "offence against this Act", the words "offence against this Act or the rules made thereunder" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 28 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 29 of the principal Act, - (i) in the heading, the words "and orders" shall be omitted; (ii) in sub-section (1), the words and figures "and all orders made under section 28" shall be omitted; (iii) in sub-section (2), the words and figures "and every order made under section 28" and the words "or order" wherever they occur, shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the principal Act or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, or other authority, no assessment or reassessment or collection of any tax due on any sale of motor spirit which has escaped assessment to tax, or which has been assessed at a rate lower than the rate at which it is assessable under section 3 of the principal Act made at any time after the date of the commencement of the principal Act and before the date of the publication of this Act in the Fort St. George Gazette shall be deemed to be invalid or ever to have been invalid on the ground only that such assessment or reassessment or collection was not in accordance with law and such tax assessed or reassessed or collected or purporting to have been assessed or reassessed or collected shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been validly assessed or reassessed or collected; and accordingly - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the State Government or by any officer of the State Government or by any other authority in connection with the assessment or reassessment or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court against the State Government or any person or authority whatsoever for the refund of any tax so paid; and (c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax so paid. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation (Amendment) Bill, 1970 (Fort St. George Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV - Section 3, dated 24th January, 1970, page 8.), runs as follows : "Rule 26 of the Madras Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Rules, 1939, contains provisions for the assessment of transactions which have escaped assessment and for the revision of assessment in cases where the tax has been assessed at too low a rate. In Caltex (India) Ltd. v. C.T.O., Madras (W.P. Nos. 965 to 978 of 1966, etc.) the Madras High Court held that sub-rule (1) of rule 26 of the said rules is invalid as the Tamil Nadu Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1939 (Tamil Nadu Act VI of 1939) does not empower the Government to make such a rule. The Government have examined the implications of the judgment and consider the specific provision should be made in the Act itself for assessment of sales which have escaped assessment and for reassessment of sales assessed at a rate lower than the normal rate. It is also proposed to validate the assessment and collection of tax already made. 2. Section 17 of the said Act provides for investigation of offences against the Act and section 20 provides for the composition of offences against the Act. It is proposed to amend these sections so as to apply them also to offences against rules made under the Act. 3. Section 28 of the Act empowers the Government to issue orders to remove any difficulty that may arise in giving effect to any of the provisions of the Act. The Supreme Court in Messrs Jalan Trading Company v. Mill Mazdoor Sabha (1967 1 S.C.J. 189) has observed that the power to remove any doubt or difficulty by altering the provisions of the Act would, in substance, amount to exercise of legislative authority and that it cannot be delegated to an executive authority. It is therefore proposed to avail of this opportunity to omit section 28 of the Act and to make the necessary consequential amendments. 4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects." 
