Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object According to clause (c) of section 16 of the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998 (Tamil Nadu Act 43 of 1998), the provisions of sections 9 and 10 of the said Act, relating to invitation and evaluation and acceptance of tender by the Tender Inviting Authority, shall not apply to procurement from certain departments of Government, public sector undertakings, statutory boards and such other institutions in respect of goods manufactured or services provided by them for a period not exceeding 6 years from the date of commencement of the said Act, namely, the 1st October 2000. With a view to encouraging the said departments, public sector undertakings, statutory boards and such other institutions to become viable and competitive in the purchase process, the Government have decided to extend the exemption provided to such government departments, public sector undertakings, etc., under the said clause (c) of section 16 of the said Act for a further period of five years from the 1st October 2006 and to amend the said clause (c) of section 16 of the said Act for the purpose. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. K. Anbazhagan, Minister for Finance. M. Selvaraj, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders (Amendment) Act, 2006. (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of October 2006.
Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders (Amendment) Act, 2006_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 16 of the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Act, l 998 (Tamil Nadu Act 43 of 1998) in clause (c), for the words "six years", the words "eleven years" shall be substituted. (By Order of the Governor) S. Dheenadhayalan, Secretary to Government-in-Charge, Law Department. 
