Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018. (2) Sections 2 and 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th day of July 2006.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 3-AA of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "3-AA. Provisions of the Act shall apply to Town Panchayats subject to certain modifications.-All provisions of the Act, except sections 5, 7, 12-C, 13-B, 43, 77-AA and 77-B shall apply to all the Town Panchayats, subject to the following modifications, namely:- (1) for the expression "municipality" wherever it occurs, the expression "town panchayat" shall be substituted; (2) for the expression "municipal council" wherever it occurs, the expression "council" shall be substituted; (3) for the expression "councillor" and "councillors" wherever it occurs, the expression "member" and "members" shall, respectively, be substituted; (4) for the expression "municipal authority" wherever it occurs, the expression "authority" shall be substituted; (5) for the expression "commissioner" wherever it occurs, the expression "Executive Officer" shall be substituted; (6) in section 4, in sub-section (6), for the expression "State Government", the expression "Director of Town Panchayats" shall be substituted.".
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The notification issued by the Government in the Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department No. II(2)/MAWS/701(c)/2014, published in Part II-Section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, dated the 21st day of November 2014 shall cease to have effect from the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act or any other law or order or notification for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all acts done or proceedings taken by the council, authority, chairman, vice-chairman, member, officers, Inspector, the Director of Town Panchayats and committees of the Town Panchayats under the provisions of the principal Act, during the period commencing on the 14th day of July 2006 and ending with the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be, and to have always been, validly done or taken in accordance with law, as if the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at all material times when such acts or proceedings were done or taken. (By order of the Governor) (S. S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
