Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, 1983. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of October 2012.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 33 of the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "33-A. Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commission.-(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society shall vest in the Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commission consisting of a Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner. (2) The Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner shall be appointed by the Government. (3) No person shall be qualified for appointment as Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner unless he is or has been an officer of the Government not below the rank of Secretary to the Government. (4) The Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office: Provided that a person appointed as Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner shall retire from office if he completes the age of sixty-five years during the term of his office. (5) Subject to the provision of sub-section (3), the conditions of service of the Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed. (6) The Government may make available to the Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the Tamil Nadu State Co-operative Societies Election Commission by sub-section (1).".
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Fourth Amendment) Ordinance, 2012 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amendment by this Act. (By order of the Governor) (G. Jayachandran) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
