Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Fisheries University Act, 2012. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Fisheries University Act, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (a), for the expression "to impart quality education", the expression "to impart quality professional education" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 5 of the principal Act,- (1) in clause (o), the following expression shall be added at the end, namely:- "and other statutory bodies related to fisheries of national and international level;"; (2) clause (w) shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 19 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (2),- (a) under the heading "CLASS I - EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS", the items (e) and (f) shall be omitted; (b) under the heading CLASS - II OTHER MEMBERS,- (i) in item (a), for the expression "one fisheries scientist", the expression "one fisheries scientist or educationist" shall be substituted; (ii) items (e), (i), (j) and (k) shall be omitted. (2) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(3) In case the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Fisheries or the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Finance or the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Law, is unable to attend the meetings of the Board, for any reason, he may depute any officer of his department not lower in rank than that of Deputy Secretary to Government to attend the meetings. The officer so deputed shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the meetings and shall have the right to vote.".
Tamil Nadu Fisheries University (Amendment) Act, 2014_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), under the heading "CLASS II - OTHER MEMBERS", for the items (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), the following items shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) Four members from amongst the Heads of Departments or Professors to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, on rotational basis; (b) One person having special knowledge or practical experience in different aspects of Fisheries to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor; and (c) One Dean from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research recognised Fisheries College.". (By order of the Governor) (G. Jayachandran) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
