Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to repeal certain enactments and to amend an enactment. Whereas it is expedient that the enactments specified in the First Schedule which are spent or have otherwise become obsolete, or have ceased to be in force otherwise than by expressed specific repeal, should be expressly and specifically repealed; And Whereas it is also expedient that amendment should be made in the enactment specified in the Second Schedule; Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018.
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The enactments specified in the First Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The enactment specified in the Second Schedule is hereby amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to; and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing; nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed; nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu REPEALS (See section 2) Year. Number. Short Title. Extent of Repeal. (1) (2) (3) (4)  Central Acts of Local Application. 1837 XXXVI The Tamil Nadu Public Property Malversation Act, 1837. The Whole. 1925 XXXV The Tamil Nadu, Bengal and Bombay Children (Supplementary) Act, 1925. The Whole  Tamil Nadu Regulations. 1802 III The Tamil Nadu Administration of Estates Regulation, 1802. The Whole. 1802 XIX The Indian Civil Service (Tamil Nadu) Loans Prohibition Regulation, 1802. The Whole. 1802 XXV The Tamil Nadu Permanent Settlement Regulation, 1802. The Whole. 1816 XII The Tamil Nadu Village-Lands Disputes Regulation, 1816. The Whole. 1817 VII The Tamil Nadu Endowments and Escheats Regulation, 1817. The Whole. 1817 VIII The Tamil Nadu Revenue Recovery (Military Proprietors) Regulation, 1817. The Whole. 1822 IV The Tamil Nadu Permanent Settlement (Interpretation) Regulation, 1822. The Whole. 1829 V The Tamil Nadu Hindu Wills Regulation, 1829. The Whole. 1831 V The Tamil Nadu Stamp Penalties Regulation, 1831. The Whole.
Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 2018_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu AMENDMENT (See section 3) Year. Number. Short Title. Amendment. (1) (2) (3) (4)  Tamil Nadu Act. 1864 II The Tamil Nadu Revenue Recovery Act, 1864. After section 25, the following section inserted, namely:-  "25-A. Service of Notice in the case of Military Personnel.-(1) If any person serving in the Army has land, such person shall be at liberty to inform the Collector the rank which he may hold and the designation of the Corps to which he is attached and record of such information shall be made by the Collector in the register and accounts relating to such land and its assessment.  (2) Where revenue is in arrear in respect of any land belonging to such person, no proceeding shall be instituted unless the Collector informs the Commanding Officer of the Corps about the action proposed to be taken under this Act.  (3) The Collector shall address an official letter by registered post with acknowledgement due to the Commanding Officer of the Corps and enclose along with the said letter a written notice to the person liable to pay the arrear of land revenue duly signed by himself or other officer empowered by the Collector in this behalf.  (4) Such notice shall, specify the amount of arrear, and the date on which it became due, and require such person to pay the said arrear within such limited period of time having regard to the fact where the Corps is stationed and the time that may be taken to serve the said notice.  (5) Acknowledgement of the receipt of the letter by the Commanding Officer shall be deemed to be sufficient service for the purposes of this Act.". (By Order of the Governer) (S. S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government Law Department. 
