Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Repeal Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 An Act to Repeal The Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 300, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Monday, September 5, 2011, Aavani 19, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042 The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 3rd September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:- Statement of Object The Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 2008), declares that the first day of the Tamil month "Thai" shall be celebrated as the Tamil New Year day. The general public, scholars in Archaeology, experts in Astronomy and scholars from various walks of life have expressed their views through different media that the said Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 2008 is against the customary practice of celebrating the first day of the Tamil month "Chithirai" as Tamil New Year. They have also requested to the Government to repeal the said Act and to restore the age old custom of celebrating the first day of the Tamil month "Chithirai" as the Tamil New year. Further, the said Act has caused practical difficulties, resistance and opposition amongst the general public in following the first day of the Tamil month of "Thai" as the Tamil New Year day. The Government have, therefore, decided to restore the time immemorial custom of celebrating the first day of the Tamil month "Chithirai" as the Tamil New Year day by repealing the said Act. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. S.P. SHANMUGANATHAN, Minister for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Issue No. 300, Part IV-Section 2, Chennai, Monday, September 5, 2011, Aavani 19, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2042 The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 3rd September 2011 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Repeal Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Repeal Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Repeal Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 2008) is hereby repealed. (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
