Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for declaring the first day of "Thai" as Tamil New Year and the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) "English Calendar Year" means a period of twelve months starting from the 1st day of January and ending with the 31st-day of December; (b) "Government" means the Government of Tamil Nadu.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, or in usage or custom to the contrary, it is hereby declared that,- (1) The first day of the Tamil month "Thai" shall be celebrated as the Tamil New Year; (2) the Tamil Year shall commence on the first day of the Tamil month "Thai" and end with the last day of the Tamil month "Margazhi".
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) All Government Offices and Boards, Corporations, Industrial Establishments. Public Sector Undertakings and local bodies, established or constituted by the Government under any law or order or notification, shall follow the Tamil Year as specified in section 3. (2) In all Government Orders, Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, District Gazettes and other Government publications, Tamil Year shall be indicated in accordance with section 3 along with the English Calendar Year.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may issue such orders and directions of a general character as they consider necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government may, by an order published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to them to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Tamil New Year (Declaration) Act, 2008_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every order issued or made under this Act shall, as soon as possible, after it is issued or made, be placed on the Table of the Legislative Assembly, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, the Assembly makes any modification in any such order or the Assembly decides that the order should not be issued or made, the order shall thereafter have effect only m such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order. (By order of the Governor) (S. Dheenadhayalan) Secretary to Government-in-charge, Law Department 
