Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University Act, 1971. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the forty-first year of the Republic of India as follows:
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of October 1990.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 2 incorporated in this Main Act.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 3 incorporated in this Main Act.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 4 incorporated in this Main Act.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 5 incorporated in this Main Act.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu References to "Tamil Nadu Agricultural University" and "Tamil Nadu Agricultural University Act in any Act or in any rule, notification, proceeding, order, regulation, by-law or other instrument made or issued under such Act or "statutes" and "regulations" made or continued in force under the principal Act shall be construed as references to "Tamil Nadu G.D. Naidu Agricultural University Act" respectively.
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where immediately before the 26th October 1990, any legal proceedings pending to which the "Tamil Nadu Agricultural University" is a party, Tamil Nadu G.D. Naidu Agricultural University" shall be deemed to be substituted for the "Tamil Nadu Agricultural University" in those proceedings;
Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Act, 1991_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (Amendment) Ordinance, 1990, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by the Act. 
