Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for supply of unclaimed bodies of deceased persons 1 [to teaching medical institutions and hospitals for the purpose of anatomical examination and dissection or medical relief or treatment. WHERES it is expedient to provide for the supply of unclaimed bodies of deceased persons 2[to teaching medical institutions and hospital for the purpose of anatomical examination and dissection or medical relief or treatment] it is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960)
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Anatomy Act, 1951.2 3 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of 4 [Tamil Nadu] (3) This section shall come into force at once. 5 [(4) The State government, may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette direct that the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force on such date and in such area as may be specified in the notification.] Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. For Statement of objects and Reasons see Fort St. George, Part IV-A dated the 27th February 1951 Received the assent of the President on the 4th August, 1951, Published in the Fort St. George Gazette on the 14 August, 1951 Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Section 1 came into force on the 14th August, 1951. The rest of the Act came into force on the 1st July, 1952
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "authorized officer" means an officer authorised under section 3 ; (b) "hospital" means any hospital established or maintained by the State Government, or by any municipal council, district board or panchayat and includes any other hospital which may be declared by the State Government, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, to be hospital for the purposes of this Act; (c) "near relative" means any of the following relatives of the deceased namely, a wife husband, parent, son, daughter, brother or sister and includes any other person who is related to the deceased (i) by lineal consanguinity within three degrees or by collateral consanguinity within six degrees, or (ii) by marriage with any of the relatives aforesaid; Explanation -The expressions "lineal consanguinity" and collateral consanguinity" shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Succession Act, 1925, and degree of relationship shall be computed in the manner laid down in that Act. (d) "prescribed means prescribed by rules made by the State Government under this Act; (e) "teaching medical institution" means any of the institutions specified in the Schedule to this Act and includes any other institution which may be declared by the State Government, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, to be a teaching medical institution for the purposes of this Act; (f) "unclaimed body" means the body of a person who dies in a hospital, prison or public place, which has not been claimed by any of his near relatives within such time as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette authorize for the area in which this Act comes into force or any part thereof, one or more officers to whom a report shall be made under section 4 and who shall competent to act under the said section. (2) Every officer authorized under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If a person dies in a hospital or in a prison and his body is not claimed by any of his near relatives within such time as may be prescribed, the authority in charge, of such hospital or prison shall. with the least practicable delay, reports the fact to the authorized officer, and the said officer shall take possession of the unclaimed body and except in the case referred to in sub-section (3) hand it over to the authority in charge of 1 [a teaching medical institution, or hospital] if it is required by the authority in charge of that institution or hospital for the purpose of anatomical examination and dissection or medical relief to treatment as the case may be. (2) If a person dies in may public place in an area in which he had no permanent place of residence and the body of that person is not claimed by any of his near relatives within such time as may be prescribed, the authorized officer shall take posession of the unclaimed body and except in the case referred to in sub-section (3) hand it over the authority in charge of 2 [a teaching medical institution or a hospital] if it is required by that authority, for the purpose specified in sub- section (1) (3) When there is any doubt regarding the cause of death or when for any reason the authorized officer considers it expedient so to do, he shall forward the unclaimed body to the police officer referred to in section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. (4) Where any unclaimed body taken possession of by the authorized officer under this section is not required by the authority in charge of a 3 [teaching medical institution or a hospital for the purpose specified in sub- section (1), it shall be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960) Substituted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960) Substituted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960)
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any doubt or dispute arises whether a person is or is not a near relative, to the deceased for the purpose of section 4, the matter shall be referred in City of Madras, to a Presidency Magistrate, and elsewhere to a Magistrate of the First Class, and the decision of such Magistrate shall be final. (2) Pending such decision, the body of the deceased person shall be preserved from decay in such manner as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever disposes of, or abets the disposal of, an unclaimed body save as provided by this Act, or obstructs any authority in charge of a teaching medical institution 1 [or a hospital] or an authorized officer from handing over, taking possession of, removing or using, such dead body for the purpose specified in section 4, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. Inserted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960)
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All officers and servants of the Police, Medical and Public Health Departments, all officers and servants in the service of a local authority, and all village officers and servants shall be bound to take all reasonable measures to assist authorized officers in the discharge of their duties under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The State Government, may by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette, made rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after they are made be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and shall be subject to such modifications by way of amendment or repeal as the Legislature may make either in the same session or in the next session] Original section 9 renumbered as 9 (i) and sub-section (2) Inserted by Madras Anatomy (Amendment) Act (10 of 1960).
Tamil Nadu Anatomy Act, 1951_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1. The College and School of Indigenous Medicine, Madras. 2. The Madras Medical College, Madras. 3. The Stanley Medical College, Madras. 1 [...] Entries 4 and 5 omitted by clause 3 of and the Sch. to the Madras Adaptation of Laws Orders, 1954. 
