Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the establishment of a University of Technology in the State of Tamil Nadu. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of The Tamil Nadu in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called 1 [The Anna University [Chennai Act,]2 ] 1978. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint. 3 ["1-A. Application of this Act - This Act applies to- (a) all constituent colleges: (b) all colleges and institutions deemed to be affiliated to, or approved by, the University under this Act; (c) all colleges and institutions situate within the University area and affiliated to, or approved by, the University in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the statutes, ordinances and regulations made thereunder".] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 40 of 2006. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- 1 ["(a)"affiliated college" means any college or institution, situate within the University area and affiliated to the University and providing courses of study in engineering, technology and allied sciences for admission to the examinations for degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University and includes a college deemed to be affiliated to the University under this Act and includes an autonomous college;"] (aa) appointed day means such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint under sub-section (2) of Section 1, 2 [(ab)"approved college" means any college situate within the University area and approved by the University and providing courses of study for admission to the examinations for titles and diplomas of the University and includes a college deemed to be approved by the University under this Act; (ac) "autonomous college" means any college designated as an autonomous college by or under the statutes; (ad) "Chairman" means the head of the faculty; (ae) "college" means a college or institution established or maintained by or affiliated to the University and providing any course of study or training in engineering, technology and allied sciences for admission to the examination for degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University;"] 3 [(b) "constituent college" means every college and institution specified in Schedules I, I-A and I-B; (c) "Dean" means the head of constituent college; (d) "Director" means the head of research and development or the head of every centre of Advanced Study as may be prescribed";]4 (e) Faculty means a Faculty of the University; (f) Government means the State Government; (g) hostel means a unit of residence for students of the University maintained or recognized by it either as a part of, or separate from a constituent college; (h) Prescribed means prescribed by the statutes, ordinances or regulations made under this Act; 5 [(ha)"Principal" means the head of an affiliated college;"] (i) State means the State of Tamil Nadu; (j) Statutes ordinances and regulations means respectively the statutes, ordinances and regulations of the University made or continued in force under this Act; (k) Teachers means such Deans, Directors, Professors, Assistant Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other like person as may be declared by the statues to be teachers; (1) University means the 6 [Anna University] established under Section 3. 7 [(m) University area means the area comprising the districts of Chennai, Kancheepuram, Thiruvallur, Vellore, Thiruvannamalai and Villupuram in the State of Tamil Nadu.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted as per Act 40 of 2006. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the development of engineering, technology and allied sciences and for furthering the advancement of learning and prosecution of research in engineering, technology and allied sciences, on and from the appointed day, there shall be established a University 1 [by the name of Anna University]. (2) The University shall be a body corporate, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by the said name. 2 [(3) and (4)](Omitted) (5) No institution affiliated to or associated with or maintained by any other University in the State shall be recognized by the University for any purpose except with the prior approval of the Government and the concerned University. (6) The principal seat of the University shall be the College of Engineering, Guindy, Madras, or any other place which the Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982. Sub-sections 3 & 4 omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall have the following objects, namely- (i) to provide facilities and offer opportunities for higher education in engineering, technology and allied sciences by instruction, training, research, development and extension and by such other means as the University may deem fit; (ii) to devise and implement a programme of education in engineering, technology and allied sciences that is relevant to the current needs of the society, alive to the long term requirements and responsive to the anticipated changes and developments, in terms of breadth of diversity and depth of specialization; (iii) to further the advancement of knowledge in engineering, technology and allied sciences; to prosecute and promote research; to disseminate and advance the knowledge thereon for the betterment of society and to bring about a widespread awareness of the tools and methods continuously generated by the advances in engineering, technology and allied sciences; and (iv) to serve as a centre for fostering co-operation and exchange of ideas between the academic and research community on the one hand and the industrial and Government employers on the other and to promote entrepreneurship among the students.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall have the following powers and functions, namely; (a) to provide for instruction and training in engineering, technology and allied sciences; (b) to provide for research and for advancement and for dissemination of knowledge in engineering, technology and allied sciences; (c) lo institute degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions in engineering, technology and allied sciences; (d) to hold examinations and confer degrees, diplomas and other academic distinction on person who have - (i) pursued a prescribed course of study ; or (ii) carried out research in the University or in any other centre or institution recognized by the University under the prescribed conditions; (e) to confer honorary degrees or other academic distinctions in the prescribed manner and under the prescribed conditions ; (f) to prescribe conditions under which the award of any degree, diploma and other academic distinctions to persons may be withheld ; (g) lo act as co-ordinator among the constituent colleges, laboratories and institutions of the University; (h) to recognize an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may determine and to withdraw such recognition ; (i) to co-operate with any other University, authority or association or any other public or private body having in view the promotion of purposes and objects similar to those of the University for such purposes as may be agreed upon on such terms and conditions as may, from time to time, be prescribed ; (j) to establish and maintain colleges or institutions relating to engineering, technology and allied sciences; (k) to establish and maintain, laboratories, libraries, research stations and museums for teaching and research ; (1) to institute teaching and research posts and to appoint persons to such posts ; (m) to create administrative and other posts and to appoint persons to such posts ; (n) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, prizes and medals in accordance with the statutes; (o) to establish and maintain or recognize hostels for students of the University and residential accommodation for the staff of the University and to withdraw any such recognition ; (p) to demand and receive payment of such fees and other charges as may be prescribed from time to time; (q) to supervise and control hostels and to regulate and enforce discipline among the students of the University and to make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare; (r) to act as trustees or managers for any property, legacy, endowment, bequest or gift for the purpose of education or research or otherwise in furtherance of the work and welfare of the University and to invest any funds representing the same, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the statutes made there under; (s) to assess the needs of the State and the country in terms of subjects, fields of specialization, levels of education and training of technical manpower both on short and long term basis and to initiate necessary programmes to meet those needs; (t) to organize advanced studies and research programmes based on a deep understanding of the trends in engineering, technology and in allied sciences so that the profession will be ensured of men who are not only up to-date, but also will be able to provide the lead; (u) to promote research, design and development activities that have a relevance to social needs and the development programmes of the nation; (v) lo initiate measures to enlist the co-operation of industries and Governmental employers to provide complementary facilities; (w) to provide for continuous experimentation in imparting knowledge, organisation of training and preparation of text-books and other instructional materials; (x) to arrange for progressive introduction of continuous evaluation and re-orientation of the objectives in educational measurement; (y) to further entrepreneurial ability among its students; (z) to educate the public with regard to the requirement of, and opportunities, in the profession of engineering, technology and allied sciences and its responsibilities and service to society; (aa) to enter into any agreement for the merger in the University of any other college or institution, and for taking over its rights, and liabilities, and for any other purpose not repugnant to the provisions of this Act; and (ab) to do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers and functions aforesaid or not, as may be necessary or desirable to further the objects of the University. 1 [(ac)to affiliate colleges to the University under conditions prescribed and to withdraw such affiliation. Provided that no college shall be affiliated to the University unless the permission of the Government to establish such college has been obtained and terms and conditions, if any, of such permission have been complied with. (ad) to approve institutions providing training for admission to the examinations for degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University under conditions prescribed and to withdraw such approval. Provided that no institution shall be approved by the University unless the permission of the Government to establish such institution has been obtained and the terms and conditions, if any, of such permission have been compiled with. (ae) to designate any college as an autonomous college with the prior concurrence of the Government under conditions prescribed and to cancel such designation. (af) to conduct evaluation or inspection of the colleges at required interval and to take suitable action as prescribed to improve academic excellence of the colleges. (ag) to monitor academically 2 [and administratively the affiliated colleges in order to prescribe the control mechanism to achieve academic excellence."] Added by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 5-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No college within the University area shall be affiliated to any University other than the Anna University".] Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2002, but not yet come into force.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (I) The University shall, subject to the provisions of the Act and the statutes, be open to all persons. (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall require the University- (a) to admit to any course of study any person who does not possess the prescribed academic qualification or standard; (b) to retain on the rolls of the University any student whose academic record is below the minimum standard required for the award of a degree, diploma or other academic distinction; or (c) to admit any person or retain any student whose conduct is prejudicial to the interest of the University of the rights and privileges of other students and teachers. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Government may, by order, direct that the University shall reserve such percentage of seats therein for the students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward class as may be specified in such direction and where such direction has been given, the University shall make the reservation accordingly.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government shall have the right to cause an inquiry to be made by such person or persons as they may direct in respect of any matter connected with the University. (2) The Government shall, in every case, give notice to the University of their intention to cause an inquiry to be made and the University shall be entitled to be represented at such inquiry. (3) The Government shall communicate to the University their views with reference to the result of such, inquiry and may, after ascertaining the opinion of the University thereon, advise the University upon the action to be taken and fix a time limit for taking such action. (4) The University shall, within the time limit so fixed, report to the Government the action taken or proposed to be taken on the advice tendered by the Government. (5) If the University does not take action within the time fixed or if the action taken by the University is in the opinion of the Government not satisfactory, the Government may, after considering any explanation offered or representation made by the University, issue such directions as they may deem fit and the University shall comply with such directions.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall consist of the following officers, namely: (1) The Chancellor, (2) The Pro-Chancellor, (3) The Vice-Chancellor, (4) The Deans, (5) 1 [The Chairman of Faculties], (6) The Registrar, (7) The Finance Officer, (7-A) The Controller of Examinations, and2 (8) Such other persons may be declared by the statutes to be officers of the University. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001 Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor of the State shall be the Chancellor of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall be the head of the University and shall, when present, preside at any convocation of the University and confer degrees, diplomas or other academic distinctions upon person entitled to receive them. (3) No honorary degree or other distinction shall be conferred by the University upon any person without the approval of the Chancellor. (4) The Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on him by or under this Act.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Minister administering the subject of technical education in the State of Tamil Nadu for the time being shall be the Pro-Chancellor of the University. (2) In the absence of the Chancellor, or during the Chancellors inability to act, the Pro-Chancellor shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the Chancellor.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every appointment of the Vice-Chancellor shall be made by the Chancellor from out of a panel of three names recommended by the Committee referred to in sub-section (2) and such panel shall not contain the name of any member of the said Committee. 1 ["Provided that if the Chancellor does not approve any of the persons in the panel recommended by the Committee, he may take steps to constitute another Committee, in accordance with sub-section (2), to give a fresh panel of three different names and shall appoint one of the persons named in the fresh panel as the Vice-Chancellor."] (2) For the purpose of sub-section (1) the Committee shall consist of three persons, of whom one shall be nominated by the syndicate, one shall be nominated by the Academic Council, and one shall be nominated by the Chancellor; Provided that the person so nominated shall not be a member of any of the authorities of the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for not more than two successive terms: Provided that- (a) the Chancellor may direct that a Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired, shall continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified in the direction; (b) the Vice-Chancellor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Chancellor and after giving two months notice resign his office. (4) When any temporary vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice-Chancellor or if the Vice-Chancellor is, by reason of absence or for any other reason, unable to exercise the powers and perform the duties of his office, the Syndicate shall as soon as possible, make the requisite arrangements for exercising the powers and performing the duties of the Vice-Chancellor. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a whole-time officer of the University and shall be entitled to such emoluments, allowances, and privileges as may be prescribed by the statutes. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1992.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic head of the University. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall, in the absence of the Chancellor and Pro-Chancellor, preside the convocation of the University and confer degrees, diplomas or other academic distinctions upon persons entitled to receive them. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline in the University. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this Act and the statutes, ordinances, and regulations made there under. (5) In any emergency, which in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor requires immediate action to be taken, he shall, by order, take such action as he deems necessary and shall, at the earliest opportunity, report the action taken to such officer or authority or body as would have in the ordinary course dealt with the matter; Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the person likely to be affected, has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (6) Any person, aggrieved by any order of the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (5), may prefer an appeal to the Syndicate within thirty days from the date on which such order is communicated to him and the Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the order passed by the Syndicate on such appeal. 1 [(7) The Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the decision of the Syndicate]. (8) The Vice-Chancellor shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee. The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and to address, any meeting of any authority or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such authority or body. (9) The Vice-Chancellor shall convene meetings of the Syndicate, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee. (10) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the co-ordination and integration of teaching and research extension education and curriculum development. (11) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by statutes. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1986.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every Dean and every 2 [Chairman of a Faculty] shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the statutes. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time officer of the University appointed by the Syndicate for such period and on such terms as may be prescribed by statutes. (2) The Registrar shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed. (3) In all suits and other legal proceedings by or against the University, the pleadings shall be signed and verified by the Registrar and all process in such suits and proceedings shall be issued to and served on, the Registrar.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole-time officer of the University appointed by the Syndicate for such period and on such terms as may be prescribed by statutes. (2) The Finance Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 15-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Controller of Examinations shall be an academician in the field of engineering, technology and allied sciences and a whole time officer of the University appointed by the Syndicate on such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Syndicate. (2) the Controller of Examinations shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a further period of three years: Provided that no person appointed as Controller of Examinations shall hold office on attaining the age of superannuation.] (3) The Controller of Examinations shall exercise such powers and perform such functions and discharge such duties as may be prescribed in the statutes."] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The authorities of the University shall be the Syndicate, Academic Council, the Finance Committee, Faculties and Board of Studies of each Faculty and such other bodies of the University as may, from time to time be declared by the statutes to be authorities of the University.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Chancellor shall, as soon as may be, after the first Vice-Chancellor is appointed under Section 39 constitute the Syndicate. 1 ["(2) The Syndicate shall, in addition to the Vice-Chancellor, consist of the following members, namely: Class I - Ex-officio Members. (1) The Secretary to Government, in-charge of Higher Education; (2) The Secretary to Government, in-charge of Industries; (3) The Secretary to Government, in-charge of Information Technology; (4) The Secretary to Government, in-charge of Law; and (5) The Director of Technical Education; Class II - Other Members. (1) Two members from among the Deans nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (2) One member from among the Chairman of the Faculties nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (3) Two member from among the Professors and Heads of the Departments of the constituent colleges, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (4) One member from the Directors of various centres of the University nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (5) Four members representing public and private sectors, industries and research institutions having special knowledge and practical experience in industry and commerce, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (6) Two members elected by the Academic Council from among its members-one from among the members belonging to the constituent colleges and one from among the members belonging to the affiliated colleges; (7) Four members from among the senior Professors and Principals of the affiliated colleges nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; and (8) One member elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly of the State from among themselves;"] 2 [(3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the Syndicate.] 3 [3(A) (i) In case the 4 [Secretary to Government, in-charge of Higher Education, or the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Industries, or the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Information Technology, or the Secretary to Government, in-charge of Law, is unable, to attend the meetings of the Syndicate for any reason, he may depute any officer of his department not lower in rank than that of Deputy Secretary to Government, to attend the meetings, (ii) In case the Director of Technical Education is unable to attend the meetings of the Syndicate for any reason, he may depute any officer not lower in rank than that of Deputy Director to attend the meetings;] (4) 5 [The term of office of the members of the Syndicate, other than the ex-officio members, shall be three years and such members shall be eligible for election or re-nomination.] 6 [Provided that a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the Legislative Council of the State shall cease to be member of the Syndicate from the date on which he ceases to be member of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the Legislative Council of the State, as the case may be.] (5) The members of the Syndicate shall not be entitled to receive any remuneration from the University except such daily and travelling allowances as may be prescribed: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall preclude any member from drawing his normal emoluments to which he is entitled by virtue of the office he holds. (6) A member of the Syndicate may tender resignation of his membership at any time before the term of his office expires. Such resignation shall be conveyed to the Chancellor by a letter in writing by the member and the resignation shall take effect from the date of its acceptance by the Chancellor. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1992. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1986 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1992. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1992. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1992.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 17-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 17 or Section 18 or Statute 9 of Schedule any person who has completed two terms of three years each, continuously in any one or both of the following authorities of the University, namely: (i) the Syndicate, and (ii) the Academic Council, shall be eligible after a period of three years has elapsed from the date of his ceasing to be member for election or nomination to any of the above mentioned authorities: Provided that for the purpose of this sub-section if a person was elected or nominated to one authority and such person became a member of another authority by virtue of the membership in the first mentioned authority, the period for which he held office in the first mentioned authority alone shall be taken into account."] (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall have application in respect of- (i) 2 [(i) ex-officio members referred to in Section 17(2), Class-I; and (ii) ex-officio members referred to in clause (1) of Statute 9 of Schedule 11".] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1998. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the statutes, have the control and general regulation to teaching and examination in the University and be responsible for the maintenance of the standards thereon. (2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members, its powers and functions and rules of procedures at its meetings shall be prescribed by the statutes.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The University shall include Faculties of Engineering, Technology and Science and such other Faculties as may be prescribed by the statutes. (2) Each Faculty shall have a 1 [Chairman] who shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) Each Faculty shall comprise of such departments of teaching with such assignment of subject of study as may be prescribed. (4) There shall be a Board of Studies for each Faculty, the constitution and functions of which shall be such as may be prescribed. (5) The constitution and functions of the Faculties shall in all other respects be such as may be prescribed. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All the authorities of the University shall have power to constitute committees and to delegate to them such of their powers as they deem fit; such committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of members of the authority concerned and of such other persons, if any, as the authority in each case, may deem fit.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University shall have a general fund to which shall be credited- (a) its income from fees, grants, donations and gifts, if any; (b) any contribution or grant made by the Central Government, any state Government, the University Grants Commission or like authority, any local authority or any corporation owned or controlled by the Government; and (c) endowments and other receipts. Explanation: In this section the expression "University Grants Commission" means the Commission established under Section 4 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 (Central Act 30 of 1956).
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The University may have such other funds as may be prescribed by the statutes.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The funds and all moneys of the University shall be managed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government shall, every year, make non-lapsable lumpsum grants to the University as follows: (a) a grant not less than the net expenditure incurred in the financial year immediately preceding the appointed day in respect of the activities of the institutions of engineering, technology and allied sciences which are transferred to the University; (b) a grant not less than the estimated expenditure on pay and allowances of the staff, contingencies, supplies and services of the University; (c) a grant to meet such additional items of expenditure, recurring and non-recurring as the Government may deem necessary for the proper functioning and development of the University.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Syndicate shall constitute a Finance Committee constituting of the Vice-Chancellor and other members as may be prescribed by the statutes.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The annual accounts shall be submitted to such examination and audit, as the Government may direct and a copy of the annual accounts and audit report shall be submitted to the Government. (2) The University shall settle objections raised in the audit and carry out such instructions as may be issued by the Government on the audit report. (3) the Government shall cause the annual accounts and the audit report to be laid before both Houses of Legislature together with their comments.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The University shall institute for the benefit of its officers, teachers and other persons employed in the University such pension, gratuity, insurance and provident fund as it may deem fit, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed. (2) Where the University has so instituted a provident fund under sub-section (1) the Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (Central Act 19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund as if the University were a local authority and the fund a Government Provident Fund. (3) The University may, in consultation with the Finance Committee, invest the provident fund amount in such manner, as it may determine.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act, the appointment, Procedure for selection, pay and allowances and other conditions of service of officers, teachers and other persons employed in the University shall be such as may be prescribed. Explanation: For the purpose of this section the word "officer" shall not include the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act, the statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: (i) the holding of convocation to confer degrees; (ii) the conferment of honorary degree and academic distinctions; (iii) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities of the University; (iv) the manner of filling vacancies among members of the authorities. (v) the allowances to be paid to the members of the authorities and committees thereof; (vi) the procedure at meetings of the authorities including the quorum for the transaction of business at such meetings; (vii) the authentication of the orders or decisions of the authorities; (viii) the formation of departments of teaching at the University and its constituent colleges; (ix) the term of office and method of appointment and conditions of service of the officers of the University other than the Chancellor and the Pro-Chancellor. (x) the qualifications of the teachers and other persons employed in the University 1 [and affiliated colleges or institutions]; (xi) the classification, the method of appointment and determination of the terms and conditions of service of teachers and other persons employed in the University; 2 [xi-a) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the teachers and other persons employed in the University;] (xii) the institution of pension, gratuity, insurance or provident fund for the benefits of the officers, teachers and other persons employed in the University; (xiii) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, bursaries, medals and prizes and the conditions of award thereof; (xiv) the establishment and maintenance of halls and hostels; (xv) the conditions for residence of students of the University in the halls and hostels and the levy of fees and other charges for such residence; (xvi) the conditions of registration of graduates and the maintenance of register thereof; 3 [(xvi-a)the conditions of affiliation of colleges to the University; (xvi-b) the manner in which, and the conditions subject to which, a college may be designated as an autonomous college or the designation of such college may be cancelled and the matters incidental to the administration of autonomous colleges including the constitution or reconstitution, powers and duties of Standing Committee on Academic Affairs, Staff Council, Boards of Studies and Boards of Examiners".] (xvii) any other matter which is required to be or may be prescribed by the statutes. Added by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1986. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 30--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The first statutes shall be those as set out in schedule II. (2) The Syndicate may from time to time, make statutes and amend or repeal the statutes in the manner hereinafter provided in this section. (3) The Academic Council may propose to the Syndicate the draft of any statute to be passed by the Syndicate and such draft shall be considered by the Syndicate at its next meeting; Provided that the Academic Council shall not propose any amendment to any statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University, until such authority has been given an opportunity of expressing its opinion upon the proposal and any opinion so expressed shall be considered by the Syndicate. (4) The Syndicate may consider the draft proposed by the Academic Council under subsection (3) and may either pass the draft statute or reject or return it with or without amendments to the Academic Council for reconsideration. (5) (a) Any member of the Syndicate may propose to the Syndicate the draft of a statute and the Syndicate may either accept or reject the draft, if it relates to a matter not falling within the purview of the Academic Council. (b) In case such draft relates to a matter within the purview of the Academic Council, the Syndicate shall refer it for consideration to the Academic Council, which .may, after following the procedure laid down in the proviso to sub-section (3), either report to the Syndicate that it does not approve the draft or submit the draft to the Syndicate in such form as the Academic Council may approve and the Syndicate, may either pass with or without amendment or reject the draft. (6) A statute passed by the Syndicate shall be submitted to the Chancellor who may assent thereto or withhold his assent; A statute passed by the Syndicate shall have no validity until it has been assented to by the Chancellor.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 31--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and statutes, the ordinances of the University may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: (i) 1 [the admission of the students to the University, its constituent colleges 2 [and to its affiliated colleges]; (ii) the courses of study leading to all degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University; (iii) the conditions under which the students shall be admitted to the courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University; (iv) the conduct of examinations of the University and the conditions on which students shall be admitted to such examinations; (v) the manner in which exemptions relating to the admission of students to examinations may be given; (vi) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies and examiners; (vii) the maintenance of discipline among the students of the University; (viii) the fees lo be charged for courses of study, research, equipment and practical training and for admission to the examinations for degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions of the University; and (ix) any other matter which by this Act or the statutes is to be made or may be provided for by an ordinance. (2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, ordinances shall be made by the Academic Council. (3) All ordinances made by the Academic Council shall take effect from such date as may be fixed by the Academic Council, but every ordinance so made shall be submitted as soon as may be after it is made to the Syndicate and shall be considered by the Syndicate at its next meeting. (4) The Syndicate shall have power, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members present at such meeting, lo modify or cancel any such ordinance and such ordinance shall from the date of such resolution have effect in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2002. Not yet come into force. (i) The admission of the students to the University and its constituent colleges and monitoring of admission of students in the affiliated colleges.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 32--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Syndicate and the Academic Council may make regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act, the statutes and the ordinances, for all or any of the other matters which by this Act and the statutes and ordinances are to be provided for by regulations and also for any other matter solely concerning such authorities. (2) Each of the authorities referred to in sub-section (1) shall make regulations providing for the giving of notice to the members thereof of the date of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and for the keeping of the proceedings of the meetings. (3) The Syndicate may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any regulation made under this section or the annulment of any regulation made there under by itself or by the Academic Council.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 33--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Not withstanding anything contained in the Madras University Act 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1923) relating to the establishment of the University of Madras or the statutes, ordinances, regulations and orders made there under, on and from the appointed day, 1 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai, specified in Schedule I] and the institutions specified in 2 [Schedule I-A] shall be disaffiliated from the University of Madras to which they were affiliated on the date immediately preceding such day. The institutions specified in 3 [Schedule I-A] shall form constituent colleges of the University and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. (2) On and from the appointed day, the control and management of 4 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai specified in Schedule I and the institutions specified in Schedule I-A], all properties, assets and liabilities of the Government, the University of Madras and the Governing Council of Madras Institute of Technology in relation thereto shall stand transferred to and vest in the University. (3) The Government may, at any time after the appointed day, transfer to the University any of their lands for its use on such terms and conditions as they deem proper. (4) The Government may, at any time after the appointed day, transfer to the University the control and management of any of their colleges and institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University on such terms and conditions as they deem proper. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law relating to the establishment of a University in the State or the statutes, ordinances, regulations and order made there under, on and from the date to be notified by the Government, the colleges or institutions referred to in sub-section (4) shall be disaffiliated from the University lo which they were affiliated on the date, immediately preceding the notified date and shall be transferred to, and maintained by, the University as its constituent colleges or institutions and the provisions of its Act shall apply accordingly. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 34--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the statutes, ordinances or regulations, every student of 1 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai specified in Schedule I] and of every institution specified in 2 [Schedule 1-A] who immediately before the appointed day was studying in that 3 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai specified in Schedule I] or institution or was eligible for any examination held or conducted by the University of Madras or the Madras Institute of Technology as the case may be, shall be permitted to complete his course of study or be admitted to the examination of the University and the University shall make arrangements- (a) for the instruction, teaching, training and holding examination for such students, for such period and in such manner as may be determined by the first Vice-Chancellor in accordance with the course of study in the University of Madras or the Madras Institute of Technology, as the case may be; and (b) for the conferment of the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinctions of the University upon the qualified student on the result of such examination. "4 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or any other provision of this Act, every person who, immediately before the appointed day, was a student of - (i) 5 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai specified in Schedule I] or any of the institutions specified in item (1) of 6 [Schedule I-A]; or (ii) The M.E., or M.Sc. (Applied Mathematics) Courses of the Madras Institute of Technology, shall be admitted to the examinations held or conducted by the University of Madras and the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinctions of the University of Madras shall be conferred upon the qualified students on the result of such examination, by the University of Madras." Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1980. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1980.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 35--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The compensation payable by the University to the University of Madras in respect of the properties, assets and rights to the University of Madras and vested in the University under sub-section (2) of Section 33 shall be such, may be agreed upon between the University and the University of Madras; Provided that where no such agreement is reached within the period of three years from the appointed day the Government may, after giving an opportunity, to the University of Madras, and the University) for making their representations in that behalf, determine the compensation payable to the University of Madras and the compensation so determined shall be final and binding on the University of Madras and the University.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 36--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, is serving in, -] (a) the Madras Institute of Technology, Chromepet, Madras; and (b) the Departments of the University of Madras specified in item I of Schedule I-A, shall, as from the said date, become an employee of the 2 [Anna University and shall cease to be employee of the Madras Institute of Technology University of Madras, as the case may be. (2) (a) As soon as may be, after the appointed day, the Government may, after consulting the Vice Chancellor, direct by general or special order that. - (i) such of the employees of the Government who immediately before the appointed day were serving in the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai and specified in schedule I; (ii) such of the employees of the Government in the department of Technical Education, who immediately before the appointed day, were liable on orders of transfer issued by the competent authority under the rules then existing for such transfer to serve in 3 [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai specified in Schedule I] as are specified in such order shall stand allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the 4 [Anna University] with effect from such date as may be specified in such order. Provided that no such order shall be issued in respect of any such employee without his consent for such allotment. (b) An order may be issued under clause (a) of this sub-section so as to have retrospective effect on and from a date not earlier than the 4th September 1978. (c) With effect from the date specified in the order under clause (a) of this sub-section, the persons specified in such order shall become employees of the 5 [Anna University] and shall cease to be employees of the Government. (3) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) of sub-section (2), shall hold office under the 6 [Anna University] by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension or gratuity if any and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day or the date specified in the order under sub-section (2), as the case may be, as if this Act had not been passed. (4) (a) Where the 7 [Anna University) is satisfied that, for the purpose of securing uniformity in the terms and conditions of service applicable to officers, teachers and other persons employed in the said University, a revision of the terms and conditions Of service applicable to officers, teachers or other persons employed in the said University is called for, the 8 [Anna University may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any agreement or contract for the time being in force alter the terms and conditions of service to such extent and in such manner as it may think fit; Provided that the remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of any such officer, teacher or other person employed in the 9 [Anna University] shall not be varied by the said University to his disadvantage 10 [...] (b) If any alteration of the terms and conditions of service made under clause (a) of this sub-section is not acceptable to any officer, teacher or other person employed in the 11 [Anna University] the said University may, unless otherwise the contract of service of such officer, teacher or other person employed in the University provides for a shorter notice of termination, terminate his employment by giving him compensation equivalent to three months remuneration. (c) The compensation payable to any officer, teacher or person employed in the 12 [Anna University] under clause (b) of this sub-section shall be in addition to and shall not affect any pension, gratuity, provident fund or insurance or any other benefit to which the officer, teacher or other person employed in the said University is entitled under the contract of service.] Substituted by for original Section 36 by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1979 and shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th September 1978. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982. Substituted by for original Section 36 by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1979 and shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th September 1978. The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Specal Provisions) Act, 1982 Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Special Provisions) Act, 1982 Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Special Provisions) Act, 1982 Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Special Provisions) Act, 1982 Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Special Provisions) Act, 1982 Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Specal Provisions) Act, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). These words were omitted by Section 3 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (second Amendment) Act, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1980). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Specal Provisions) Act, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982). The expression was substituted by Section 4 of the Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment and Specal Provisions) Act, 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 1982).
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 37--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The sums at the credit of the provident fund accounts of 1 [the employees referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 36 as on the dates of their becoming employees of the University] shall be transferred to the University and the liability in respect of the said provident fund, pension, gratuity and family benefit accounts of such employees shall be, the liability of the University. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The University of Madras shall, out of its funds as on the appointed day, pay to the University such amount as the Government may, in consultation with the University of Madras, specify. (2) The amount payable under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to the amounts transferred under Section 37.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) to (6), the Chennai University Act, 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1923), the Madurai Kamaraj University Act, 1965 (Tamil Nadu Act 33 of 1965), the Bharathiar University Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1982), the Bharathidasan University Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1982), the Manonmaniam Sundaranar University Act, 1990 (Tamil Nadu Act 31 of 1990) and the Periyar University Act, 1997 (Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1997) (hereafter in this section referred to as the University Acts) shall, with effect on and from the date of the commencement of the Anna University (Amendment) Act, 2001, (hereinafter referred to as the notified date), cease to apply in respect of every college and institution to which this Act applies. (2) Such cessor shall not affect: (a) the previous operation of the University Acts in respect of the college and institutions referred to in sub-section (1); (b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the University Act; or (c) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of such penalty, forfeiture or punishment and any such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or-punishment may be imposed as if the Anna University (Amendment) Act, 2001 had not been passed. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), all statutes, ordinances and regulations made under the University Acts and in force on the notified date shall, in so far as they are not consistent with the provisions of this Act. continue to be in force in respect of the colleges and institutions referred to in the said sub-section (1), until they are replaced by statutes, ordinances and regulations made under this Act. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the statutes, ordinances and regulations continued in force under sub-section (3) or made under this Act, every person who immediately before the academic year 2001-2002 was a student of a college or institution within the University areas affiliated to, or approved or maintained by, the Chennai, Madurai-Kamaraj, Bharathiar, Bharathidasan, Manonmaniam Sundaranar and Periyar Universities or was eligible to appear for any of the examinations in engineering, technology and allied Sciences of the said Universities, shall be permitted to complete his course of study in the respective Universities; and the Anna University shall make arrangements for the institution, teaching and training for such students for such period and in such manner as may be determined by the Anna University, in accordance with the course of study, in the respective Universities, and such students shall, during such period, be admitted to the examinations held or conducted by the respective Universities and the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinctions of the Universities shall be conferred upon the qualified students on the result of such examinations, by the Universities concerned. (5) All college within the University area which immediately before the notified date,- (a) continue to be affiliated to, or recognized by, the Chennai, Madurai-Kamaraj, Bharathiar, Bharathidasan, Manonmaniam Sundaranar and Periyar Universities; and (b) provide courses of study for admission to the examination for degrees and diplomas of the Universities specified in clause (a); shall be deemed to be colleges affiliated to the Anna University under this Act and the provisions of this Act shall" as far as may be, apply accordingly. (6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) but without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (3) to (5), anything done or any action taken before the notified date under any provisions of the University Act, in respect of any area to which the provisions of this Act apply shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, and shall continue to have effect accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Chennai University Act, 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1923), the Madurai-Kamaraj University Act, 1965 (Tamil Nadu Act 33 of 1965), the Bharathiar University Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1982), the Manonmaniam Sundaranar University Act, 1990 (Tamil Nadu Act 31 of 1990), and the Periyar University Act, 1997 (Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1997), or the statutes, regulations and orders made there under, on and from the notified date, the colleges specified in Schedule I-B shall be transferred to and maintained by, the Anna University as the constituent colleges of that University. (2) On and from the notified date, the control and management of the colleges specified in sub-section (1) and all properties assets and liabilities of the Government in relation thereto shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the University.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person, who Immediately before the notified date, is serving in the colleges specified in Schedule I-B shall, as from the said date become an employee of the University and shall cease to be an employee of the Government. (2) (a) As soon as may be, after the notified date, the Government may, after consulting the Vice-Chancellors of the Anna University and the University concerned, direct, by general or special order, that such of the employees of the University concerned as are specified in such order shall stand allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the Anna University with effect on and from such date as may be specified in such order; Provided that no such order shall be issued in respect of any such employee without his consent for such allotment. (b) With effect on and from the date specified in the order under clause (a), the persons specified in such order shall become employees of the Anna University and shall cease to be employees of the University concerned. (3) Every person referred to in sub-section (1) and (2) shall hold office under the Anna University by the same tenure at the same remuneration and upon the same rights and privileges as lo pension or gratuity, if any, and other matters as he would have held the same on the notified date or the date specified in the order under clause (a) of sub-section (2), as the case may be, as if the Anna University (Amendment) Act, 2001 had not been passed. (4) The liability of pay, pension and gratuity to the persons referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be the liability of the Anna University.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The sums at the credit of the provident fund accounts of the persons referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 38-C as on the notified date and of the persons referred to in sub-section (2) of that section as on the date specified in the order under clause (a) of the said sub-section (2) shall be transferred to the Anna University and the liability in respect of the said provident fund accounts shall be the liability of the Anna University. (2) There shall be paid to the Anna University out of the accumulations in the superannuation fund and other like funds, if any, of the Chennai, Madurai-Kamaraj, Bharathiar, Bharathidasan, Manonmaniam Sundaranar, or Periyar Universities or, as the case may be, of the Government, such amounts as have been credited to the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, on behalf of the persons referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 38-C. The amounts so paid shall form part of the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, that may be established by the Anna University for the benefit of its employees.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Chennai, Madurai-Kamaraj, Bharathiar, Bharathidasan, Manonmaniam Sundaranar or Periyar University, as the case may be, shall, out of its funds as on the notified date, pay to the Anna University such amount as the Government may, in accordance with the University concerned, specify. (2) The amount payable under sub-section (1) shall be in addition to the amounts transferred under Section 38-D"
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sections 38-C, 38-D and 38-E, the Government may, after consulting the Vice-Chancellor of the Anna University, direct by general or special order, that such of the persons who have become employees of the University under sub-section (1) of Section 38-C, other than teachers, as are specified in such order shall stand allotted to the Directorate of Technical Education with effect on and from such date as may be specified in such order, at such remuneration and upon such rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters, as if they had not become employees of the University. Provided that no such order shall be issued without the consent of such employees. (2) The sums at the credit of the provident fund accounts of the employees specified in the order under sub-section (1) as on the date specified in that order shall be transferred to the Government and the liability in respect of the said provident fund account shall be the liability of the Government. (3) All amounts as have been credited to the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, on behalf of the employees specified in the order under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, of the Government. The amount so paid shall form part of the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, established by the Government for the benefit of its employees. Not yet come into force as inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2002.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or the statutes, regulations, and orders made there under, on and from the notified date, the colleges specified in Schedule 1-B shall cease to be constituent colleges of Anna University, Chennai. (2) On and from the notified date, the control and management of the colleges specified in Schedule 1-B and all properties, assets and liabilities in relation thereto shall stand transferred to, and vest in, the Government Explanation - For the purposes of this Section and Section and Section 38-H and 38-1, "notified date" means the date of commencement of the Anna University (Amendment) Act, 2006.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person, who has become an employee of the University under sub-section (1) of Section 38-C and is serving in the colleges specified in Schedule 1-B immediately before the notified date shall, as from the said date, become an employee of the Government and shall cease to be an employee of the Anna University, Chennai. (2) The liability to pay pension and gratuity to the persons referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the liability of the Government.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 38-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The sums at the credit of the provident fund accounts of the person referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 38-H as on the notified date shall be transferred to the Government and the liability in respect of the said provident fund accounts shall be the liability of the Government. (2) There shall be paid to the Government out of the accumulations in the superannuation fund and other like funds, if any, of the Anna University, Chennai, such amounts as have been credited to the superannuation fund or other like funds if any, on behalf of the persons referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 38-H. The amount so paid shall form part of the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, established by the Government for the benefit of its employees."
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 39--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 11, within six months from the appointed day the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Government on a salary to be fixed by them, for a period not exceeding in the aggregate five years and on such other conditions as may be specified by the Government in this behalf.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 40--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of Section 14 within three months from the appointed day, the first Registrar shall be appointed by the Government for a period not exceeding two years. The pay and allowances and other conditions of service of the first Registrar shall be such as may be fixed by the Government in this behalf.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 41--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and submitted to the Syndicate at least one month before the annual meeting at which it is to be considered. (2) The Syndicate shall, after considering the annual report, forward a copy thereof to the Government.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 42--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act or proceeding of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalidated merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or of any defect or irregularity in the appointment of a member of any authority or of other body of the University or of any defect or irregularity in any such act or proceeding not affecting the merits of the case or on the ground that the Syndicate did not meet once in every three months.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 43--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may, by notification, alter, amend or add to 1 [Schedules I, and I-A] and upon the issue of such notification, 2 [Schedules I, and I-A]3 shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. (2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) or under any other provisions of this Act shall, as soon as possible, after it is issued, be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and if , before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed, or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modification in any such notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Schedule 1-B omitted by Act 40 of 2006.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 44--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On and from the appointed day, the provisions of the Madras University Act, 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1923) (hereinafter in this section referred to as the said Act), shall cease to apply to and in respect of [the College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai in Schedule I and the institutions in Schedule I-A.] (2) Such cessor shall not affect- (a) the previous operation of the said Act; or (b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment, incurred in respect of any offence committed against the said Act; or (c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of such penalty, forfeiture or punishment, and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act, had not been passed. (3) Notwithstanding anything Contained in sub-section (1), any statutes, ordinances and regulations made under the said Act and in force on the appointed day, shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force until they are repealed by statutes, ordinances and regulations made under this Act.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section 45--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any difficulty arises to, the constitution or reconstitution of any authority of the University after the appointed day, or otherwise in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government may by notification, make such provision, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to them to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty; Provided that no such notification shall be issued after the expiry of three years from the date of establishment of the University under Section 3. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1979.
Anna University Chennai Act, 1978_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [Schedule I [Sec Section 2(b)] 1. The College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai.] 2 [Schedule I-A [See Sections 2(b)] 1. The following Departments of the University of Madras located in the Alagappa Chettiar College of Technology, Guindy, Madras, namely (1) Chemical Technology; (2) Leather Technology; (3) Textile Technology; (4) The School of Architecture and Town Planning. II. The Madras Institute of Technology, Chromepet, Madras. 3 [Schedule I-B [See Section 2(b)] I. Thanthai Periyar Col lege of Engineering, Vellore. II. Alagappa College of Engineering and Technology, Karaikudi. III. Government College of Technology, Coimbatore. IV. Government College of Engineering, Tirunelveli. V. Government College of Engineering, Salem. VI. Government College of Engineering, Bargur.] Schedule II [See Section 30(1)] THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY Emoluments, Terms and conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor: 1. The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be as follows - (i) There shall be paid to the Vice-Chancellor a salary of three thousand rupees per menses and he shall be entitled, without payment of rent, lo the use of a furnished residence throughout his term of office, and no charge shall fall on the Vice-Chancellor personally in respect of the maintenance of such residence. (ii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be fixed by the Syndicate with the approval of the Chancellor from time to time: Provided that, where an employee of- (a) the University or its constituent college; or (b) any other University or college or institution maintained by, or afflicted lo, that University, is appointed as Vice-Chancellor, he shall be allowed to continue to contribute to the provident fund to which he is a subscriber, and the contribution of the University shall be limited to what he had been contributing immediately before his appointment as Vice-Chancellor. (iii) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowances at such rates as may be fixed by the Syndicate. (iv) The Vice-Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay for one-eleventh of the period spent by him on active service. (v) The Vice-Chancellor shall also be entitled, on medical grounds or otherwise to leave without pay for a period not exceeding three months during the term of his office: Provided that such leave may be converted into leave on full pay to the extent to which he is entitled to leave under sub-clause (iv) 2. (1) Every Chairman shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from among the Professors in the Faculty for a period of three years and he shall be eligible for re-appointment. Provided that a Chairman on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such: Provided further that if at any time there is no professor in a Faculty, the Vice-Chancellor, shall exercise the powers of the Chairman of the Faculty. (2) When the office of the Chairman is vacant or when the Chairman is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. (3) The Chairman shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be responsible for the conduct and maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the Faculty. The Chairman shall have such other functions as may be prescribed by ordinances. (4) The Chairman shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies or Committees of the Faculty, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a member thereof. 2-A.Deans of constituent Colleges4 -(1) Every Chairman shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor from among the Professors in the University for a period of three years and he shall be eligible for re-appointment. Provided that a Chairman on attaining the age of superannuation shall cease to hold office as such. (2) When the office of the Chairman is vacant, or when the Chairman is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, lo perform the duties of his office, the duties of his office shall be performed by such persons as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. (3) The Chairman shall have such powers and functions as may be prescribed by the ordinance:] 3. (1) The Registrar shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University. (2) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may be prescribed by 5 [Regulations]; Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years. (3) When the office of the Registrar is vacant, or when the Registrar is. by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. (4) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, excluding teachers of the University and academic staff, as may be specified in the orders of the Syndicate and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings lo them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increments; Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him. (b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice-Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the penalties specified in sub-clause (a), (c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that punishment beyond the powers of the Registrar is called for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice-Chancellor along with his recommendations: Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Syndicate against an order of the Vice-Chancellor imposing any penalty. (d) No appeal under sub-section (b) or sub-clause (c) shall be preferred after the expiry of sixty days from the date on which the order appealed against was received by the appellant. (5)The Registrar shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Syndicate, the Academic Council, the Faculties and the Boards of Studies but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities. (6) It shall be the duty of the Registrar; (a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University as the Syndicate shall commit to his charge; (b) to issue notices convening meetings of the Syndicate, the Academic Council, the Faculties, the Boards of Studies, the Boards of Examiners and of any Committees appointed by the authorities of the University; (c) to keep the minute of all the meetings of the Syndicate, the Academic Council, the Faculties, the Board of Studies and of any Committees appointed by the authorities of the University; (d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Syndicate and the Academic Council; (e) to supply to the Chancellor, copies of agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings; and (f) to perform such other duties as may be specified in these statutes, the ordinances or the regulations or as may be required, from time to time by the Syndicate or the Vice-Chancellor. 4. (1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole-time salaried officer of the University. (2) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as may be prescribed by the ordinances; Provided that the Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years; Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in office until his successor is appointed and enter upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one year, whichever is earlier. (3) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such person as the Vice-Chancellor may appoint for the purpose. (4) The Finance Officer shall be ex-officio secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be deemed to be a member of such committee. (5) The Finance Officer shall,- (a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advice the University as regards its financial policy; and (b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Syndicate or as may be prescribed by these statutes or the ordinances; Provided that the Finance Officer shall not incur any expenditure or make any investment exceeding such amount as may prescribed without the previous approval of the Syndicate. (6) Subject to the control of the Syndicate, the Finance Officer shall- (a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed property; (b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Syndicate for recurring and non-recurring expenditure for a year not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purposes for which they are granted or allotted; (c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for their presentation to Syndicate. (d) keep a constant watch on the cash and bank balance and of investments; (e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advice on the methods of collection employed; (f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up-to-date and that stock-checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, special centres, specialised laboratories, constituent colleges and institutions maintained by the University; (g) call for explanation for unauthorized expenditure and for other financial irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons as fault; and (h) call from any office, centre, laboratory, constituent college or institution maintained by the University, any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his duties. (7) The receipt of the Finance Officer or of the person or persons duly authorized in this behalf by the Syndicate for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment of such money. 5. (1) Each Department shall have a Head who shall be a Professor and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of appointment shall be prescribed by the ordinances; Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department shall be appointed in the manner prescribed by the ordinances; Provided further that in a Department where there is no Professor. Assistant Professor or a Reader may be appointed as Head of the Department in the manner prescribed by the ordinances: Provided also that if there is no Professor or Assistant Professor or Reader, in a Department, the Dean of the Faculty concerned shall act as the Head of that Department. (2) It shall he open lo a Professor or Assistant Professor or Reader lo decline the offer of appointment as the Head of the Department. (3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment. (4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office. (5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the ordinances. 6. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Syndicate on the recommendation of the selection committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole time officer of the University. (2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by the Syndicate. 7. The powers and duties of the Syndicate shall be,- (a) to consider and review the financial requirements and approve the annual financial estimates of the University. (b) to provide for the administration of any funds placed at the disposal of the University for the purposes intended; (c) to arrange for the investment and withdrawal of funds of the University; (d) to borrow money subject to the approval of the Government for capital investments and to make suitable arrangements for its repayment; (e) to acquire, hold and dispose of property on behalf of the University; (f) to determine the form, provide for the custody, and regulate the use, of the common seal of the University; (g) lo appoint such committees, either standing or temporary, as it may consider necessary and specify the terms of reference thereof subject lo the provisions of the Act and these statutes; (h) lo determine and regulate all questions of policy relating to the University in accordance with the provisions of the Act and these statutes; (i) to make financial provision for the instruction, teaching research, advancement and dissemination of knowledge in such branches of learning and courses of study as may be determined by the Academic Council; (j) to provide for the establishment and maintenance of colleges, hostels, laboratories, and other facilities neccessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act: (k) to provide for the institution and conferment of degrees diplomas and other academic distinctions; (l) to provide for the institution, maintenance and award of scholarships, fellowships, studentships, medals, prizes and the like; (m) to accept trust, bequest, donation and transfer of any movable or immovable property on behalf of University; (n) to enter into any contract on behalf of the University; (o) to make statutes and to amend or repeal the same; and (p) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties inconsistent with the provisions of the Act or these statutes as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Act. 8. (1) The Syndicate shall meet at such time and places and shall, subject to the provisions of clauses (2) and (3), observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings including the quorum at meetings as may be prescribed; Provided that the Syndicate shall meet as least once in every three months. (2) The Vice-Chancellor or in his absence, any member chosen by the members present, shall preside at a meeting of the Syndicate. (3) All questions at any meeting of the Syndicate shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Vice-Chancellor or the member presiding, as the case may be, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote. (4) (a) The Syndicate may, for purpose of consultation, invite any person having special knowledge or practical experience in any subject under consideration to attend any meeting. Such person may speak in. and otherwise take part in, the proceeding of such meetings but shall not be entitled to vote. (b) The person so invited shall be entitled to such daily and travelling allowances as are admissible to a member of the Syndicate. 9. 6 [(1) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely: [Class I - Ex-officio Members. (a) The Vice-Chancellor; (b) The Chairman; (c) The Chairman of the Faculties; (d) The Director of Library of the University; (e) The Principals of all the Government Aided Engineering Colleges. Class II - Other Members. (f) Fifteen members from among the Professors and Heads of the Departments of the University, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor: (g) Twenty-five members from among the Principals and Professors of the affiliated Colleges, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (h) Five educationalists having proficiency in matters relating to education, research and educational administration, general and technical, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (i) Six members from among the Chief Engineers or General Managers from the Departments of the State Government, Railways, Military Engineering Services, Defence, Post and Telegraphs, Telephones and other autonomous organisations in the State, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (j) Five persons occupying senior positions from private industries and research organisations having proficiency in the matters relating to industries and research, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (k) Five persons occupying senior positions from public sector industries of the Central and State Departments in the State having proficiency in matters relating to industries and research, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (1) Five persons from Professional Engineering Societies or institutions or bodies or associations, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (m) Five persons of eminence from Small Scale Industries or Entrepreneurship Development Board of Apprenticeship Board of both Central and State Governments, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor; (n) One person from among the teachers of each of the institutions given below, nominated by the Chancellor on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor: (i) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. (ii) Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai. (iii) Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore. (iv) Regional Engineering College, Tiruchirappalli. (v) The Department of Engineering and Technology of the Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar, Tamil Nadu; and (o) Members of the Syndicate not included in any of the above items";]7 (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex-officio Chairman of, and the Registrar shall be the ex-officio Secretary to, the Academic Council. (3) The term of office of the members other than ex-officio members shall be three years. Provided that where a member is nominated to the Academic Council to a casual vacancy; the period of office held 8 [for not less than one year] by any such member shall be construed as a full term of three years for the purpose of this clause. Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, the expression term shall include the term held prior to the 9 [date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu Anna University (2nd amendment) Act, 1991 in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette.] (3-A) A member of the Academic Council who is nominated in his capacity as a member of a particular electorate or body or the holder of a particular appointment, shall cease to be a member of Academic Council from the date on which he ceases to be member of that electorate or body or holder of that appointment as the case may be. (4) The Chancellor may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, remove any member of the Academic Council other than an ex-officio member from office, if such member is, in the opinion of the Chancellor, incapable of acting as a member or has abused his position as a member, so as to render his continuance as such member detrimental to the interests of the University. 10. The powers and duties of the Academic Council shall be - (a) lo exercise general control on teaching and other educational programmes and maintain and promote the standards thereof: (b) to make regulations and amend or repeal the same; (c) to make regulations- (i) regulating the admission of students to the University and the number of students to be admitted; (ii) regarding the courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and other academic distinctions; (iii) regarding the conduct of examinations and maintenance and promotion of standards of education; (iv) prescribing equivalence of examinations, degrees, diplomas and certificates of other Universities. Colleges, Institutions and Boards; (v) regarding industrial training where such training forms part of the requirements for the degrees, diploma or other academic distinctions; and (vi) for the assessment, evaluation and grading of students performance; (d) to advise the Syndicate on all academic matters including the control and management of libraries; (e) to make recommendations to the Syndicate for the institution of Professorship, Readership, Assistant Professorship and other teaching posts including posts in research and in regard to the duties and emoluments thereof: (f) to formulate, modify or revise schemes for the constitution or reconstitution of departments of teaching and research; (g) to make recommendations to the Syndicate regarding postgraduate teaching and research; (h) to make recommendations to the Syndicate regarding the qualifications to be prescribed for teaching in the University; (i) to make recommendation to the Syndicate for the conferment of honorary degrees or other distinctions; (j) to review and act upon the proposals of Boards of Studies in formulating rules, regulations, syllabi and methods of evaluation, introduction of new courses and modification of existing courses; (k) to make recommendations to the Syndicate regarding institution of fellowships and scholarships; (l) to recommend to the Syndicate measures for promoting collaboration between industries and Governmental employees on the one hand and the University on the other; (m) to delegate to the Vice-Chancellor or to any of the committees of the Academic Council, any of its powers; (n) To assess and make recommendations laying down standards of accommodation, equipment library, maintenance and other physical facilities required for each faculty; and (o) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 11. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: (a) the Vice-Chancellor; (b) two officers of the Government one from the Finance department and the other from the department dealing with the subject Technical Education nominated by the Chancellor; (c) two members nominated by the Syndicate from among its member (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex-officio Chairman and the Finance Officer shall be the ex-officio Secretary to the Finance Committee. (3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex-officio members shall hold office for a period of three years. (4) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year to examine the accounts and lo scrutinize proposals for expenditure. (5) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to the Syndicate for approval. (6) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total non-recurring expenditure for the year based on the income and resources of the University which, in the case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans. (7) The Finance Committee shall- (a) review the financial position of the University from time to time; (b) make recommendation to the Syndicate on every proposal involving investment or expenditure for which no provision has been made in the annual financial estimates or which involves expenditure in excess of the amount provided for in the annual financial estimates. (c) prescribe the methods and procedure and forms for maintaining the accounts of the University, constituent colleges and institutions; (d) make recommendation to the Syndicate on all matters relating to the finances of the University; and (c) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 12. All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex-officio members) of- (i) the Syndicate, and (ii) any other authority or other body of the University shall as soon as convenient may be filled; (a) in a case falling under clause (i), by the Vice-Chancellor; and (b) in a case falling under clause (ii), by the person or body who or which nominated the member whose place has become vacant and the person nominated under this statute to a casual vacancy shall be a member of the Syndicate or other authority or other body of the University for the remainder of the term for which the member in whose place he is nominated would have held office: Provided that no casual vacancy shall be filled, if such vacancy occurs within six months before the date of the expiry of the term of the member of any authority or other body of the University. 13. (1) There shall be Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Syndicate for appointment to the posts of Professor, Assistant Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Librarian and 10 [Director]. (2) The Selection Committee for the appointment to the posts specified in column (1) of the Table below shall consists of the Vice-Chancellor, a nominee of the Government and the persons specified in the corresponding every entry in column (2) of the said Table and in the case of appointment of a Professor, Assistant Professor, Reader, or Lecturer in a department where there is no Head of the Department, shall also consist of a person nominated by the Academic Council from amongst its members: THE TABLE Professor, Assistant Professor or Reader.. (i) The Head of the Department concerned, if he is a Professor. 11 [(ii) One Director or a Chairman or a Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor.] (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the Syndicate, out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic Council for their special Knowledge of or interest in the subject with which the Professor, Assistant Professor or Reader will be concerned. Lecturer. (i) The Head of the Department concerned. (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor. (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the Syndicate out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic Council for their special knowledge of or interest in the subject with which the Lecturer will be concerned. Librarian. (i) Two persons not in the service of the University who have special knowledge of the subject of Library Science or Library Administration to be nominated by the Syndicate. (ii) One person. not in the service of the University, nominated by the Syndicate. 12 [Director] Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two shall he nominated by Syndicate and one by the Academic Council for their special knowledge of or interest in the subject in which instruction is being provided by the constituent college or institutions. Explanation I: Where the appointment is being made for an inter-disciplinary project, the Head of the Project shall be deemed to be Head of the Department concerned. Explanation II: The Professor to be nominated shall be the Professor concerned with the speciality for which the selection is being made and that the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the Head of the department and the Chairman of Faculty before nominating the Professor. Explanation III: At least three out of four or two out of three members as the case may be, concerned with the speciality referred to under column (2) shall be present at the Selection Committee meeting. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a Selection Committee. (4) The Meetings of Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice-Chancellor. (5) The Procedure lo be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid down in the ordinances. (6) If the Syndicate is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Chancellor for final orders. (7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: (i) I f the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing provisions: Provided that if the Vice-Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a temporary basis by a local Selection Committee referred to in sub-clause (ii) for a period not exceeding six months. (ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of a local selection committee consisting of the Chairman of the Faculty concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor: Provided that if the same persons holds the offices of the Chairman and the Head of the Department, the selection committee may consist two nominees of the Vice-Chancellor: Provided further that in case of sudden casual vacancies in leaching posts caused by death or any other reason, the Chairman may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned make a temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar about such appointment. (iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall if he is not recommended by a regular selection committee for appointment under these statutes, be continued in service on such temporary employment unless he is subsequently selected by a local selection committee or a regular selection committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be. 8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 13, the Syndicate may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor in the University on such terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so, appoint him lo the post. (2) Syndicate may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other University or Organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the ordinances. 9. The Syndicate may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in 13 [statute 13] for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit. 10. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act and these statutes. the first Vice-Chancellor shall have power to appoint such officers, teachers and other persons as may be necessary. 11. (1) It shall be the duty of the first Vice-Chancellor to make arrangements for constituting the authorities of the University specified in Section 16 of Act within one year after the appointed day or such longer period not exceeding two years as the Government may, by notification, specify. (2) The first Vice-Chancellor shall, make such rules, as may be necessary, for the functioning of the University. (3) The authorities constitute under clause (1) shall commence to perform their functions on such date to dates, as the Government may, by notification, specify. (4) It shall be the duty of the first Vice-Chancellor lo make, with approval of the Chancellor, such statutes and regulations, as may be necessary and submit them to the respective authorities competent to deal with them for their disposal. Such statutes and regulations, when framed, shall be published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and these statutes and until such time an authority is duly constituted. the first Vice-Chancellor may, appoint any officer or constitute any committee temporarily to exercise and perform any of the powers and duties of such Authority under the Act and these statutes. Certain provision of the Madras University, Annamalai University and Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment) Act. 1982 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1982) Not incorporated in the Principal Act. 12. Removal of doubts - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that notwithstanding anything contained in the 1923 Act, the 1929 Act or the 1978 Act as amended by this Act every member of the Senate, Syndicate or Academic Council, as the case may be, elected or nominated: (i) in the case of the Madras University, before the 1st December 1981, shall continue to be such member for the period for which he would have continued as such member but for the amendments made to the 1923 Act by part II of this Act, and; (ii) in the case of Annamalai University and the Perarignar Anna University of Technology, before the 21st December 1981, shall continue to be such member for the period for which he would have continued as such member but for the amendments made on the 1928 Act by Part 111 or the 1978 Act by Part IV of this Act: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be constructed as enabling any member referred to therein to continue as a member of any of the authorities in any of the said Universities of which he may happen to be a member by virtue of his membership of the Senate, Syndicate or Academic Council, as the case may be after he ceases to be a member of the Senate. Syndicate or Academic Council as the case may be. 13. Certain proceedings to hold elections to be void - (1) Every action taken and every proceedings commenced on or after 1st December 1981 but before the 21st December 1981, lo hold election to the Senate Syndicate or Academic Council of the Madras University shall be deemed to be null and void and accordingly fresh action or proceedings shall hereafter be taken in accordance with the provisions of the 1923 Act as amended by this Act. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that notwithstanding anything contained in the 1923 Act as amended by this Act. every member who ceases to be a member of the Senate Syndicate or Academic Council by reason of the operation or sub-section (I) shall ceases to be a member of- (i) the Syndicate or the Academic Council as the case may be, to which he was elected in his capacity as a member of the Senate; and (ii) the Syndicate to which he was elected in his capacity as a member of the Academic Council and to which Council he was elected in his capacity as a member of the Senate, with effect on and from the date on which he ceases to be member of the Senate or Academic Council by reason of sub-section (1) 14. Repeal and Saving - (1) the Madras University, Annamalai University, and Perarignar Anna University of Technology (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 18 of 1981) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the 1923 Act, the 1929 Act or the 1978 Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the 1923 Act, the 1929 Act or the 1978 Act, as the case may be, as amended by this Act. 23. Removal of doubts - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that members of the authorities of the Chennai, Madurai-Kamaraj, Bharathiar, Bharathidasan. Manonmaniam Sundaranar. Periyar University elected or nominated or otherwise as such members under the Chennai University Act, 1923 (Tamil Nadu Act VII of 1923), the Madurai-Kamaraj University Act, 1965 (Tamil Nadu Act 33 of 1965), the Bharathiar University Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1982), the Bharathidasan University Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1982), the Manonmaniam Sundaranar University Act. 1990 (Tamil Nadu Act 31 of 1990) or the Periyar University Act, 1997 (Tamil Nadu Act 45 of 1997), as the case may he, from the colleges or institutions deemed to have been affiliated to the Anna University under sub-section (5) of Section 38-A of the Anna University Act, 1978 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1978) and holding office as such members, in any of the authorities University concerned immediately before the date of the commencement of the Anna University (Amendment) Act, 2001 shall continue lo be such members till the term of office expires. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1986. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1982. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001 Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1979. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2001. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1979. 
