Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the levy of Additional Sales Tax Whereas it is considered necessary to levy additional tax on the sale or purchase of goods; Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Twenty-first year of Republic of India as follows: -
Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st April, 1970. Received the assent of the Governor on the 22nd May, 1970
Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)(a) [...] (Substituted by Act 37 of 1999 - with effect from 21-6-1999) (1)(aa) The tax payable under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) (hereafter in this section referred to as the said Act), shall, in the case of a dealer including the principal selling or buying goods through agents whose taxable turnover for a year exceeds ten crores of rupees, be increased by an additional tax, calculated at the following rates, namely:  RATE OF TAX i. Where the taxable turnover exceeds ten crores of rupees but does not exceed twenty-five crores of rupees 1 per cent of the taxable turnover (i-a) Where the taxable turnover exceeds twenty-five crores of rupees but does not exceed fifty crores of rupees. 1.5 per cent of the taxable turnover ii. Where the taxable turnover exceeds fifty crores of rupees but does not exceed one hundred crores of rupees. 2 per cent of the taxable turnover iii. Where the taxable turnover exceeds one hundred crores of rupees but does not exceed three hundred crores of rupees 2.5 per cent of the taxable turnover iv. Where the taxable turnover exceeds three hundred crores of rupees 3 per cent of the taxable turnover Explanation I:- Taxable Turnover for the purpose of this clause in respect of a principal selling or buying goods [ ...] through agents shall be the aggregate taxable turnover of all his agents relating to the sale or purchase of the goods of such principal within the State. Explanation II:- Notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act, for the purpose of his clause, turnover in respect of sugarcane excluding sugarcane sets shall be arrived at by multiplying the total metric tonnes of sugarcane excluding sugarcane sets purchased during the year, by the minimum price fixed under clause 3 and the additional price determined under clause 5-A, of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 and such turnover shall be included n the total turnover of the dealer and the taxable turnover shall be arrived at accordingly for he purpose of this clause. Explanation III:- Taxable turnover for the purpose of this clause in respect of a dealer liable to pay tax under Section 3-G of the said Act shall be the total turnover. Explanation IV:- Taxable turnover for the purpose of this clause does not include the turnover of resale, taxable under Section 3-H of the said Act. Explanation V Taxable turnover for the purpose of this clause in respect of a dealer liable to pay tax under Section 7-C of the said Act for the financial years commencing on the 1st day of April 1993, shall be the total value referred to in the said section. Provided that where in respect of declared goods as defined in clause (h) of Section 2 of be said Act, the tax payable by such dealer under the said Act, together with the additional tax payable under this sub-section, exceeds four per cent of the sale or purchase price thereof, the rate of additional tax in respect of such goods shall be reduced to such an extent that the and the additional tax together shall not exceed four per cent of the sale or purchase price f such goods. 1 [(aaa) on any amount of additional tax or penalty imposed by the assessing authority remaining unpaid under this Act, the dealer referred to in clause (aa) shall pay interest as specified in sub-section (3) of Section 24 of the said Act, in addition to such amount of additional tax or penalty due."] 2 [(1)(b)The provisions of the said Act shall apply in relation to the additional tax payable under clause (aa) and the interest payable under the clause (aaa) as they apply in relation to the tax and interest payable under the said Act.] (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the said Act, no dealer referred to in sub-section (1) shall be entitled to collect the additional tax payable under the said sub-section. (3) Any dealer who collects the additional tax payable under sub-section (1) in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and no court below the rank of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any such offence. Inserted as per Act 14 of 2005 and deemed to have me into force with effect from 1.4.1970 Clause (b) amended as per Act 14 of 2005
Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act or any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other authority, any interest paid or payable for delayed payment of additional tax or penalty which is in conformity with the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by Section 2 of this Act for the period commencing on the 1st day of April 1970 and ending with the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette shall, for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly paid or payable in accordance with law, as if the Principal Act as amended by Section 2 of this Act had been in force at all material times when such interest was paid or become payable and accordingly all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by any authority officer or person in connection with the payment of such interest for delayed payment of additional tax or penalty shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law.
Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section 3A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any dealer, 3 [*** collects any amount by way of additional tax or purporting to be by way of additional tax, in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 4 [...] the assessing authority, concerned, may, after giving such dealer 5 [...] a reasonable opportunity of being heard, order in writing impose upon him by way of penalty, a sum not exceeding one and a half times such amount: Provided that no proceedings under this section shall be commenced after a period of five years from the expiry of the year in which the amount has been collected: Provided further that no prosecution for an offence, under sub-section (3) of Section 2 6 [...] shall be instituted in respect of the same facts on which a penalty has been imposed under this section. The words "importer or wholesale dealer omitted by Act 8 of 1981 Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 65 of 1973 The words "importer or wholesale dealer omitted by Act 8 of 1981 The words "importer or wholesale dealer omitted by Act 8 of 1981 The words "importer or wholesale dealer omitted by Act 8 of 1981 Omitted by Act 8 of 1981
Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may make rules to carry out the purpose of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall be published in Tamil Nadu Government Gazett and unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force o the day on which they are so published. (3) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after it is made, be placed of the table of both Houses of the Legislature and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modification in any such rule of both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that an such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
