Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to amend certain Universities Laws. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object Consequent on the establishment of the Anna University of Technology, Chennai and Anna University of Technology, Madurai, the Government have issued orders to transfer the constituent colleges at Tindivanam, Villupuram, Thiruvannamalai and Kancheepuram from Anna University, Chennai to Anna University of Technology, Chennai and the constituent colleges at Dindigul and Ramanathapuram from Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli to Anna University of Technology, Madurai. 2. Accordingly, it has been decided to amend the Anna University of Technology, Chennai Act, 2010 (Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2010) and Anna University of Technology, Madurai Act, 2010 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 2010). 3. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. DR. K. PONMUDY, Minister for Higher Education. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of June 2010.
Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 53 of the Anna University of Technology, Chennai Act, 2010 (Tamil Nadu Act 26 of 2010), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "53-A. Transfer of constituent colleges:- (1) On and from the appointed day, the colleges established and maintained by the Anna University, Chennai, at Tindivanam, Villupuram, Thiruvannamalai and Kancheepuram shall cease to-be the constituent colleges of Anna University, Chennai and shall become the constituent colleges of the Anna University of Technology, Chennai. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the statutes, ordinances and regulations continued in force under sub-section (3) of section 53 or made under this Act, every person who immediately before the appointed day was a student of the constituent colleges specified in sub-section (1) or was eligible to appear for any of the examinations of the Anna University, Chennai shall be permitted to complete his course of study in the Anna University, Chennai and the Anna University of Technology, Chennai shall make arrangements for the instruction, teaching and training for such students for such period and in such manner as may be determined by the Anna University of Technology, Chennai in accordance with the course of study in the Anna University, Chennai and such students shall, during such period, be admitted to the examinations held or conducted by the Anna University, Chennai and the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinctions of the Anna University, Chennai shall be conferred upon the qualified students on the result of such examinations, by the Anna University, Chennai.".
Tamil Nadu Universities Laws (Third Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 53 of the Anna University of Technology, Madurai Act, 2010 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 2010), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "53-A. Transfer of constituent colleges:- (1) On and from the appointed day, the colleges established and maintained by the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli at Dindigul and Ramanathapuram shall cease to be the constituent colleges of Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli and shall become the constituent colleges of the Anna University of Technology, Madurai. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Statutes, ordinances and regulations continued in force under sub-section (3) of section 53 or made under this Act, every person who immediately before the appointed day was a student of the constituent colleges specified in sub-section (1) or was eligible to appear for any of the examinations of the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli shall be permitted to complete his course of study in the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli and the Anna University of Technology, Madurai shall make arrangements for the instruction, teaching and training for such students for such period and in such manner as may be determined by the Anna University of Technology, Madurai in accordance with the course of study in the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli and such students shall, during such period, be admitted to the examinations held or conducted by the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli and the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinctions of the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli shall be conferred upon the qualified students on the result of such examinations, by the Anna University of Technology, Tiruchirappalli.". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
