Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object It has been brought to the knowledge of the Government that the registered dealers dealing with white goods such as T.V., Washing machines etc., are selling the goods at a price less than the purchase price of those goods by availing discount from the seller. In view of this, the output tax payable on those goods becomes less than the input tax credit available to them. The excess input tax credit available is being adjusted against any outstanding tax due from those dealers or carried forward to the next year or refunded. In qrder to protect the revenue of the Government, the Government have decided to amend the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006). 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. S.N.M. UBAYADULLAH, Minister for Commercial Taxes. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 19 of the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006), after sub-section (19), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(20) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where any registered dealer has sold goods at a price lesser than the price of the goods purchased by him, the amount of the input tax credit over and above the output tax of those goods shall be reversed.". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
