Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows : Statement of Object The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 2008 (L. A. Bill No. 55 of 2008) runs as follows : While moving the demand for grant in respect of Commercial Taxes under Commercial Taxes and Registration department, the honourable Minister for Commercial Taxes has announced that certain amendments will be made to the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006) in order to simplify the existing procedure and to weed out the practical problems. 2. The Government have, therefore, decided to amend the said Act, suitably. Accordingly, the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2008 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 1 of 2008) was promulgated by the Governor on the 17th June, 2008 and the same was published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated the 18th June, 2008. 3. The Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of June, 2008.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the Principle Act), for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(4)(a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), but subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), every dealer, who effects second and subsequent sales of goods purchased within the State, whose turnover relating to taxable goods, for a year, is less than rupees fifty lakhs may, at his option, instead of paying tax under sub-section (2), pay a tax, for each year, on his turnover relating to taxable goods at such rate not exceeding one per cent, as may be notified by the Government. Such option shall be exercised by a dealer,- (i) who commences business, within thirty days from the date of commencement of the business ; (ii) whose turnover relating to taxable goods is below rupees fifty lakhs during the previous year, on or before the 30th day of April of the year for which he exercises such option ; (iii) for the year 2008-2009, within thirty days from the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008 : Provided that such dealer shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax : Provided further that such dealer shall not be entitled to input tax credit on the goods purchased by him : Provided also that the dealer who purchased goods from such dealer shall not be entitled to input tax credit on the goods purchased by him. (b) if the turnover, relating to taxable goods of a dealer paying tax under clause (a), in a year, reaches rupees fifty lakhs at any time during that year, he shall inform the assessing authority in writing within seven days from the date on which such turnover has so reached. Such dealer is liable to pay tax under sub-section (2) on all his sales of rupees fifty lakhs and above and he is entitled to the input tax credit on the purchases made from the date, and on the stock available with him, the purchases of which has been made within ninety days before the date, on which such turnover has reached rupees fifty lakhs : Provided that such dealer whose turnover relating to taxable goods has reached rupees fifty lakhs during the previous year shall not be entitled to exercise such option for subsequent years.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 21 of the Principal Act, for the expression "every dealer, liable to pay tax under this Act", the expression, "every dealer, registered under this Act" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 87 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "87-A. Assessment of sales in certain cases.-Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the assessment of a dealer under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) or under the Tamil Nadu Additional Sales Tax Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 14 of 1970), in respect of the assessment for the period from the 1st day of April, 2006 to the 31st day of December, 2006, shall be on the basis of the return filed by him and such return shall be accepted in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed.".
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2008_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2008 is hereby repealed. 2. Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
