Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 2 An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University Act, 1989. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object The Hon'ble Chief Minister during budget session for the year 2011-2012, has announced on 13-09-2011, on the floor of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly that a new "Fisheries University" will be established at Nagapattinam Taluk. To give effect to the said announcement, it has been decided to establish a "Fisheries University" at Nagapattinam Taluk. A bill for the establishment of the Fisheries University has been introduced, separately. As a result certain consequential amendments have to be made to the. Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University Act, 1989 (Tamil Nadu Act 42 of 1989). Therefore, it has been decided to amend the said Tamil Nadu Act 42 of 1989 for the purpose. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. T.K.M. CHINNAYYA, Minister for Animal Husbandry. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. L A. Bill No. 22 of 2012, published in T. N. Govt Gazette, Extra., dated 7.05.2012. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 31st May 2012 and is hereby published for general information:-
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall come into force on such date and the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 2 of the Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University Act, 1989 (Tamil. Nadu Act 42 of 1989) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in clause (g), the expression "and the Fisheries College, Tuticorin" shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the expression "and Fisheries" shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (a) under the heading "Class l-Ex-officio Members", for the items (e), (f) and (g) and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely:- "(e) the Director of Animal Husbandry; and (f) The Registrar."; (b) under the heading "Class ll-Other Members", in item (c), the expression "or fisheries" shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), under the heading "Class l-Ex-officio Members" item (d) shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the expression "Fisheries" shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu in section 29 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted. "(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the statutes, the University shall establish a Veterinary and Animal Sciences Research Organisation for doing basic research on problems primarily relating to veterinary, animal husbandry and allied subjects for the purpose of aiding the development of animal husbandry and shall for this purpose establish as many veterinary and livestock research stations as may be necessary in co-operation with the department of Animal Husbandry and Research stations under the control of the Government.".
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 30 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the expression "livestock farmers, fish farmers and fisherman", the expression "and livestock farmers" shall be substituted; (2) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the expression "the livestock farmers, fish farmers and fisherman", the expression "the livestock farmers" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), the expression "and the Fisheries College, Tuticorin" shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1-A), the expression "and Fisheries" shall be omitted. (By order of the Governor) G. Jayachandran, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
