Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object It is noticed that petroleum products intended for sale to dealers in Puducherry State by the Oil Companies are being unloaded and sold in this State itself. Local sales of petroleum products which are intended for inter-State sales causes huge loss of revenue to the State exchequer. In order to curb such practice and to prevent evasion of tax, the Government have decided to include Petrol with or without additives, High Speed Diesel Oil and Light Diesel Oil in the Sixth Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006). 2. The Government have also decided to amend sub-section (2) of section 70 of the said Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006, to make it clear that transit pass is necessary for inter-State sale of any goods specified in the Sixth Schedule to that Act. 3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above decisions. Agri S.S. KRISHNAMOORTHY, Minister for Commercial Taxes and Registration. A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the. Governor on the 26th September 2011 and is hereby published for general information.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 70 of the Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax Act, 2006 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 2006) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2),- (1) for the expression "consigned or transferred" occurring in two places, the expression "sold or consigned or transferred" shall be substituted; (2) for the expression "consignor or transferor" wherever it occurs, the expression "seller or consignor or transferor" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Value Added Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Sixth Schedule to the principal Act, after Serial Number 9 and the entries relating thereto, the following Serial Numbers and entries shall respectively, be added, namely:- "10. Petrol with or without additives 11. High Speed Diesel oil. 12. Light Diesel oil.". (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
