Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An ACt to provide for the levy of a tax on Certain forms of betting in the PresidenCy of Madras. WHEREAS it is neCessary to make an addition to the publiC revenues of the PresidenCy of Madras and for that purpose to provide for the levy of a tax on Certain forms of betting; It is hereby enaCted as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Betting Tax Act, 1935.2 (2) It extends to the whole of the Presidency of Madras. (3) (a) This section shall come into force at once. (b) The remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force in the district of Chingleput, Madras on the 15th day of November 1935. (c) The 3 [State Government] may, by notification in the 4 [Official Gazette], direct that all or any of the remaining provisions of this Act shall come into force in any other local area on such date as may be specified in such notification: 5 [Provided that no such notification shall be published in respect of any area included in a cantonment without the previous sanction of the 6 (Central Government).] Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on the 6th November, 1935 Provincial Government was substituted for Local Government by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State was substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order 1950. Substituted for the words Fort Si. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937. The proviso was added by Section 2 of the Madras Betting Tax (Amendment) Act, 1936 (Madras Act 14 of 1936). Substituted for the words Governor-General in Council by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act shall apply only to betting at meetings for horse-races and pony-races. (2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the 1 [Chennai] City Police Act, 1888, (Tamil Nadu Act III of 1888), or of the 2 [Tamil Nadu] Gaming Act, 1930 (3 [Tamil Nadu] Act III of 1930) regarding the time and place at which betting on horse-races may take place. Provincial Government was substituted for Local Government by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State was substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order 1950. Substituted for the words Fort Si. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Substituted for the words Fort Si. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (a) "backer" includes any person who bets at a totalizator or with a book-marker ; (b) "bet" includes wage ; and "betting" includes wagering ; (c) "book-maker" means a person who carries on the business of making bets with the public in general ; (d) "director" means the person (whether an individual, a corporate body or an association) primarily responsible for the holding of a race-meeting ; (e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act ; (f) "race-meeting" means an assembly of persons for horse-racing or pony-racing to which the public have access whether on payment or otherwise ; and (g) "totalizator" means any machine, instrument or contrivance for enabling persons to make bets with one another on the principle of a common pool.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State Government] may, by notification in the 2 [Official Gazette], from time to time, direct that a tax (hereinafter referred to as the totalizator tax) shall be levied on backers in respect of all moneys paid by them into any totalizator by way of stakes or bets. (2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall specify the local area in which, the rate at which, and the date from which, the totalizator tax shall be levied: 3 [Provided that the rate shall be exceed 4 [twenty-five per cent] of every sum paid into the totalizator.] (3) Such portion of the moneys paid into the totalizator as is equivalent to the amount of the totalizator tax calculated at the rate specified in the notification aforesaid shall be deemed to have been paid by the backer on account of the totalizator tax and to have been received by the director on behalf of the State Government Provincial Government was substituted for Local Government by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State was substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order 1950. Substituted for the words Fort Si. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937. The proviso was substituted for the original proviso by Section 2(i) of the Madras Betting Tax (Amendment) Act 1947 (Madras Act 20 of 1947). Substituted by Madras Act 30 of 1958.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 4-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) There shall be levied on the totalizator tax payable under this Act a surcharge at the rate of five per cent of such totalizator tax. (2) The provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the surcharge payable under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the totalizator tax payable under this Act.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1968.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 [(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time, direct that a tax (hereinafter referred to as the betting tax) shall be levied on every book-maker in respect of all moneys paid or agreed to be paid to him by backers in consequence of bets made in a place within the race enclosure which the director has, with the sanction of the State Government, set apart for the purpose of such betting.] (2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall specify the local area in which, the rate at which, and the date from which, the betting tax shall be levied: 2 [Provided that the rate shall not exceed 3 [twenty-five per cent] of every sum paid out by a book-maker to a winning backer, the amount of bet being excluded. (3) The betting tax shall be collected and paid to the 4 [State Government], in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1973. Proviso substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1947. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1962. Provincial Government Substituted by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order, 1950.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 5-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) There shall be levied on the betting tax payable under this Act a surcharge at the rate of five per cent of such betting tax. (2) The provisions of this Act and the rules made there under shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the surcharge payable under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the betting tax payable under this Act.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 44 of 1971.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The director of every race-meeting at which betting takes place shall- 1 [(a) cause accounts to be kept in the prescribed manner of all sums paid into every totalizator used, and of all sums paid or agreed to be paid to every book-maker by backers in consequence of bets made by them at such meeting.] (b) forward at the time, in the manner, and to the officer, prescribed in this behalf, a return showing the total amount of the moneys paid into every totalizator used at such meeting and whenever required, make over to the prescribed officer the amount of totalizator tax collected at such meeting ; and (c) furnish such other reports and returns as may be prescribed. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1958.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The director of every race-meeting held in any local area in respect of which a notification has not been issued under Section 4 or Section 5 shall pay to the 1 [State Government] by way of tax. in respect of such meeting, such amount not exceeding 2 [one thousand rupees] as may be prescribed. Provincial Government Substituted by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order, 1950. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1962.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 7-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The amount of lax or any other sum payable, and the amount of refund due, under the provisions of this Act shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and, for this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee consisting of paise, then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one rupee and if such part is less than fifty paise, it shall be ignored.] Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 9 of 1972.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State Government] may appoint persons, and may authorise hem to appoint other persons, for any local area, to inspect race-meetings and the accounts f betting thereat. (2) Every person appointed under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860) and shall be given free access to every race-meeting held in the local area for which he has been appointed and to every place where betting is conducted at such race-meeting, and to all books of account relating to such belting, whether such books belong to the director or to any book-maker. Provincial Government Substituted by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order, 1950.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State Government] may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any race-meeting from- (a) the totalizator tax leviable under Section 4, or (b) the betting tax leviable under Section 5, or (c) the tax leviable under Section 7. Provincial Government Substituted by Adaptation Order. 1937 and State substituted for Provincial by Adaptation Order, 1950.
Tamil Nadu Betting Tax Act, 1935_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State Government] may by notification in the 2 [Official Gazette] make rules- (a) with reference to all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed, and (b) to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act and not inconsistent therewith. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the [State Government] shall have power to make rules regarding the manner in which any tax payable under this Act may be recovered. 3 [Such rules may provide for the recovery of the tax as an arrear of land revenue.] 4 [(3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette and, unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so published. (4) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after it is made, be placed on the Table of the Legislative Assembly and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, the Legislative Assembly in making any modification in any such rule or the Legislative Assembly that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1962. Substituted, for the words Fort St. George Gazette by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Added by Section 3 of the Madras Betting Tax (Amendment) Act 14 of 1936. Sub-section (3) and (4) added Tamil Nadu Act 6 of 1962. 
