Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1978. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of October 1994.
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 4 of the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(f) four whole time directors appointed by the Government, namely:- (i) a Managing Director; (ii) an Executive Director; (iii) a Finance Director; and (iv) an Engineering Director.".
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "10-A. Executive Director. - (1) An Executive Director shall be a person who has special knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to water supply and sewerage or has sufficient experience in administrative matters and arrangements. (2) The Executive Director shall hold office until the age of superannuation applicable under, or until his service is terminated pursuant to the terms and conditions determined under, section 12.".
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 12 of the principal Act, for the expression "the Managing Director, Finance Director", the expression "the Managing Director, Executive Director, Finance Director" shall be substituted.
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (1) in clause (a), for the expression "the Managing Director", the expression "the Managing Director, the Executive Director" shall be substituted; (2) in clause (b), for the expression "the Managing Director, the Finance Director", the expression "the Managing Director, the Executive Director, the Finance Director" shall be substituted; (3) in clause (d), for the expression "the Managing Director, the Finance Director", the expression "the Managing Director, the Executive Director, the Finance Director" shall be substituted; (4) in clause (e), for the expression "the Managing Director, the Finance Director", the expression "the Managing Director, the Executive Director, the Finance Director" shall be substituted.
Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any meeting of the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board or of any Committee thereof held during the period commencing on the 17th day of October 1994 and ending with the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, in which the Executive Director had participated as Director of the said Board or member of any Committee thereof, shall for all purposes be deemed to be and to have always been validly held in accordance with law as if the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at all material times. (By order of the Governor) (S.S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
