Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Act, 1976 . BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980. (2) It shall come into force1 on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. This Act has not yet been brought into force.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the long title of, and the preamble to, the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Act, 1976 (President's Act 25 of 1976) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the expression "Special Officers " in both the places where it occurs, the expression "managing committees" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 1 of the principal Act, for the expression "Special Officers", the expression " Managing Committees " shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 4 of the principal Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression 'Special Officers", the expression "managing committees" shall be substituted ; (2) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely "(1) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Co-operative Societies Act, or in the Tamil Nadu Cooperative Land Development Banks Act, 1934 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1934) or in any other law for the time being in force, on and from the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980, the Government shall appoint a managing committee consisting of not more than nine members for each scheduled co-operative society for such period or periods not exceeding two years in the aggregate as may be specified by the Government, from time to time. (b) The managing committee shall consist of both officials and non-officials. (c) The Government shall appoint one of the members of the managing committee as the Chairman thereof. (d) The managing committee shall manage the affairs of every scheduled co-operative society." ; (3) in sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), for the expression "Special Officer" wherever it occurs, the expression "managing committee" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 5 of the principal Act, for the expression "Special Officer" wherever it occurs, the expression "managing committee" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1980_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Act, every Special Officer appointed under subsection (1) of section 4 of the principal Act and holding office as such immediately before the date of commencement of this Act, shall cease to hold office and be deemed to have vacated his office on and from the date of commencement" of this Act. (2) Anything done or any action taken by the Special Officer in pursuance of the powers conferred on him by sub-section (2) of section 4 of the principal Act before the date of the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been done or taken by the managing committee concerned in pursuance of the powers, conferred on it by sub-section (2) of section 4 of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
