Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of December 2010.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 5 of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the expression "one hundred and fifty-five", the expression "two hundred" shall be substituted.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 45 of the principal-Act,- (i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:- "Two hundred divisions."; (ii) in sub-section (1), for the expression "one hundred and fifty-five" occurring in two places, the expression "two hundred" shall be substituted.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 46-AA of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "46-AAA. Special Provisions:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made or orders issued under this Act, until the ordinary election to be held in the year 2011, the territorial area of the divisions of the city, the total number of divisions and the total number of councillors shall be the same as they exist before the commencement of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011.".
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 48 of the principal Act,- (1) in sub-section (1), for the expression "one hundred and fifty-five", the expression "two hundred" shall be substituted, (ii) in sub-section (2), for the expression "one hundred and fifty-five", the expression "two hundred" shall be substituted.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 8 of 2010) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
