Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In Schedule VII to the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919,- (1) for the item relating to section 191, the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "191 Making connection with mains without permission- (a) Ordinary building- (i) Residential Five thousand rupees; (ii) Commercial Ten thousand rupees; (b) Special building- (i) Residential Twenty five thousand rupees; (ii) Commercial Fifty thousand rupees; (c) Multi-storeyed building- (i) Residential One lakh rupees; (ii) Commercial Two lakh rupees. Explanation. - For the purpose of this item, ordinary building, special building and multi-storeyed building shall have the same meaning assigned to them, respectively, in the Development Regulation for Chennai Metropolitan Area."; (2) for the item relating to sub-section (5) of section 202, the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "202 (5) Allowing filth to flow in streets- (a) Ordinary building- (i) Residential Five thousand rupees; (ii) Commercial Ten thousand rupees; (b) Special building- (i) Residential Twenty five thousand rupees; (ii) Commercial Fifty thousand rupees; (c) Multi-storeyed building- (i) Residential One lakh rupees; (ii) Commercial Two lakh rupees. Explanation. - For the purpose of this item, ordinary building, special building and multi-storeyed building shall have the same meaning assigned to them, respectively, in the Development Regulation for Chennai Metropolitan Area.". (By order of the Governor) (S.S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government-in-charge, Law Department. 
