Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to make provisions with respect to the use of the eyes of deceased persons for Therapeutic purposes in the State of 1 [Tamil Nadu] Whereas it is expedient to make provision with respect to the use of the eyes of deceased persons for therapeutic purposes in the State of 2 [Tamil Nadu] Be it enacted in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1). This Act may be called the The 1 [Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960.2 (2) It extends to the whole of the State of 3 [Tamil Nadu.] (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on 11th June, 1960 Published in the Fort St. George. Gazette, Part IV-B, dated 22nd June, 1960 Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act unless the context otherwise require- (1) "approved institutions" means an institution specified in the Schedule and includes any other institution declared by the State Government, by notification to be an approved institution for the purposes of this Act; (2) "near relative" means any of the following, relatives of the deceased, namely, a wife, husband, parent, son, daughter, brother or sister and includes any other person who is related to the deceased (i) by lineal consanguinity within three degrees or by collateral consanguinity within six degrees or (ii) by marriage with any of the relative aforesaid. Explanation - The expression "lineal consanguinity" and "collateral consanguinity" shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act 34 of 1925); and degrees of relationship shall be computed in the manner laid down in the Act.
Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person, either in writing at any time or orally in the presence of the two or more persons during his last illness has expressed an unequivocal request that his eyes or eyes be used for therapeutic purposes after his death, the party lawfully in possession of his body after his death, may unless the said party has reason to believe that the request was subsequently withdrawn, authorize the removal of the eyes from the body for use for those purposes. (2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the party lawfully in possession of the body of a deceased person may authorise the removal of the eye or eyes from the body for purpose aforesaid unless that party has reason to believe- (a) that the deceased had expressed an objection to his eye or eyes being so death with after his death, and had withdrawn it; or (b) that the surviving spouse or any near relative of the deceased objects to the eye or eyes of the deceased being so dealt with. (3) An authority given under this Act in respect of any deceased person shall be sufficient warrant for the removal of eye or eyes from the body and its or their use for the purposes aforesaid; but no such removal shall be effected except by a medical officer possessing the prescribed qualifications and attached to, or employed in, an approved institution, who must have satisfied himself by a personal examination of the body that life is extinct and the eye or eyes shall, after such removal, be handed over by such medical officer to the nearest approved institutions. (4) (a) No authority for the removal of the eye or eyes under this Act shall be given if the party empowered to give such authority has reason to believe that an inquest may be required to be held on the body. (b) Any person knowing, or having reason to believe, that an inquest may be required to be held over a dead body gives or abets the giving of any authority under this Act shall, on conviction before a. Magistrate, be liable to fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. (5) No authority shall be given under this Act in respect of the body of a deceased person by any person who has been entrusted with the body solely for the purpose of its interment, burial, cremation or disposal otherwise. (6) In the case of a body lying in a hospital, prison, nursing home or institution, and not claimed by any of the near relatives of the deceased within such time as may be prescribed, an authority under this Act may be given by the person having the control and management of the hospital, prison, nursing home or institution or by any person designated by the first mentioned person in that behalf. (7) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as rendering unlawful any dealing with the body of the deceased person, or any part thereof, which would have been lawful if this Act had not been passed.
Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification, make such rule as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after they are made be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and shall be subject to such modifications by way of amendment or repeal as the Legislature may make either in the same session or in the next session.
Tamil Nadu Corneal Grafting Act, 1960_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [See clause (1) of section 2.] 1. The Government Ophthalmic Hospital, Madras 2. The Government Stanley Hospital, Madras 3. The Government Royapettah Hospital, Madras 4. The Government Erskine Hospital, Madurai 5. The District Headquarters Hospitals at- (a) Coimbatore (b) Cuddalore (c) Ootacamund (d) Salem. (e) Thanjavur (f) Tiruchirappalli (g) Tirunelveli (h) Vellore 
