Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2018. (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In Schedule-IV to the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in Part VI, after rule 29-C, the following rules shall be added, namely:- "29-D. If any amount remains unpaid after the due date for its payment, the assessee shall pay, in addition to the amount due, interest at such rate not exceeding two per cent simple interest, as may be prescribed. 29-E. Where arrears amount are due to the corporation consequent on the orders delivered by the Taxation Appeal Tribunal in the appeal preferred by the assessee, the assessee shall pay the said amount with two per cent simple interest from the due date of payment of the said amount, within fifteen days from the date of delivery of the order. 29-F. Five per cent of the net property tax payable by an assessee, subject to a maximum of five thousand rupees shall be granted as an incentive, who has paid the property tax within fifteen days from the date of commencement of the half-year.".
Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In Schedule-V to the principal Act, in Part II, in rule 14, after clause (h) and before the proviso, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(i) incentive payable to the assessee under rule 29-F of Schedule-IV.". (By order of the Governor) (S. S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
