Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the protection from eviction of cultivating tenants who are in arrears with respect to the rent payable to the landlords. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Forty eighth year of the Republic of India as follows-
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997. (2) It applies to all cultivating tenants in the drought affected areas and flood affected areas. (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of July 1996 and shall remain in force up to and inclusive of the 30th day of June 1999. (4) Upon the expiry of this Act, the provisions of section 8 of the Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891, (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1891) shall apply as if this Act had then been repealed by a Tamil Nadu Act.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- (a) "Cultivating tenant" means- (i) a cultivating tenant as defined in clause (aa) of section 2 of the Tenants Protection Act: or (ii) a cultivating tenant as defined in clause (5) of section 2 of the Public Trusts Act: (b) "drought affected areas" means the areas specified in Schedule I in this Act: (c) "flood affected areas" means the areas specified in Schedule-II to this Act: (d) Public Trusts Act means the Tamil Nadu Public Trust (Regulation of Administration of Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961, (Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1961). (e) " Tenants Protection Act" means the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955). (f) words and expression used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Tenants Protection Act or in the Public Trusts Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Tenants Protection Act or in the Public Trusts Act, as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu During the continuance of this Act- (i) no application under the Tenants Protection Act or under Chapter III of the Public Trusts Act shall be made by or at the instance of a landlord or a public trust, for the eviction of a cultivating tenant from his holding or any part thereof on the ground that the cultivating tenant is in arrear with respect to the rent payable to the landlord or to the public trust, as the case may be. (ii) no cultivating tenant shall be evicted from his holding or any part thereof by or at the instance of the landlord or the public trust concerned whether in execution of a decree or order of a Court or otherwise on the ground that the cultivating tenant is in arrear with respect to the rent payable to the landlord or to the public trust as the case may be. Explanation - For the purposes of this section and section 4 and 7 "rent" means the total amount of arears of rent accrued due to the landlord on or before the 30th day of June 1996 and outstanding on the date of the publication of this Act or rent payable for the fasli year ending with the 30th day of June 1997 or both.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) All applications under the Tenants Protection Act or under Chapter III of the Public Trusts Act; and (b) all suits proceedings in execution of decrees or orders and other proceedings for the eviction of a cultivating tenant on the ground that he is in arrear with respect to the rent payable to the landlord or to the public trust, as the case may be and pending before a Revenue Divisional Officer, an authorized officer, a court or other authority as the case may be shall stand stayed.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In computing the period of limitation or limit of time prescribed for a suit or an application for the eviction of a cultivating tenant or an application for the execution of a decree or order for such eviction the time during which he was protected by sections 3 and 4 from eviction shall be excluded. Explanation - A decree or order shall be deemed to be decree or order for the eviction of cultivating tenant notwithstanding that any other relief is also granted by such decree or order.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All application for the eviction of a cultivating tenant under the Tenants Protection Act or under Chapter III of the Public Trusts Act, as the case may be, and all suits and proceedings stayed under this Act shall after the expiration of this Act, be proceeded with subject to the provisions of any law which may then be in force, from the stage which had been reached when the application, suit or other proceedings was stayed.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any cultivating tenant who had been evicted from any land on or after the 1st day of July 1996 but before the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, on the ground that such cultivating tenant was in arrear with respect to the rent payable to the landlord or the public trust as the case may be shall on application, to the Revenue Divisional Officer or the authorized Officer as the case may be within a period of three months after the date of such publication be entitled to be restored to possession of such land and to hold it with all the rights and subject to all the liabilities of a cultivating tenant under the Tenants Protection Act or under the Public Trusts Act, as the case may be: Provided that the application may be received after the period of three months aforesaid but before the expiry of this Act, if the applicant satisfies the Revenue Divisional Officer or the authorized Officer, as the case may be that he had sufficient cause for not making the application within the said period of three months. (2) The provisions of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the Tenants Protection Act or as the case may be, sub-section (2) of section 20 of the Public Trusts Act shall so far as may be, apply to an application under sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Tenants Protection Act, the Public Trusts Act, the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Arrears of Rent (Relief) Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1980) the Tamil Nadu Cyclone and Flood Affected Areas Cultivating Tenants Arrears of Rent Relief Act 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 16 of 1980) the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Special Provisions) Act, 1984 (Tamil Nadu Act 29 of 1984), the Tamil Nadu Cyclone and Flood Affected Areas Cultivating Tenants (Special Provisions) Act, 1986 (Tamil Nadu Act 60 of 1986) the Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Arrears of Rent (Relief) Act, 1990 (Tamil Nadu Act 38 of 1990) the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908) or in any other law for the time being in force or any custom usage or contract or decree or order of a court or other authority.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State government may by notification from time to time include any drought affected area or flood affected area in Schedule I or Schedule II, as the case may be to this Act.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [See Section 2 (b) and 9]. Drought-Affected Areas. Name of the District- 1. Chidambaranar. 2. Kanniyakumari. 3. Ramanathapuram. 4. Kamarajar. 5. Tirunelveli-Kattabomman. 6. Coimbatore. 7. Pudukkottai. 8. Tiruchirappalli-Perumbidugu Mutharayar. 9. Karur-Dheeran Chinnamalai. 10. Perambalur-Thiruvalluvar. 11. Thanjavur. 12. Pasumpon Muthuramalinga Thevar. 13. NagaiQuaid-e-Milleth. 14. South Arcot Vallalar. 15. Salem. 16. Villupuram-Ramasamy Padayachiar. 17. Thiruvannamalai-Sambuvarayar. 18. Madurai. 19. Dindigul Mannar Thirumalai.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants (Protection from Eviction) Act, 1997_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [See sections 2(c) and 9]. Flood Affected Areas. Name of the Districts- 1. South Arcot- 2. Villupuram-Ramasamy Padayatchiar. 3. Nagai-Quaid-e-Milleth. 4. Thanjavur. 5. Tiruvarur-A.T.Pannirselvam. 6. Thiruvannamalai-Sambuvarayar. 7. Perambalur-Thiruvalluvar. 8. Tiruchirappalli Perumbidugu Mutharayar. 9. Anna. 10.M.G.R. 
