Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the 1 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955, and the 2 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 and to extend those Acts to added territories in the State of 3 [Tamil Nadu]. Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of 4 [Tamil Nadu] in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963.2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the President, on the 24th February, 1964; Published in the Fort St. George Gazette (Extraordinary) Part IV, section 4, dated 27th February, 1964.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "added territories" means the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and 1 [Tamil Nadu] (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 (Central Act 56 of 1959)." Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Amendments carried out in the main Act under relevant sections.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Amendments carried out in the main Act under relevant sections.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Added Territories) Act, 1963_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 2 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955), and the 3 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1956), as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act and as amended by this Act (hereinafter in this section referred to as the said Acts) are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in, the added territories. (2) Any law corresponding to either of the said Acts in force in the added territories immediately before the commencement of this Act including the Andhra Tenancy Act, 1955 (Andhra Act 18 of 1956) (hereinafter in this section referred to as the corresponding law) shall stand repealed on such commencement. (3) the repeal by sub-section (2) of the corresponding law shall not affect- (a) the previous operation of the corresponding law or anything duly done or suffered there under; or (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the corresponding law; or (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the corresponding law; or (d) any Investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed. (4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), anything done or any action taken including any appointment or delegation made, notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation or form framed, certificate granted or registration effected under the corresponding law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the said Acts and shall continue in force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the said Acts. (5) For the purpose of facilitating the application of the said Acts in the added territories, any Court or other authority may construe the said Acts with such alteration not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt them to the matter before the Court or other authority. (6) Any reference in the said Acts to a law which is not in force in the added territories shall, in relation to those territories, be construed as a reference to the law, if any, in force in those territories corresponding to the law referred to in the said Acts. (7) Any reference in any law which continues to be in force in the added territories after, the commencement of this Act to the corresponding law shall, in relation to those territories, be construed as a reference to the said Acts. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. 
