Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to extend the 1 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955), and the 2 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1956), should be extended to, and by virtue of such extension should be in force in, the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district; Whereas it is expedient to provide that the 3 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955), and the 4 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1956), should be extended to, and by virtue of such extension should be in force in, the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district; Be it enacted in the Tenth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959.2 (2) It shall come into force at once. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on 19th February, 1960, Published in the Fort St. George Gazette, Part 1V-B, dated 2nd March, 1960.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 2 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants Protection Act, 1955 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1955), and the 3 [ Tamil Nadu] Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1956), as in force immediately before the commencement of this Act (hereinafter referred to as the said Acts are hereby extended to, and shall be in force in, the Shencottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district (hereinafter referred to as the said taluk). Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any law corresponding to either of the said Acts in force in the said taluk immediately before the commencement of this Act (hereinafter referred to as the corresponding law) shall stand repealed on such commencement.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The repeal, by section 3, of the corresponding law shall not affect- (a) the previous operation of the corresponding law or anything done or duly suffered there under; or (b) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against the corresponding law; or (c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not been passed. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), anything done or any action taken including any appointment or delegation made, notification, order, instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation or form framed, certificate granted or registration effected under the corresponding law shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the said Acts and shall continue in force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under the said Acts.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Unless the context otherwise requires, the Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1891), shall apply for the interpretation of the said Act as extended to, and in force in the said taluk.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For purpose of facilitating the application of the said Acts in the said taluk, any Court or other authority may construe the said Acts with such alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt them to the matter before the Court or other authority.
Tamil Nadu Cultivating Tenants Protection and Payment of Fair Rent (Extension to Shencottah Taluk) Act, 1959_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any reference in the said Act to a law which is not in force in the said taluk shall, in relation to that taluk, be construed as a reference to the law, if any in force in that taluk corresponding to the law referred to in the said Acts. (2) Any reference in any law which continues to be in force in the said taluk after the commencement of this Act to the corresponding law shall, in relation to that taluk, be construed as reference to the said Acts. 
