Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to District Municipalities. Whereas it is expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to district municipalities in the Presidency of Madras; and whereas the previous sanction of the Governor-General has been obtained under section 79 of the Government of India Act, 1915, to the passing of this Act; it is hereby enacted as follows:-
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This act may be called The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (2) It extends to the whole of the Presidency of Madras, except the city of Madras.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The enactments mentioned in Schedule I are repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (1) Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act XVII of 1973. (1-B) 'Appoint':- 'Appoint' includes to appoint temporarily or in an officiating capacity. (2) 'Appointment':- Appointment includes temporary and officiating appointments (3) 'Building':- 'Building' includes a house, out-house, stable, latrine, shed, hut, wall (other that a boundary wall not exceeding eight feet in height) and any other such structure, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or any other material whatsoever. (4) 'Building-line':- 'Building-line" means a line which is in rear of the street alignment and to which the main wall of a building abutting on a street may lawfully extend. (5) 'Carriage':-'Carriage' means any wheeled vehicle with spring or other appliances acting as springs and includes any kind of bicycle, tricycle, rickshaw and palanquin, but does not include any motor vehicle within the meaning of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914. (6) 'Cart':- 'Cart' includes any wheeled vehicle which is not a carriage but does not include any motor vehicle within the meaning of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914. (7) 'Casual vacancy', casual election:- 'Casual vacancy' means a vacancy occurring otherwise than by efflux of time and 'casual election' means an election held on the occurrence of a casual vacancy. (7-A) 'Chairman' means the chairman of the town panchayat or the municipality, as the case may be. (8) 'Company':- 'Company' means a company as defined in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 or formed in pursuance of an Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or of Royal Charter or Letter Patent, or of an Act of the Legislature of a British Possession and includes any firm or association carrying on business in the Presidency of Madras whether incorporated or whether its principal place of business is the said Presidency or not. (8-A) 'Election authority':-'Election authority' means such authority not being the chairman or a councillor as may be prescribed. (8-B) 'European':- 'European' means any person of European descent who either was born in or has a domicile in the United Kingdom or in any British Possession or in any part of India or whose father was so born or has or had up to the date of the birth of the person in question such a domicile. (8-C) 'Executive Authority' means an officer of the State Government, or of the local authority (not being the chairman or vice-chairman or a member of the council) as may be specified by the State Government, by notification. (9) 'Filth':-'Filth' includes sewage, night-soil, dung, dirt, putrid and putrefying substances and all offensive matter. (9-A) 'Finance Commission' means the commission referred to the section 124.B (10) 'Hill station':-'Hill station' means a place specified in Schedule II and includes any other place which may be notified by the State Government as a hill station. (11) 'Hut':-'Hut' means any building which is constructed principally of wood, mud, leaves, grass or thatch and includes any temporary structure of whatever size of any small building of whatever material made which the council may declare to be a hut for the purposes of this Act. (11-A) 'Indian Christian '-'Indian Christian' means a native of India who is or in good faith claims to be, of unmixed Asiatic descent and who professes any form of the Christian religion, (11-B) 'Inspector' means any officer not below the rank of a District Collector appointed by the State Government to exercise or perform any of the powers or duties of the Inspector under the Act. (12) 'Latrine' includes privy, water-closet and urinal. (12-A) Omitted. (12-B) 'Local authority. '-'Local authority' includes a cantonment authority. (12-C) 'Municipal Council' means the council of the town panchayat or the municipality as the case may be; (12-D) 'Municipality' means an institution of self Government constituted for a smaller urban area as detailed in class (2) of Article 243-Q of the Constitution. (13) 'Municipal office ':-'Municipal office' means the principal office of any municipal council. (14) 'Nuisance':-'Nuisance' includes any act, omission, place or thing which causes or is likely to cause injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or hearing or which is or may be dangerous to life or injurious to health or property. (15) 'Occupier':-'Occupier' includes any person for the time being paying or liable to pay to the owner, the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building or part of the same in respect of which the word is used. (16) 'Ordinary vacancy.' 'Ordinary election '-'Ordinary vacancy' means a vacancy occurring by efflux of time and 'Ordinary election' means an election held on the occurrence of an ordinary vacancy. (17) 'Owner. '-'Owner' includes (a) the person for the time being receiving or entitled to receive whether on his own account or as agent, trustee, guardian, manager or receiver for another person, or for any religious or charitable purpose, the rent or profits of the property, in connection with which the word is used, and (b) the person for the time being in-charge of the animal or vehicle, in connection with which the word is used. (18) 'Palanquin. '-'Palanquin' includes tonjans, manchils and chairs carried by men by means of posts, but not slings or cots used for the conveyance of children or aged or sick people. (18-A) 'Panchayat town' means an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area classified as panchayat town under section 3-P. (19) 'Prescribed. -'Prescribed' means prescribed by the State Government by rules made under this Act. (20) 'Private street':-'Private street' means any street, road, square, court, alley, passage or riding-path, which is not a 'public street' but does not include a pathway made by the owner of premises on his own land to secure access to or the convenient use of such premises. (21) 'Public street',- 'Public street' means any street, road, square, court, alley, passage or riding-path over which the public have a right of way whether a thorough-fare or not, and includes. (a) the roadway over any public bridge or causeway; (b) the footway attached to any such street, public bridge or causeway; and (e) the drains attached to any such street, public bridge or causeway and land, whether covered or not by any pavement, verandah, or other structure, which lies on either side of the roadway upto the boundaries of the adjacent property whether that property is private property or property belonging to the Government. (22) 'Public water-courses, etc. '-'Public water-courses, springs, wells and tanks' include those used by the public to such an extent as to give a prescriptive right to such use. (23) 'Railway':-'Railway' includes a tramway. (24) 'Reconstruction. -'Reconstruction' of a building includes. (a) the re-erection wholly or partially of a building after more than one-half of its cubical contents has been taken down or burnt down, or has fallen down whether at one time or not; (b) the re-erection wholly or partially of any building of which an outer wall has been taken down or burnt down or has fallen down to or within ten feet of the ground adjoining the lowest storey of the building, and of any frame building which has so far been taken down or burnt down or has fallen down as to leave only the frame work of the lowest storey; (c) the conversion into a dwelling-house or a place of public worship of any building not originally constructed for human habitation or for public worship, as the case may be, or the conversion into more than one dwelling-house of a building originally constructed as one dwelling-house only or the conversion of a dwelling house into a factory; (d) the re-conversion into a dwelling house or a place of public worship or a factory of any building which has been discontinued as, or appropriated for any purpose other than, a dwelling-house of a place of public worship or factory as the case may be. (25) 'Residence':- 'Resided -A person is deemed to have his 'residence' or to 'reside' in any house if he sometimes uses any portion thereof as a sleeping apartment, and a person is not deemed to cease to reside in any such house merely because he is absent from it, or has elsewhere another dwelling in which he resides, if he is at liberty to return to such house at any time and has not abandoned his intention of returning. (26) 'Rubbish':-'Rubbish' means dust, ashes, broken bricks, mortar, broken glass, and refuse of any kind which is not 'filth'. (27) 'Salary':-'Salary' means pay and acting pay or payment by way of commission and includes exchange compensation allowances; but not allowances for house rent, carriage-hire, or travelling expenses. (28) 'Scavenger':-'Scavenger' means a person employed in collecting or removing filth, in cleansing drains or slaughter-houses or in driving carts used for the removal of filth. (28-A) 'Scheduled Castes' shall have the same meaning as in the Constitution. (28-B) 'Scheduled Tribes' shall have the same meaning as in the Constitution. (28-C) 'Tamil Nadu State Election Commission' means the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission referred to in section 43.B; (28-D) 'Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner' means the Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner referred to in section 43.B; (29) 'Street alignment':-'Street alignment' means a line dividing the lands comprised in and forming part of a street from the adjoining land. (29-A) 'Town Panchayat' means an institution of self-Government constituted for a transitional area as defined in clause (2) of Article 243-Q of the Constitution; 1 "(29-AA) "Transitional area" means an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area classified as transitional area under Section 3-B" (29-B) 'Wards Committee' means the wards committee referred to in section 24-B; (30) Water-course':- 'Water-course' includes any river, stream, or channel whether natural or artificial. (31) 'year':-'Year' means the financial year. Inserted by T.N. Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act. 18/2006
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This chapter shall apply only to the town panchayats.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor:- (a) may having regard to the revenue generated for local administration the percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he deems fit, by notification, classify and declare every local area comprising a revenue village or villages or any portion of a revenue village or contiguous portions of two or more revenue villages and having a population estimated at not less than five thousand and an annual income of not less than one lakh of rupees as panchayat town for the purposes of this Act; and (b) shall by notification, specify the name of such panchayat town. (2) In every panchayat town declared as such under subsection (1), there shall be established a town panchayat. (3) (a) The Governor may, by notification, exclude from a panchayat town any area comprised therein, provided that the population of the panchayat town after such exclusion, is not less than five thousand. (b) In regard to any area excluded under clause (a), the Governor shall, by notification under sub-section (1), declare it to be a panchayat town if it has a population of not less than five thousand or if its population is less than five thousand, include it in any contiguous panchayat town under clause (c) (i). (c) The Governor may, by notification - (i) include in a panchayat town any local area contiguous thereto; or (ii) cancel or modify a notification issued under subsection (1); or (iii) alter the name of the panchayat town specified under clause (b) of sub-section (1). (d) Before issuing a notification under clause (a) or under clause (b) read with sub-section (1) or under clause (c), the Governor shall give the town panchayat or town panchayats which will be affected by the issue of such notification, a reasonable opportunity for showing cause against the proposal and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of such town panchayat or town panchayats. (4) Any rate-payer or inhabitant of such area or any town panchayat concerned, may, if he or it objects to any notification under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), appeal to the High Court within such period as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Save as provided under sub-section (2) every town panchayat town shall consist of the elected members as determined under section 3-J. (2) The following persons shall also be represented in the town panchayat, namely; (a) Omitted (b) the members of the House of the people and the members of the State Legislative Assembly representing a constituency comprising the whole or any part of the town panchayat; and (c) the members of the Council of States who are registered as electors within the area of the town panchayat. (3) The persons referred to in sub-section (2) shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings but shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the town panchayat.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A town panchayat shall be constituted for each panchayat town consisting of such number of elected members, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification issued in that behalf by the Governor. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the administration of the panchayat town shall vest in the town panchayat, but the town panchayat shall not be entitled to exercise functions expressly assigned by or under this Act or any other law to its Chairman or to any other authority. (3) Every town panchayat shall be a body corporate by the name of the panchayat town specified in the notification issued under section 3-B, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and subject to any restrictions or qualifications imposed by or under this Act or any other law, shall be vested with the capacity of suing or being sued in its corporate name, of acquiring, holding and transferring property, movable or immovable, of entering into contracts and of doing all things necessary, proper or expedient for the purpose for which it is constituted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor may alter any classification, notified under sub-section (1) of section 3-B. if in his opinion the panchayat town satisfies or ceases to satisfy the conditions referred to in that sub-section. (2) Any decision made by the Governor under this section shall not be questioned in a court of law.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the total number of members of town panchayat shall be notified by the Inspector in accordance with such scale as may be prescribed with reference to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published. Provided that for the first election to the town panchayat to be held immediately after the commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994, the provisional population figures of the town panchayat as published in relation to 1991 census shall be deemed to be the population of the town panchayat as ascertained in that census. (2) The inspector, may from time to time, by notification, alter the total number of members of the town panchayat notified under sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every town panchayat sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years beginning from the date appointed for its first meeting after each ordinary election and no longer and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the town panchayat. (2) An election to constitute a town panchayat shall be completed- (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in subsection (1); or (b) before the expiration of period of six months from the date of its dissolution; Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved town panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election for constituting the town panchayat for such period.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3GG--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, in respect of Sholinghur town panchayat, which cannot be constituted on the 25th day of October, 2001 even after resorting to election process, the Government may by notification appoint special officer to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the said two panchayat, until the day on which the first meeting of the said town panchayat is held after election to the said two panchayat. (2) The special officer appointed under sub-section (1) shall hold office only for six months from the date of his appointment or for such shorter period as the Government may, by notification specify in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The members of town panchayat referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3-C shall be elected in such manner as may be prescribed; Provided that no person shall be eligible to be elected under this Act as a member of more than one town panchayat.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Seats shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every town panchayat and the number of seats so reserved, shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that town panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the town panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that town panchayat area, bears to the total population of that area. (2) Seats shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. (2-A) and (2-B) omitted. (3) Seats shall be reserved for women in the town panchayat and the number of seats reserved for women shall not be less than one-third including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes of the total number of seats in the town panchayat. (4) (a) The Offices of the Chairpersons of the town panchayats shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the number of offices so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of offices in the State as the proportion of the Scheduled Castes in all the town panchayats in the Sate or the Scheduled Tribes in all the town panchayats in the State, bears to the total population of all the town panchayats in the State. (b) The Offices of the Chairpersons of the town panchayat shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the offices reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of offices reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. (4-A) Omitted. (5) The Offices of the Chairpersons of the town panchayats shall be reserved for women and the number of offices reserved for women shall not be less than one-third including the number of offices reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes of the total number of offices of the chairpersons of the town panchayats in the State; Provided that the offices reserved under this section shall be allotted by rotation to different town panchayats in such manner as may be prescribed. (6) The reservation of seats under sub-sections (1) and (2) and the reservation of office of Chairpersons under subsection (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 of the Constitution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3-J--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purpose of election of councillors to a town panchayat, the Inspector shall, after consulting the town panchayat, by notification, divide the panchayat town into wards and determine the number of members to be elected in accordance with such scale as may be prescribed. (2) Only one member shall be elected from each ward.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3K--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, members of every town panchayat elected at an ordinary election shall hold office for a term of five years. (2) The term of office of the members elected at ordinary election shall commence on the date appointed for the first meeting of the town panchayat after such ordinary election. (3) The member of a town panchayat elected in a casual vacancy shall enter upon the office forthwith but shall hold office so long as the member in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office, if the vacancy had not occurred.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3L--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The electoral roll of a town panchayat shall be the same as the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly prepared and revised in accordance with the provisions of law for the time being in force in a panchayat town and shall be deemed to be the electoral roll for such town panchayat for the purposes of this Act. (2) No amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry in the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly made after the last date for making nominations for elections in any town panchayat and before the notification of the result of such election, shall form part of the electoral roll for such election, for the purposes of this section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3M--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder or of any other enactment for the time being in force elsewhere in the State of Tamil Nadu but not in the Panchayat town shall apply to that town panchayat to such extent and subject to such modifications, additions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3N--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in this Act or any other law. (2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions of this Chapter shall be, in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3-O--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 This chapter shall apply only to the Town Panchayats Inserted by T.N.Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act No 18/2006.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3P--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor: (a) may, having regard to the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he deems fit, by notification, classify and declare every local area comprising a revenue village or villages or any portion of a revenue village or contiguous portions of two or more revenue villages and having a population estimated at less than thirty thousand as a panchayat town for the purposes of this Act; and (b) shall, by notification, specify the name of such panchayat town. (2) In every panchayat town declared as such under sub-section (1), there shall be established a town panchayat. (3) (a) The Governor may, by notification, exclude from a panchayat town any area comprised therein. (b) In regard to any area excluded under clause (a), the Governor may, by notification under sub-section (1), declare it to be a panchayat town or include it in any contiguous panchayat town under clause (c) (i). (c) The Governor may, by notification: (i) include in a panchayat town any local area contiguous thereto; or (ii) cancel or modify a notification issued under subsection (1), or (iii) alter the name of the panchayat town specified under clause (b) of sub-section (1). (d) Before issuing a notification under clause (a) or under clause (b) read with sub-section (1) or under clause (c), the Governor shall give the town panchayat or Town Panchayats which will be affected by the issue of such notification, a reasonable opportunity for showing cause against the proposal and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of such town panchayat or Town Panchayats. (4) Any rate-payer or inhabitant of such area or any town panchayat concerned may, if he or it objects to any notification under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), appeal to the High Court within such period as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3Q--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Save as provided under sub-section (2), every town-panchayat shall consist of the elected members as determined under Section 3-X. (2) The following persons shall be represented in the town panchayat, namely; (a) the members of the House of the People and the members of the State Legislative Assembly representing a constituency comprising the whole or any part of the town panchayat; and (b) the members of the Council of States who are registered as electors within the area of the town panchayat. (3) The members of the House of the People, the State Legislative Assembly and the Council of States referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2) shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings, and vote at the meetings, of the town panchayat.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3R--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A town panchayat shall be constituted for each panchayat town consisting of such number of elected members, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification issued in that behalf by the Governor. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the administration of the panchayat town shall vest in the town panchayat, but the town panchayat shall not be entitled to exercise functions expressly assigned by or under this Act or any other law to its chairman or to any other authority. (3) Every town panchayat shall be a body corporate by the name of the panchayat town specified in the notification issued under Section 3-P, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal, and, subject to any restrictions or qualifications imposed by or under this Act or any other law, shall be vested with the capacity of suing or being sued in its corporate name, or acquiring, holding and transferring property, movable or immovable or entering into contracts and of doing all things necessary, proper or expedient for the purpose for which it is constituted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3S--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor may alter any classification, notified under sub-section (1) of Section 3-P, if in his opinion, the panchayat town satisfies or ceases to satisfy the conditions referred to in that sub-section. (2) Any decision made by the Governor under this Section shall not be questioned in a Court of law.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3T--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the total number of members of a town panchayat shall be notified by the Inspector in accordance with such scale as may be prescribed with reference to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published. (2) The Inspector may, from time to time, by notification, alter the total number of members of a town panchayat notified under sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3U--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every town panchayat, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years beginning from the date appointed for its first meeting after each ordinary election and no longer and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the town panchayat. (2) An election to constitute a town panchayat shall be completed: (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in subsection (1); or (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved town panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election for constituting the town panchayat for such period.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3V--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The members of town panchayat referred to in subsection (1) of Section 3-Q shall be elected in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that no person shall be eligible to be elected under this Act as a member of more than one town panchayat.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3W--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Seats shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every town panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that town panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the town panchayat area, or of the Scheduled Tribes in that town panchayat area, bears to the total population of that area. (2) Seats shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. (3) Seats shall be reserved for women in the town panchayat and the number of seats reserved for women shall not be less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats in the town panchayat. (4) (a) The offices of the chairman of the Town Panchayats shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the number of offices so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of offices in the State as the population of the Scheduled Castes in all the Town Panchayats in the State or the Scheduled Tribes in all the Town Panchayats in the State, bears to the total population of all the Town Panchayats in the State. (b) The offices of the chairman of the Town Panchayats shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the offices reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of offices reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. (5) The offices of the chairman of the Town Panchayats shall be reserved for women and the number of offices reserved for women shall not be less than one-third (including the number of offices reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of offices of the chairman of the Town Panchayats in the State: Provided that the offices reserved under this sub-section and under sub-section (4) shall be allotted by rotation to different Town Panchayats in such manner as may be prescribed. (6) The reservation of seats under sub-sections (1) and (2) and the reservation of offices of chairman under sub-section (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 of the Constitution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3X--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purpose of election of members to a town panchayat, the Inspector shall, after consulting the town panchayat, by notification, divide the panchayat town into wards and determine the number of members to be elected in accordance with such scales as may be prescribed. (2) Only one member shall be elected from each ward.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3Y--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, members of every town panchayat elected at an ordinary election shall hold office for a term of five years. (2) The term of office of the members elected at ordinary election shall commence on the date appointed for the first meeting of the town panchayat after such ordinary election. (3) The member of a town panchayat elected in a casual vacancy shall enter upon the office forthwith but shall hold office only so long as the member in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office, if the vacancy had not occurred.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3Z--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The electoral roll of a town panchayat shall be the same as the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly prepared and revised in accordance with the provisions of law for the time being in force in a panchayat town and shall be deemed to be the electoral roll for such town panchayat for the purposes of this Act. (2) No amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry in the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly made after the last date for making nominations for elections in any town panchayat and before the notification of the result of such election shall form part of the electoral roll for such election, for the purposes of this Section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3AA--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Act and the rules made under this Act or of any other enactment for the time being in force elsewhere in the State of Tamil Nadu but not in the panchayat town shall apply to that town panchayat to such extent and subject to such modifications, additions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3BB--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in this Act or any other law. (2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions of this Chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 3CC--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act: (a) the president and members of a Village Panchayat, who are elected or deemed to have been elected and holding office as such immediately before the date of constitution of such Village Panchayat as town panchayat under this Act, shall be deemed to be the chairman and members of such town panchayat elected under this Act and such chairman and members shall continue to hold office upto such date as the State Government may, by notification, fix in this behalf or, in case no such date is fixed, would expire under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994) and such chairman and members shall exercise all powers and perform all duties conferred on the chairman and members by or under this Act; (b) all the employees, other than the provincialised employees, of the Village Panchayat immediately before its constitution as town panchayat shall be the employees of such town panchayat under this Act. The provincialised employees shall continue to serve under the town panchayat. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall apply to the town panchayat referred to in sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment, the non-agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, by notification, declare his intention. (a) to constitute as a municipality any town, village, hamlet, bazaar, station or other local area or any group of the same in the immediate neighbourhood of one another; or (b) to exclude from a municipality any local area comprised therein and defined in such notification; or (c) to include within a municipality any local area in the vicinity thereof and defined in such notification-Provided that no cantonment shall be included within a municipality. (2) Any inhabitant of a local area or tax-payer of the municipality, in respect of which any such notification has been published may, if he desires to object to anything therein contained, submit his objection in writing to the Governor within six weeks from the publication of the notification and the Governor shall take all such objections into consideration. (3) When six weeks from the publication of the notification have expired and the Governor has considered the objections if any, which have been submitted, he may as the case may be, by notification declare to be a municipality, or exclude in a municipality, the local area or any portion thereof. (4) This act shall come into force in or cease to apply to, any municipality or part thereof, as the case may be, on such date as may be specified under sub-section (3). (5) If any local area in which the Madras Local Boards Act. 1920, is in force is constituted as or included in a municipality, the State Government may pass such orders as they may deem fit as to the transfer to the council of such municipality or and as to the discharge of liabilities if any, of such Local Board relating to such assets or institutions.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 4A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Governor may having regard to the size of the area and the municipal service being provided or proposed to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he may deem fit, declare an urban area comprised in any municipality or specified area therein to be an industrial townships. (2) In regard to any municipality or any area declared to be a township under sub-section (1), the Governor shall, by notification, constitute a township committee. (3) A notification issued by the Governor may direct that any functions-vested in a municipal council-by or under this Act shall be transferred to and performed by the township committee and shall provide for- (i) the total number of members of the township committee; (ii) the persons who shall be the members of the township committee or the manner in which they shall be chosen. (iii) the person who shall be the chairman of the township committee or the manner in which he shall be elected or appointed; (iv) the term of office of members and the chairman; (v) the restrictions and conditions subject to which the township committee may perform its functions; and (vi) the procedure of the township committee. (4) The Governor may, by notification, direct that any of the provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder or of any other enactment for the time being in force else where in the State of Tamil Nadu but not in the municipality or specified area therein referred to in sub-section (1) shall apply to that municipality or area to such extent and subject to such modification, additions and restrictions as may be specified in the notification. (5) (a) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section the Governor may, as occasion may arise, by order, do anything which appears to him necessary for the purposes of removing the difficulty. (b) All orders issued under clause (a) shall, as soon as possible after they are made, be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and shall be subject to such modifications by way of amendments or repeal as the Legislature may make either in the same session or in the next session.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 4B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, if the Governor is satisfied that any industrial township should be declared as a municipality, he may, by notification declare such industrial township to be a municipality. (2) The provisions of this Act or of any rules so made thereunder shall apply to any township so declared to be a municipality on such date as may be specified in the notification under sub-section (1)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every municipality, unless sooner dissolved under section 4, shall continue for five years beginning from the date appointed for its first meeting after each ordinary election and no longer and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the municipality. (2) An election to constitute the municipality shall be completed,- (a) before the expiry of its duration specified in subsection (1); or (b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its dissolution; Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipality would have constituted, is less than six months it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this sub-section for constituting the municipality for such period.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal authorities charged with carrying out the provisions of this Act are- (a) a council (b) a chairman; and (c) an executive authority (2) The municipal council shall, by the name of the municipality be a body corporate, shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and subject to any restriction or qualification imposed by this or any other enactment shall be vested with the capacity of suing or being sued in its corporate name, of acquiring holding and transferring property movable or immovable, of entering into contracts and of doing all things necessary for the purpose or its constitution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall consist of such number of councillors as may be determined by the State Government, by notification and different notifications may be issued for different municipal councils; Provided that the number of councillors so notified shall not be more than fifty-two and shall not be less than twenty. Provided further that the power to determine the number of councillors shall not be exercised by the State Government more than once within a period of five years in respect of any municipality. (2) Save as provided in sub-section (3), every municipality shall consist of the elected members as notified under sub-section (1); (3) The following persons shall also be represented in the municipality, namely:- (a) Omitted. (b) the members of the House of the people and the members of the State Legislative Assembly representing the constituency comprising the whole or any part of the municipality; and (c) the members of the council of States who are registered as electors within the area of the municipality. (4) The persons referred to in sub-section (3) shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings but shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the council. (5) Seats shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every municipality and the number of seats so reserved, shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct elections in that municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that municipal area or the Scheduled Tribes in that municipal area, bears to the population of that area. Provided that for the first election for the municipality to be held immediately after the commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994, the provisional population figures of the municipal area as published in relation to 1991 census, shall be deemed to be the population of the municipal area as ascertained in that census. (6) Seats shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. (7) Seats shall be reserved for women in the municipality and the number of seats reserved for women shall not be less than one-third including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes of the total number of seats in a municipality. (8) (a) The offices of the Chairpersons of the municipalities shall be reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the number of offices so reserved shall bears as nearly as may be the same proportion to the total number of offices in all Municipalities in the State as the population of the Scheduled Castes in all Municipalities in the State or the Scheduled Tribes in all Municipalities in the State bears to total population of all municipalities in the State. (b) The offices of Chairpersons of the municipalities shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes from among the offices reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which shall not be less than one-third of the total number of offices reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. (9) The offices of the Chairpersons of the municipalities shall be reserved for women and the number of offices reserved for women shall not be less than one-third including the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, of the total number of offices of the Chairpersons of the municipalities in the State. Provided that the offices of the Chairpersons of the municipalities reserved under this section shall be allotted by rotation to different municipalities in such manner as may be prescribed. (10) The reservation of seats under sub-sections (5) and (6) and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons under subsection (8) shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in Article 334 of the Constitution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 Omitted Omitted by T.N. Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act 18/2006
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 7F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The term of office of councillors shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act be five years beginning and expiring at noon on such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint in that behalf. (2) Ordinary vacancies in the office of councillors shall be filled scheduled at ordinary elections which shall, in consultation with the State Government be fixed by the Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner to take place on such days within three months before the occurrence of the vacancies as he thinks fit. Provided that the State Government may, for sufficient cause, direct or permit the holding of any ordinary election after the occurrence of the vacancy. (2-A) Omitted. (3) A councillor elected at an ordinary election held after the occurrence of a vacancy shall enter upon office forthwith but shall hold office only so long as he would have been entitled to hold office if he had been elected before the occurrence of the vacancy. (4) A casual vacancy in the office of a councillor shall be filled in casual election which shall, in consultation with the State Government be fixed by the Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner to take place as soon as may be after the occurrence of the vacancy. Provided that no casual election shall be held to fill a vacancy occurring within six months before the date of retirement by efflux of time and that such vacancy shall be filled at the next ordinary election. (5) A councillor elected at a casual vacancy shall enter upon office forthwith but shall hold office so long only as the councillor in whose place he is elected would have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred [sub-section (6) omitted by Tamil Nadu Act XXV of 1994]
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If at an ordinary or casual election held under section 8, no councillor is elected, a fresh election shall be held on such day as the State Election Commissioner may fix. (2) Omitted (2-A) Omitted (3) The term of office of a councillor elected under this section shall expire at the time at which it would have expired if he had been elected at the ordinary or casual election, as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Omitted (2) "Every council shall elect one of its members to be its chairman". (3) The council shall elect one of its members other than the persons referred to in sub-section (3) of section 7 and the chairman to be its vice-chairman, and shall nominate a panel of not more than three members any one of whom shall perform the functions of the chairman in the absence of both the chairman and the vice-chairman. (4) A chairman shall be deemed to have vacated his office on the expiry of his term of office as a councillor or on his otherwise ceasing to be the councillor. (5) A vice-chairman shall be deemed to have vacated his office on the expiry of his term of office as a councillor or on his otherwise ceasing to be a councillor. (6) When the office of chairman is vacant, the vice-chairman shall perform the functions of the chairman until a new chairman is elected and assumes office. (7) When the office of the chairman is vacant and there is either a vacancy in the office of the vice-chairman or the vice-chairman has been continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated, the member nominated under sub-section (3) shall until the vice-chairman returns to jurisdiction or, as the case may be, recovers from his incapacity, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the rules or notifications issued thereunder, perform the functions of the chairman of the council. (8) An outgoing chairman or vice-chairman is eligible for re-election. Explanation.- A new chairman or vice-chairman shall be deemed to have assumed office on his being declared elected as such.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 12A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If at an election held under section 12 no Chairman or vice-chairman is elected, a fresh election shall be held.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 12B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No chairman or councillor shall receive or be paid, from the funds at the disposal of or under the control of the council, any salary or other renumeration for services rendered by him in any capacity.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 12BB--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person holding the office of chairman, vice-chairman or councillor shall undertake any trip to any foreign country in his official capacity as such, except with the permission in writing of the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 12C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A Commissioner shall be appointed by the State Government in the case of each municipality included in Schedule IX and in the case of any other municipality notified by the State Government in this behalf. Every notification issued under this sub-section shall specify the reasons therefor. (2) The Commissioner shall be a whole time officer of the municipality and shall undertake any work in connection with this office without the sanction of the municipal council and the State Government. (3) The State Government may recover from the municipal council concerned the whole of the salary and allowances paid to any Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1), and such contribution towards his leave allowances, pension and provident fund as the State Government may, by general or special order, determine. (4) The State Government shall have power to regulate the methods of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances and discipline and conduct of the Commissioner appointed under sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The chairman of the municipal council shall- (a) make arrangements for the election of the vice-chairman; (b) convene the meetings of the council; and (c) perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specially imposed or conferred on the chairman by this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 13A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority of the municipal council shall- (a) carry into effect the resolutions of the council; (b) furnish to the council such periodical reports regarding the progress made in carrying out the resolutions of that body in the collection of taxes as the council may direct; and (c) perform all the duties and exercise all the powers specifically imposed or conferred on the executive authority by this Act and subject, whenever it is hereinafter expressly so provided, to the sanction of the council, and the subject to all other restrictions limitations and conditions hereinafter imposed exercise the executive powers for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and be directly responsible for the due fulfilment of the purposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 13B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the case of municipalities included in Schedule IX or notified under sub-section (1) of section 12-C the chairman shall have full access to all the records of the municipal council and no official correspondence between the council and the State Government shall be conducted except through the chairman. The chairman shall be bound to transmit communications addressed through him by the commissioner to the State Government or by the State Government to the Commissioner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 The chairman shall by virtue of his office, be a member of every committee of the council. Inserted by T.N. Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act 18/2006
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may in cases of emergency direct the execution of any work or the doing of any act which would ordinarily require the sanction of the council, and the immediate execution or doing of which is, in his opinion, necessary for the service or safety of the public and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such work shall be paid from the municipal fund; Provided that- (a) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any order of the council prohibiting the execution of any particular acts, and (b) he shall report the action taken under this section and the reasons therefor to the council at its next meeting.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may, without the sanction of the council incur petty contingent expenditure incidental to the municipal administration, not exceeding fifty rupees in each case; Provided that- (a) provision to meet the expenditure is available under the relevant head of account in the budget framed by the council, with the modifications, if any, made therein by the State Government; and (b) the executive authority shall report any expenditure incurred under this section and the reasons therefore to the council at its next meeting.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The chairman may by an order in writing, delegate any of his functions to the vice-chairman; Provided that he shall not delegate any functions which the municipal council expressly forbids him to delegate. (2) If the chairman has been continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated his functions shall, during such absence or incapacity, devolve on the vice-chairman; Provided that where the absence from jurisdiction of the chairman is within the State of Tamil Nadu and is on business connected with the municipality, the chairman's functions shall not, except to the extent, if any, to which functions have been delegated by him under sub-section (1), devolve on this vice-chairman; (3) If the vice-chairman also has been continuously absent from jurisdiction for more than fifteen days or is incapacitated or if the office of vice-chairman is vacant, the chairman may, by an order in writing, delegate any of his functions to any councillor who shall be styled chairman delegate during the period of delegation. Provided that- (i) when an order of delegation made under this subsection is in force, no further order of delegation of any functions shall be made in favour of any one other than the councillor in whose favour the order in force was made; (ii) no delegation under this sub-section shall, without the special sanction of the council, be made for any period exceeding in the aggregate ninety days in any year; and (iii) every order made under this sub-section shall be communicated forthwith to the council and to the District Collector. (4) Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act XXIII of 1978. (5) The exercise or discharge of any functions delegated under sub-sections (1) and (3) shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions, if any, as may be laid down by the chairman and shall also be subject to his control and revision. The chairman shall also have power to control and revise the exercise or discharge of any functions devolving on the vice-chairman under sub-section (2).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 18A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) (a) The Commissioner shall have the right to attend the meetings of the council or any committee thereof, and take part in the discussions thereat but shall not have the right to move any resolutions or to vote. (b) He shall attend any meeting of the council or of any committee if required to do so by the chairman. (2) In the case of municipalities included in Schedule IX or notified under sub-section (1) of section 12-C the officers and servants of the municipal council shall be subordinate to the commissioner. (3) subject to any directions given or restrictions imposed by the State Government or the municipal council, the commissioner may, by order in writing delegate any of his functions to any officer or servant of the council or to any servant of the Government. The exercise or discharge of any functions so delegated shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be laid down by the commissioner and shall also be subject to his control and revision.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act the municipal administration shall vest in the council, but the council shall not be entitled to exercise functions expressly assigned by or under this Act or any other law to the chairman or executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any councillor may call the attention of the executive authority to any neglect in the execution of municipal work, to the case of municipal property, or to the wants of any locality and may suggest any improvements which may appear desirable, (2) Every 'councillor shall have the right to move resolutions and to interpellate the chairman on matters connected with the municipal administration subject to such regulations as may be framed by the council. (3) Every councillor shall have access during office hours to the records of the council after giving due notice to the executive authority provided that the Executive authority may for reasons given in writing forbid such access.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may at any time require the executive authority to produce any document which is in his custody. The executive authority shall comply with every such requisition unless in his opinion immediate compliance therewith would be prejudicial to the interest of the council or of the public, in which case he shall make a declaration in writing to that effect and shall, if required by the council, refer the question to the district collector, whose decision shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority shall be bound to give effect to every resolution of the council unless such resolution is modified, suspended or cancelled by a controlling authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A council may, with the previous approval of the State Government, constitute such number of standing committees not exceeding three for the purpose of exercising such power, discharging such duties or performing such functions as they may delegate to them, or may appoint individual councillors or committees to enquire into and report or advise on any matter which it may refer to them. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the Taxation Appeals committee referred to in section 23-A. (2) The composition of standing committees and the method of appointment of chairman and the term of office of members and chairman of standing committees shall be such as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 23A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act. (1) For every Municipality, there shall be a Taxation Appeals Committee which shall consist of the chairman of the municipal council who shall also be the chairman of the Taxation Appeals Committee, and four councillors selected by the council. (2) The business of the Taxation Appeals Committee shall be transacted in accordance with the rules made by the State Government in the behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be lawful for the council from time to time by a resolution supported by not less than one-half of the sanctioned strength of the council to appoint as members of any committee any persons who are not councillors but who may in the opinion of such council possess special qualifications for serving on such committee. But the number of persons so appointed on any committee shall not exceed one-third of the total number of members of such committee. All the provisions of this Act relating to the duties, powers, liabilities, and disqualification and disabilities of councillors shall, save as regards the disqualification on the ground of residence be applicable, so far as may be to such person. Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the Taxation Appeals Committee referred to in section 23-A
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 24A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu There shall be prepared every year a development plan for the municipality and the panchayat town and submitted to the District Planning Committee constituted under section 241 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act XXI of 1994) having jurisdiction over the municipality or the town panchayat.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 24B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) These shall be constituted by the State Government, wards committee or committees consisting of one or more wards within the territorial area of the municipality having a population of three lakhs or more. (2) Each wards committee shall consist of; (a) all the councillors of the Municipality representating the wards within the territorial area of the wards committee. (3) where a wards committee consists of: (a) one ward, the councillor representing that ward in the Municipality; or (b) two or more wards, one of the councillors representing such wards in the Municipality elected by the members of the wards committee, shall be the chairperson of that committee. (4) The chairperson shall vacate office as soon as he ceases to be a councillor. (5) In the event of the office of the chairsperson falling vacant before the expiry of his term, the wards committee shall, as soon as may be, after the occurrence of the vacancy, elect a new chairperson in accordance with sub-rule (3). Provided that a chairperson so elected shall hold office only so long as the person in whose place he is elected would have held it if such vacancy had not occurred. (6) The duration of the wards committee shall be co-extensive with the duration of the municipality. (7) The functions and duties of the wards committee and the procedures to be adopted by such committee for transaction of its business shall be such as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council shall observe the rules in schedule III and may make regulations not inconsistent therewith or with other provisions of this Act or any rules made by the State Government in regard to the following matters:- (a) the time and place of its meetings; (b) the manner in which notice thereof shall be given; (c) the preservation of order and the conduct of proceedings at meetings, and the powers, which the chairman may exercise for the purpose of enforcing his decisions on points or order; (d) the division of duties among the members of the council; (e) the constitution and procedure of committees; (f) the delegation of its power, duties or functions (i) to the chairman, a councillor, an officer or servant of the council or a servant of the Government; or (ii) to a committee constituted under clause (e) or to its chairman or to any one or more of its members; (g) the persons by whom receipts may be granted for money paid to the council; and (h) all other similar matters.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A council may, and if so required by the State Government shall join with one, or more than one other local authority in constituting a joint committee for any purpose in which they are jointly interested or for any matter for which they are jointly responsible. (2) a joint committee may include persons who are not members of the local authorities concerned but who may in their opinion possess special qualifications or special interest for serving on such committee: Provided that the number of such persons shall not exceed one-third of the total number of members of the joint committee. (3) The constitution of a joint committee shall be by means of regulations which shall not, except in the cases referred to in sub-sections (6) and (7), have effect unless assented to by each of the local authorities concerned. (4) The regulations shall determine- (a) the total number of members of the joint committee; (b) the number who shall be members of the local authorities concerned and the number who may be outsiders; (c) the person who shall be members of the joint committee or the manner in which they shall be elected or appointed. (d) the person who shall be chairman of the joint committee or the manner in which he shall be elected or appointed; (e) the term of office of members and chairman; (f) the powers, being powers exercisable by one or more of the local authorities concerned, which may be exercised by the joint committee. (g) the procedure of the joint committee. (5) Regulations made under sub-sections (3) and (4) may be varied or revoked provided that all the local authorities concerned assent to such variation or revocation. (6) If the State Government take action under sub-section (1) they may issue such directions as they think necessary or desirable in respect of all or any of the matters referred to in sub-sections (3) and (4). (7) If any difference of opinion arises between local authorities under any of the foregoing provisions of this section, it shall be referred to the State Government whose decisions shall be final. (8) The powers of the State Government under this section shall, where one of the local authorities concerned is a cantonment authority or the port authority of a major port, only be exercisable with the concurrence of the Central Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All elections of chairman, vice-chairman and members of municipal councils shall be notified in the official Gazette.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every meeting of the council shall be presided over by the chairman; in his absence by the vice-chairman; and in the absence of the both the chairman and the vice-chairman the councillors and- (a) in the case of town panchayats, the persons referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3-C and. (b) in the case of municipalities, the persons referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of section 7, shall elect one from among the councillors to preside for the occasion. (2) The chairman shall preserve order and shall decide all points of order arising at or in connection with meetings. There shall be no discussion on any point of order and the decision of the chairman on any point of order shall, save as is otherwise expressly provided in this Act, be final. (3) A vice-chairman or councillor presiding for the occasion shall, for that meeting, and during the period that he presides over it, have all the powers of the chairman.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 30--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No councillor shall vote on. or take part in the discussion of any question coming up for consideration at a meeting of the council of any committee, if the question is one in which, apart from its general application to the public, he has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest by himself or his partner. (2) The chairman may prohibit any councillor from voting or taking part in the discussion of any matter in which he believes such councillor to have such interest or he may require such councillor, to absent himself during the discussion. (3) such councillor may challenge the decision of the chairman, who shall thereupon put the question to the meeting. The decision of the meeting shall be final. (4) If the chairman is believed by any councillor present at the meeting to have any such pecuniary interest in any matter under discussion, he may, if a motion to that effect be carried, be required to absent himself from the meeting during such discussion. (5) The councillor concerned shall not be entitled to vote on the question referred to in sub-section (3), and the chairman concerned shall not be entitled to vote on the motion referred to in sub-section (4) Explanation I - 'Chairman' in this section includes a vice-chairman, or councillor, or presiding for the occasion. Explanation II - Councillor in this section shall include (a) In the case of town panchayats, the persons referred to the clauses (b) and (c) of sub-sections (2) of section 3C; and (b) In the case of municipalities, the persons referred to the clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (3) of section 7;
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 31--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any councillor or vice-chairman may resign his office by giving notice to the chairman; the chairman may resign his office by giving notice to the Commissioner. Such resignation shall take effect in the case of a councillor or vice-chairman from the date on which it is received by the chairman and in the case of a chairman from the date on which it is received by the Commissioner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 32--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act of a municipal council or of a committee thereof or of any person acting as chairman vice-chairman or member of the municipal council or committee shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only for a defect in the establishment of the municipality or committee or on the ground that the chairman, vice-chairman or any member of the council or committee was not entitled to hold or continue in such office by reason of any disqualification or by reason of any irregularity or illegality in his election or appointment or by reason of such act having been done during the period of any vacancy in the office of chairman, vice-chairman or member of the council or committee.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 33--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year, and not later than such date as may be fixed by the State Government the municipal council shall submit to the State Government through the District Collector a report on the administration during the preceding year in such form and with such details as the State Government may direct. If the District Collector makes any remarks on the report, such remarks shall be forwarded to the council and the council shall be entitled within such time as the State Government may fix to offer or make such explanations or observations as the council thinks fit. (2) The executive authority shall prepare the report; the municipal council shall consider his report and forward it to the State Government with its resolutions thereon, if any, (3) The report and the resolutions thereon, if any, shall be published in such manner as the council, subject to the approval of the State Government may direct.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 34--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The District Collector may enter on and inspect, or cause to be entered on and inspected, any immovable property or any work in progress under the control of any municipal authority in his district. (2) The State Government or the District Collector may: (a) call for any document in the possession or under the control of any council or executive authority (b) require any council or executive authority to furnish any return plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics. (c) require any council or executive authority to furnish any information or report on any municipal matter; (d) record in writing, for the consideration of the council or executive authority any observations they or he may think proper in regard to its or his proceedings or duties.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 35--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If it appears to the District Collector that the executive authority of a municipality has made default in carrying out any resolution of the council, the said Collector, after giving the executive authority a reasonable opportunity of explanation, shall send a report thereon together with the explanation, if any, of the executive authority to the State Government and at the same time forward a copy of the same to the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 36--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, by order in writing (i) suspend or cancel any resolution passed, order issued, or licence or permission granted, or (ii) prohibit the doing of any act which is about to be done or is being done in pursuance or under colour of this Act, if, in their opinion, (a) such resolution, order, licence, permission or act has not been legally passed, issued, granted or authorized, or (b) such resolution, order, licence, permission or act is in excess of the powers conferred by this Act or of any other law, or (c) the execution of such resolution or order, the continuance in force of such licence or permission or the doing of such act is likely to cause danger to human life, health or safety, or is likely to lead to a riot or an affray: Provided that the State Government shall before taking action under this section on any of the grounds referred to in clauses (a) and (b) give the authority or person concerned an opportunity for explanation. Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall enable the State Government to set aside any election which has been held. (2) If, in the opinion of the District Collector, immediate action is necessary on any of the grounds referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) he may suspend the resolution, order, licence, permission or act, as the case may be, and report to the State Government who may thereupon either rescind the Collector's order or after giving the authority or person concerned a reasonable opportunity of explanation, direct that it continues in force with or without modification permanently or for such period as they think fit.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 37--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The District Collector may, in cases of emergency, direct or provide for the execution of any work, or the doing of any act which the council or executive authority is empowered to execute or to do, and the immediate execution or the doing of which is, in his opinion, necessary for the safety of the public and may direct that the expense of executing such work or doing such act incurred as the emergency may require shall be paid from the municipal fund. (2) If the expense is not so paid, such Collector may make an order directing the person having the custody of the municipal fund to pay it in priority to any other charge against the fund. (3) such person shall, so far as the funds to the credit of the municipal council admit, be bound to comply with such order. (4) Every case in which the powers conferred by this section are exercised shall be forthwith reported to the State Government by the District Collector with the reasons in full for the exercise of such powers; and copy of the letter shall at the same time be sent to the municipal council for information.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 38--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may appoint such officers as may be required for the purpose of inspecting or superintending the operations of all or any of the municipal councils established under this Act. (2) All schools, hospitals, dispensaries, vaccine stations, choultries and other institutions maintained by any municipal council and all documents relating thereto shall at all time be open to the inspection of such officers as the State Government may appoint in that behalf. (3) Municipal authorities and municipal officers and servants shall be bound to afford to inspecting or superintending officers appointed under this section such access at all reasonable times to municipal, property or premises, and to all documents which subject to any rules framed for their guidance under section 303 (1) and 2(K) they may consider to be necessary to enable them to discharge their duties of inspection or superintendence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 38A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The administration by a municipal council of any undertaking for the generation, transmission, supply or use of electrical energy shall be subject to such control as may be prescribed not inconsistent with the Indian Electricity Act 1910, as in force for the time being, the rules made under that Act, and term of the licence granted under it to the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 39--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If at any time it appears to the State Government that a municipal council, chairman or executive authority has made default in performing any duty imposed by or under this or any other Act, they may by order in writing, fix a period for the performance of such duty. (2) If such duty is not performed within the period so fixed, the State Government may appoint some person to perform it, and may direct that the expense of performing, it shall be paid, within such time, as they may fix, to such person by the municipal council. (3) The State Government may, with the consent of the municipal council, undertake on its behalf the construction of water-supply, drainage or other works, appoint persons to carry out the construction of such works, and direct that the expenses, including the pay of such persons, be paid from the municipal fund. (4) If expenses which the State Government have directed under sub-section (2) or (3) to be paid from the municipal fund are not so paid, the District Collector, with the previous sanction of the State Government may make an order directing the person having the custody of the municipal fund to pay it in priority to any other charge against such fund except charges for the service of authorized loans. (5) Such person shall, so far as the funds to the credit of the municipal council admit, be bound to comply with such order. (6) If on a representation in writing made by the chairman, the State Government are satisfied that due to the non-co-operation of the councillor with the chairman, the municipal council is not able to function, the State Government may, by notification, authorise the chairman to perform, subject to the control of the State Government or any officer authorised by the State Government in this behalf, such of the duties imposed upon the municipal council by law and for such period not exceeding six months as may be specified in such notification. During the period for which the chairman is so authorised, there shall be no meeting of the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 40--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, by notification, remove any chairman or vice-chairman, who in their opinion wilfully omits or refuses to carry out or disobeys the provisions of this Act or any rules, by-laws, regulations or lawful order issued thereunder or abuses the powers vested in him. (2) The State Government shall, when they propose to take action under sub-section (1), give the vice-chairman concerned an opportunity for explanation, and the notification issued under the said sub-section shall contain a statement of the reasons of the State Government for the action taken. (3) Any person removed under sub-section (1) from the office of vice-chairman shall not be eligible for election to the said office until the date on which notice of the next ordinary elections to the municipal council is published in the prescribed manner, or the expiry of one year from the date specified in such notification.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 40A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a motion expressing want of confidence in the chairman or vice-chairman may be made in accordance with the procedure laid down herein. (2) Written notice of intention to make the motion, in such form as may be fixed by the State Government, signed by such number of councillors as shall constitute not less than one-half of the sanctioned strength of the council, together with a copy of the motion which is proposed to be made, shall be delivered by any two of the councillor, signing the notice in person together, to the Regional Director of Municipal Administration. (3) The Regional Director of Municipal Administration shall then convene a meeting for the considerations of the motion, to be held at the municipal office, at a time appointed by him which shall not be later than thirty days from the date on which the notice under sub-section (2) was delivered to him. He shall give to the councillors notice of not less than fifteen clear days of such meeting and of the time appointed therefor. (4) The Regional Director of Municipal Administration shall preside at the meeting convened under this section, and no other person shall preside there at. If within half an hour after the time appointed for the meeting Regional Director of Municipal Administration is not present to preside at the meeting, the meeting shall stand adjourned to a time to be appointed and notified to the councillors by the Regional Director of Municipal Administration under sub-section (5). (5) If the Regional Director of Municipal Administration is unable to preside at the meeting, he may, after recording his reasons in writing, adjourn the meeting to such other time as he may appoint. The date so appointed shall not be later than thirty days from the date appointed for the meeting under sub-section (3), Notice of not less than seven clear days shall be given to the councillors of the time appointed for the adjourned meeting. (6) Save as provided in sub-sections (4) and (5) a meeting convened for the purpose of considering a motion under this section, shall not for any reason be adjourned (7) As soon as the meeting convened under this section has commenced, the Regional Director of Municipal Administration shall read to the council the motion for the consideration of which it has been convened, and declare it to be open for debates. (8) No debate on any motion under this section shall be adjourned. (9) Such debate shall automatically terminate on the expiry of two hours from the time appointed for the commencement of the meeting, if it is not concluded earlier. Upon the conclusion of the debate or upon the expiry of the said period of two hours, as the case may be, the motion shall be put to the vote of the council. (10) The Regional Director of Municipal Administration shall not speak on the merits of the motion, nor shall he be entitled to vote thereon. (11) A copy of the minutes of the meeting together with a copy of the motion and the result of the voting thereon shall forthwith on the termination of the meeting be forwarded by the Regional Director of Municipal Administration to the State Government. (12) If the motion is carried with the support of not less than three-fifths of the sanctioned strength of the council, the State Government shall, by notification, remove the chairman or vice-chairman. (13) If the motion is not carried by such a majority as aforesaid, or if the meeting cannot be held for want of a quorum, no notice of any subsequent motion expressing want of confidence in the same chairman or vice-chairman shall be received until after the expiry of six months from the date of the meeting. (14) No notice of a motion under this section shall be received within six months of the assumption of office by a chairman or vice-chairman.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 40B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 Removal of chairman Omitted by T.N. Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 18/2006
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 41--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, in the opinion of the State Government, the municipality is not competent to perform or persistently makes default in performing the duties imposed on it by law or exceeds or abuses its powers, the State Government may, by notification. (a) dissolve the municipality from a specified date; and (b) direct that the municipality be reconstituted with effect from a date which shall not be later than six months from the date of dissolution. (1-A) Before publishing a notification under sub-section (1) the State Government shall communicate to the council concerned the grounds on which they propose to do so, fix a reasonable period for the council to show cause against the proposal and consider its explanations or objections, if any: Provided that where a council has disobeyed an order issued under section 36, the State Government shall not be bound to follow the procedure laid down in this sub-section. (2) On the date fixed for the dissolution of the council under sub-section (1), all its members as well as its chairman and vice - chairman shall forthwith be deemed to have vacated their offices and the persons referred to the sub-section (2) of section 3-C or sub-section (3) of section 7, as the case may be, shall cease to be represented in the council and fresh elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (3) Dissolution shall take effect from noon on the date of publication of the notification, if no date is therein specified, and thereupon the following consequences shall ensue:- (a) All the members of the council as well as its chairman and vice-chairman shall forthwith be deemed to have vacated their offices (b) All or any of the functions of the council and the chairman, may, during the period of dissolution be exercised and performed, as far as may be, and to such extent as the State Government may determine, by such persons as the State Government appoint in that behalf and any such person who is not a District Collector or Revenue Divisional Officer may, if the State Government so direct, receive, payment for his services from the municipal fund; the State Government may determine the relations of such person with the municipal secretary (if any), with the district controlling officers and with themselves; and where there is a commissioner the State Government may direct him to exercise and perform any powers and duties of the council in addition to his own. (c) Omitted (4) An election to reconstitute a municipal council shall be completed before the expiration of the period of six months from the date of dissolution: Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipal council would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this sub-section for constituting the municipal council for such period. (5) All the newly elected councillors of the reconstituted municipality shall enter upon their offices on the date fixed for its reconstitution and they shall hold their offices only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipality would have continued had it not been so dissolved (6) When a council is dissolved under this section, the State Government until the date of the reconstitution thereof and the reconstituted council thereafter shall be entitled to all the assets and be subject to all the liabilities of the council as on the date of the dissolution or supersession and on the date of the reconstitution respectively.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 42--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When the District Collector or person appointed by the State Government lawfully takes action on behalf or in default of the municipal council under this Act he shall have all such powers as are necessary for the purpose, and shall be entitled to the same protection under this Act as the municipal authority whose powers he is exercising, and compensation shall be recoverable from the municipal fund by any person suffering damage from the exercise of such powers to the same extent as if the action has been taken by such municipal authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purposes of election to a municipal council, the State Government shall, after consulting the municipal council, by notification, divide the municipality into wards and determine the number of members to be elected the accordance with such scale as may be prescribed. (2) only one member shall be elected for each ward. (3) All the electors of a ward irrespective of their Community or sex, shall be entitled to vote at an election to the seat in that ward. (4) When issuing under sub-section (1) a notification which materially alters the existing division of a municipality into wards, the State Government may direct that the alteration shall take effect from the next ordinary elections. (5) When a new ward is formed, or when an existing ward is abolished, the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission shall determine. (a) the ward which each councillor then on the council shall be deemed to represent; and (b) the ward or wards in which elections shall be held to fill up the vacancies, if any, in the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person has been elected for two or more wards, he shall, within seven days from the date of the last of such elections, intimate to the commissioner, the ward for which he chooses to serve. (2) In default of such intimation, the commissioner shall determine by lot and notify the ward for which such person shall serve. (3) The said person shall be deemed to have been elected only for the ward so chosen or so notified, as the case may be, and the vacancies thereby arising in the representation of the other wards shall be filled by fresh elections
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43AA--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made or orders issued under this Act, for the first election to the municipal council to be held immediately after the 14th day of July 2006, the territorial area of the wards of the municipal council, the total number of wards and the total number of councillors or members, as the case may be, to be returned from such wards shall be the same as they exist on the 14th day of July 2006." Inserted by T.N. Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act: 18/2006
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for and the conduct of all elections to the municipalities including town panchayats shall be vested in the State Election Commission consisting of Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor under Art. 243-K of the Constitution. (2) The Governor shall, when so requested by the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission make available to the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission by sub-section (1)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, in consultation with the Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner make rules regulating the procedure with regard to election. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), such rules may provide for all matters not expressly provided for in this Act including deposits to be made by candidates standing for election as councillors the conditions under which such deposits may be forfeited and the maximum amount of expenditure which may be incurred by candidates standing for elections as councillor. Provided that the deposits required shall not exceed three thousand rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 43D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything, contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, the giving and recording of votes by voting machines may be adopted in such ward or wards of a Municipality as Tamil Nadu State Election Commission may having regard to the circumstances of each case, specify. Explanation:- For the purpose of this section 'voting machine' means any machine or apparatus whether operated electronically or otherwise used for giving or recording of votes and any reference to a ballot box or ballot paper in this Act or the rules made thereunder shall, save as otherwise provided, be construed as including a reference to such voting machine wherever such voting machine is used at any election.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 44--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The electoral roll of the municipality shall be the same as the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly prepared and revised in accordance within the provisions of law for the time being in force in a municipality and shall be deemed to be the electoral roll for such municipality for the purpose of this Act and that no amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry in the electoral roll of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly made after the last date for making nominations for election in any municipality and before the notification of the result of such election, shall form part of the electoral roll for such election, for the purpose of this section. (1-A) A person shall be disqualified for registration in an electoral roll if he (a) is not a citizen of India; or (b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent Court; or (c) is for the time being disqualified from voting under the provisions of section any law relating to corrupt practices and other offences in connection with elections. (1-B) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for any municipality more than once. (1-C) No person registered in the electoral roll for a municipality shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for another municipality, panchayat or city. Explanation:- For the purpose of this sub-section, the expressions 'panchayat' and 'City' shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1958 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXV of 1958), the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919) or the Madurai Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1971) or in any other law for the time being in force. (1-D) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1), (1-A), (1-B) and (1-C) every person who - (a) is not less than eighteen years of age on the qualifying date; and (b) is ordinarily resident in a municipality, shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that municipality. Explanation:- For the purpose of this section, "qualifying date" in relation to the preparation or revision of an electoral roll under this Act, means the first day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised. (1-E) (a) A person shall not be deemed to be ordinarily resident in a municipality on the ground only that he owns, or is in possession of, a dwelling house therein. (b) A person, absenting himself temporarily from his place of ordinary residence shall not by reason thereof cease to be ordinarily resident therein. (c) A person who is a patient in any establishment maintained wholly or mainly for the reception and treatment of persons suffering from mental illness or mental defectiveness or who is detained in prison or other legal custody at any place, shall not by reason thereof be deemed to be ordinarily resident therein. (d) If in any case a question arises as to whether a person is ordinarily resident in a municipality at any relevant time, the question shall be determined by Tamil Nadu State Election Commission in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (2) Any officer of the State Government or the municipality authorized in this behalf by the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission in consultation with the State Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, prepare and publish in such manner and at such time as the State Government may direct, the electoral roll for the municipality or the alterations to such roll as the case may be. Explanation:- The power conferred by this sub-section on the person so authorized shall include the power to omit, in the manner and at the times aforesaid from the electoral roll for the municipality published under this sub-section the name of any person who is dead or who incurs any of the disqualifications specified the sub-section (1-A) or who is disqualified to be included in such part of the electoral roll for any territorial constituency of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly as related to that ward; Provided that the name of any person omitted from the electoral roll for the municipality by reason of a disqualification under clause (c) of sub-section (1-A) shall forthwith be reinstated in that roll if such disqualification is, during the period such roll is in force removed under any law authorising such removal. (2-A) To assist the person authorised under sub-section (2) the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission may employ such persons as it thinks fit; (3) When a municipality has been divided into wards, the electoral roll for the municipality shall be divided into separate lists for each ward. (4) Where after the electoral roll for a municipality or any alterations thereto have been published under sub-section (2), the municipality is divided into wards for the first time or the division of the municipality into wards is altered, or the limits of the municipality are varied the person authorised under that sub-section shall, as soon as may be after such division or alteration, or variation, as the case may be, in order to give effect to the division of the municipality into wards or to the alteration of the wards, or to the variation of the limits as the case may be, authorise a re-arrangement and republication of the electoral roll for the municipality or any part of such roll, in such manner as the Tamil Nadu State Election Commissioner direct. (5) The electoral roll for the municipality published under sub-section (2), as revised by any alterations thereto subsequently published under that sub-section or under subsection (4), shall remain in force until the publication of a fresh electoral roll for the municipality under sub-section (2) (6) Every person whose name appears in the electoral roll for the municipality as so revised, shall, so long as it remains in force, be entitled, subject to the provisions of this Act, to vote at an election; and no person whose name does not appear in such roll shall vote at an election.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 44A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No Civil court shall have jurisdiction (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any person is or is not entitled to be registered in an electoral roll for a municipality; or (b) the inclusion or execution of any entry in or from an electoral roll by an authority under section 44.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 44B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person makes in connection with (a) the preparation, revision or correction, of an electoral roll, or (b) the inclusion or exclusion of any entry in or from an electoral roll, a statement or declaration in writing which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, with fine, or with both.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 45--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 46--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 47--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6) of section 44, no person who is of unsound mind and declared so by the competent court shall be qualified to vote and no person who is disqualified under section 60 shall be qualified to vote so long as the disqualifications subsists.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 48--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall be qualified for election as a councillor, unless (a) his name is included in the electoral roll of the municipality; and (b) he has completed his twenty - first year of age. (2) No officer of Government including a village officer shall be qualified for election or for holding office as a councillor Provided that this prohibition shall not apply to the holder of any office which does not involve both of the following incidents, namely, that the incumbent (a) is a whole - time servant of the Government; and (b) is remunerated either by salary or fees: Provided further that if any question arises either before or after an election whether any person is or is not disqualified under this sub-section, the question shall be referred to the Governor whose decision shall be final. (3) Before taking any decision on any such question, the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the State Election Commission and shall act according to such opinion.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 48A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where in connection with the tendering of any opinion to the Governor under sub-section (3) of section 48, the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission considers it necessary or proper to make an inquiry, and the Commission is satisfied that on the basis of the affidavits filed and the documents produced in such inquiry by the parties concerned of their own accord, it cannot come to a decisive opinion on the matter which is being inquired into, the Commission shall have for the purposes of such inquiry, the powers of a civil court, while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely:- (a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; (b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as evidence; (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; (d) requisitioning any public record or a copy thereof from any court or office; (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents (2) The Commission shall also have the power to require any person, subject to any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, the subject matter of the enquiry. (3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a Civil court and when any such offence, as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860) is committed in the view or presence of the Commission, the Commission may after recording, the facts constituting the offence and the Statement of the accused as provided for in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974) forward the case to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as if the case had been forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974). (4) Any proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 48B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the State Election Commission shall subject him to or be used against him in, any civil or criminal proceedings except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement. Provided that the statement; (a) is made in reply to a question which he is required by the Commission to answer; or (b) is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 48C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu State Election Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure (including the fixing of places and times of its sitting and deciding whether to sit in public or in private)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 48D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission or any person acting under the direction of Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the foregoing provisions of sections 48-A to 48-C or of any order made thereunder or in respect of the tendering of any opinion by the Commission to the Governor or in respect of the publication by or under the authority of the Commission of any such opinion, paper or proceedings.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 49--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A person who has been sentenced by a criminal court to transportation or to imprisonment for a period of more than six months for any offence other than an offence of a political character or an offence not involving moral delinquency (such sentence not having been reversed or the offence pardoned) shall be disqualified for selection as a councillor while the sentence is in force and for six years from the date of the expiration of the sentence. (1-A) A person convicted of an offence punishable under the protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (Central Act XXII of 1955), shall be disqualified for election as a councillor for a period of six years from the date of such conviction. (2) A person shall be disqualified for election as a councillor if such person is at the date of nomination or election (a) of unsound mind, a deaf-mute or a leper; (b) an applicant to be adjudicated a bankrupt or insolvent or an uncertificated bankrupt or undischarged insolvent; (c) interested in a subsisting contract made with, or any work being done for, the municipal council except as a shareholder (other than a director) in a company Provided that a person shall not be deemed to have any interest in such contract of work by reason only of his having a share or interest in (i) any lease, sale or purchase of immovable property or any agreement for the same; or (ii) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of money only; (iii) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the council is inserted; or (iv) the sale to the council of any articles in which he regularly trades, or the purchase from the council of any articles to a value in either case not exceeding fifteen hundred rupees in the aggregate in any year during the period of the contract or work (Cc) employed as paid legal practitioner on behalf of the council or as legal practitioner against the council (d) an officer or servant holding office under this Act; or an honorary magistrate for the municipal town; (e) already a councillor whose term of office as such will not expire before his fresh election can take effect; or has already been elected a councillor whose term of office has not yet commenced; (f) the servant or employer or the official subordinate or official superior of a councillor holding office on the said date; or (g) in arrears of any kind due by him (otherwise than in a fiduciary capacity) to the municipality up to and inclusive of the previous year, in respect of which a bill or notice has been duly served upon him and the time, if any, specified therein for payment has expired (2-A) If the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission is satisfied that a person: (a) has failed to lodge an account of election expenses within the time and to the manner required by or under the Act and (b) has no good reason or 'justification for the failure, The Tamil Nadu State Election Commission shall, by order published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette declare him to be disqualified for being elected as and for being a chairman or a councillor, as the case may be, and any such person shall be disqualified for a period of three years from the date of the order. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (1-A) the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission may direct that such conviction or sentence shall not operate as a disqualification. (4) Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 49A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person shall be qualified for being elected as, and for being a chairman, vice-chairman or councillor of a municipality or of a town panchayat if he is a member of the Legislative Assembly of the State or a member of either House of Parliament.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 50--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of section 51. a councillor or a person referred to in clause (b) and (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3-C or clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2) of section 30 shall cease to hold his office, if he- (a) is sentenced by a criminal court to such punishment and for such offence as is described in sub-section (1) of section 49; (aa) is convicted of an offence punishable under the Protection of Civil Right Act, 1955 (Central Act XXII of 1955) (b) becomes of unsound mind, a deaf-mute, or a leper; (c) applies to be adjudicated or is adjudicated, a bankrupt or insolvent; (d) subject to the proviso to clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 49, acquires any interest in any subsisting contract made with, or work being done for the council except as a shareholder (other than a director) in a company (dd) is employed as paid legal practitioner on behalf of the council or accepts employment as legal practitioner against the council; (e) is appointed as an officer or servant under this Act or as an honorary magistrate for the municipal town; (f) accepts employment under or becomes the official subordinate of any other councillor; (g) Omitted, (h) ceases to reside in the municipality or within two miles thereof; (hh) fails to pay arrears of any kind due by him (otherwise than in a fiduciary capacity) to the municipality within three months after a bill or notice has been served upon him under this Act, or where in the case of any arrears this Act does not require the service of any bill or notice within three months after a notice requiring payment of the arrears (which notice it shall be the duty of the executive authority to serve at the earliest possible date) has been duly served upon him by the executive authority; or (i) absents himself from the meetings of the council for a period of three consecutive months reckoned from the date of commencement of his term of office, or of the last meeting which he attended, or of his restoration to office as the chairman or councillor under sub-section (4), as the case may be, or if within the said period, less than three meetings have been held, absents himself from three consecutive meetings held after the said date: Provided that no meetings from which a councillor absents himself shall be counted against him under this clause, if due notice of that meeting was not given to him. Explanation:- A meeting held under sub-rule (2) of rule 2 of Schedule III or rule' 3 of that Schedule shall not be deemed to be a meeting within the meaning of this clause. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub-section (1) the Tamil Nadu State Election Commission may direct that such conviction or sentence shall not operate as a disqualification. (3) Where a person ceases to be a councillor under clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub-section (1) or under section 60 such person shall be restored to office for such portion of the period for which such person was elected as may remain unexpired at the date of such restoration, if and when the conviction sentence or order is annulled on appeal or revision or the disqualification caused by the conviction or sentence or incurred under section 60 is removed by an order of The Tamil Nadu State Election Commission and any person elected or co-opted to fill the vacancy in the interim shall on such restorations vacate office. (4) Where a person ceases to be a councillor under clause (i) of sub-section (1) the executive authority shall at once intimate the fact in writing to such person and report the same to the council at its next meeting. If such person applies for restoration suo motu to the council on or before the date of its next meeting or within fifteen days of the receipt by him of such intimation, the Council may at the meeting next alter receipt of such application restore him to his office of the chairman or councillor. Provided that the chairman or a councillor shall not be so restored more than twice during his term of office.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 50A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every councillor before taking his seat shall make and subscribe at a meeting of the council an oath or affirmation according to the following form, namely: I. A.B having been //elected as a councillors //??? Nominated under // the council do//swear in the name of God //???Sincerely affirm // that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter. (2) If a person sits or votes as a councillor before he has complied with the requirements of sub-section (1), he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he sits or votes, as the case may be, to a penalty of three hundred rupees to be recovered as arrears of tax under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 51--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever it is alleged that any person who has been elected as a councillor is disqualified under section 50, section 50-A or section 60 and such person does not admit the allegation, or whenever any councillor is himself in doubt whether or not he has become disqualified for office, under section 50, section 50-A or section 60 such councillor or any other councillor may, and the executive authority, at the request of the council, shall, apply to the District Judge of the district in which the municipality is situated. (2) The said judge after making such inquiry as he deems necessary, shall determine whether or not such person is disqualified under section 50 section 50-A or section 60 and his decision shall be final. (3) Pending such decision, councillor shall be entitled to act as if he were not disqualified.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 51A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No election of Chairman or a Councillor shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to the District Judge of the District in which the municipality is situated within forty five days from the date of the publication of the result of the election under section 27. An election petition calling in question any election may be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in section 51-B by any candidate at such election, by any elector of the ward concerned, or by any councillor. (3) A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition all the candidates at the election (4) An election petition. (a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which petitioner relies; (b) shall with sufficient particulars, set forth the ground or grounds on which the election is called in question; and (c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), for the verification of pleadings. (5) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interest of justices in respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion unless the District Judge finds the adjournment of the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reason to be recorded. (6) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial within six months from the date on which the election petition is presented to the District Judge for trial.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 51B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the District Judge is for opinion - (a) that on the date of his election a returned candidate was not qualified or was disqualified, to be chosen as chairman or councillor under this Act or (b) that any corrupt practice has been committed by a returned candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of a returned candidate or his agent, or (c) that any nomination paper has been improperly rejected, or (d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially effected - (i) by improper acceptance of any nomination, or (ii) by any corrupt practice committed in the interests of the returned candidate by a person other than that candidate or his agent or a person acting with the consent of such candidate or agent, or (iii) by the improper acceptance or refusal of any vote or reception of any vote which is void, or (iv) by the non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder the District Judge shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void. (2) If in the opinion of the District Judge a returned candidate has been found guilty by an agent, of any corrupt practice, but the Judge is satisfied (a) that no such corrupt practice was committed at the election by the candidate, and every such corrupt practice was committed contrary to the orders, and without the consent of the candidate. (b) that the candidate took all reasonable means for preventing the commission of corrupt practices at the election; and (c) that in all other respects the election was free from any corrupt practice on the part of the candidate or any of his agents, then the District Judge may decide that the election of the returned candidate is not void.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 51C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of this Act: (1) Bribery as defined in clause (1) of section 123 of the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951 (Central Act XLIII of 1951). (2) Undue influence as defined as the clause (2) of the said section. (3) The systematic appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person to vote or refrain from voting on grounds of caste, race, community or religion or the use of or appeal to, religious symbols, or, the use of or appeal to national symbols such as the national flag or the national emblem, for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidate's election. (4) The publication by a candidate or his agent or by any other person of any statement of fact which is false, and which he either believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character or conduct of any candidate, or in relation to the candidature, or withdrawal from contest of any candidate being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate's election. (5) The hiring or procuring whether on payment or otherwise of any vehicle or vessel by a candidate or his agent or any other person for conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself, and the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling station provided in accordance with the rules made under this Act. Provided that the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or by several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to or from any such polling station shall not be deemed to be a corrupt practice under this clause if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical power. Explanation:- In this clause the expression "vehicle" means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise (6) The holding of any meeting in which intoxicating liquors are served. (7) The issuing of any circular, placard or poster having a reference to election which does not bear the name and address of the printer and publisher thereof. (8) Any other practice which the State Government may by rules specify to be a corrupt practice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 52--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 53--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 54--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 55--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every officer, clerk, agent or other person performing any duty in connection with the recording or counting of votes at an election who except for some purpose authorized by law, communicates to any person any information showing directly or indirectly for which candidate any voter has voted, and every person who by any improper means procures any such information, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in section 171 -F of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act XLV of 1860) any person who in connection with an election under this Act commits an offence of personation punishable under that section shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months and not more than two years and with fine.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any person in connection with an election under this Act promotes or attempts to promote on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or language, feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of the citizens of India shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or fine, or with both.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall convene, hold or attend any public meeting within the municipality within twenty-four hours before the date of commencement of the poll or on the date or dates on which a poll is taken for an election. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person who at a public meeting to which this section applies acts, or incites others to act, in a disorderly manner for the purpose of preventing the transaction of the business for which the meeting was called together, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees. (2) This section applies to any public meeting of a political character held within the municipality between the earliest date for making nomination of candidates for an election and the date on which such election is held. (3) If any police officer reasonably suspects any person of committing an offence under sub-section (1), he may, if requested so to do by the chairman of the meeting, require that person to declare to him immediately his name and address and, if that person refuses or fails so to declare his name and address, or if the police officer reasonably suspects him of giving a false name or address, the police officer may arrest him without warrant.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall print or publish or cause to be printed or published, any election pamphlet or poster which does not bear on its face the names and addresses of the printer and the publisher thereof (2) No person shall print or cause to be printed any election pamphlet or poster - (a) unless a declaration as to the identity of the publisher thereof, signed by him and attested by two persons to whom he is personally known is delivered by him to the printer in duplicate; and (b) unless, within a reasonable time after the printing of the document one copy of the declaration is sent by the printer together with one copy of the document to the Commissioner (3) For the purposes of this section, - (a) any process for multiplying copies of document other than copying it by hand, shall be deemed to be printing and the expression 'printer' shall be construed accordingly; and (b) 'election pamphlet or poster' means any printed pamphlet, hand-bill or the document distributed for the purpose of promoting or prejudicing the election of a candidate or group of candidates or any placard or poster having reference to an election, but does not include any hand - bill, placard or poster merely announcing the date, time place and other particulars of an election meeting or routine instructions to election agents or workers. (4) Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person who is a returning officer, or an assistant returning officer, or a presiding officer to perform any duty in connection with an election shall in the conduct or the management of the election do any act (other than the giving of vote) for the furtherance of the prospects of the election of a candidate (2) No such person as aforesaid, and no member of a police force, shall endeavour - (a) to persuade any person to give his vote at an election, or (b) to dissuade any person from giving his vote at an election, or (c) to influence the voting of any person at an election in any manner (3) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall on the date or dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station, commit any of the following acts within the polling station or in any public or private place within a distance of one hundred yards of the polling station, namely:- (a) canvassing for votes; or (b) soliciting the vote of any elector; or (c) persuading any elector not to vote for any particular candidate; or (d) persuading any elector not to vote at the election; or (e) exhibiting any notice or sign (other than an official notice) relating to the election. (2) any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees. (3) An offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall, on the date or dates on which a poll is taken at any polling station, (a) use or operate within or at the entrance of the polling station, or in any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof, any apparatus for amplifying or reproducing the human voice, such as a megaphone or a loudspeaker, or (b) shout, or otherwise act in a disorderly manner, within or at the entrance of the polling station or in any public or private place in the neighbourhood thereof so as to cause annoyance to any person visiting the polling station for the poll, or so as to interfere with the work of the officers and other persons on duty at the polling station. (2) Any person who contravenes, or wilfully aids or abets the contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine or with both. (3) If the polling officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or has committed an offence punishable under this section, he may direct any Police Officer to arrest such person, and thereupon the Police Officer shall arrest him. (4) Any Police Officer may take such steps, and use such force, as may be reasonably necessary for preventing any contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1), and may seize any apparatus used for such contravention. Explanation :- In this section, the expression "polling officer" means the polling officer of a polling station or if there is a presiding officer at the polling station such presiding officer.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person who during the hours fixed for the poll at any polling station misconducts himself or fails to obey the lawful directions of the polling officer may be removed from the polling station by the polling officer or by any police officer on duty or by any person authorised in this behalf by such polling officer. (2) The powers conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised so as to prevent any elector who is otherwise entitled to vote at a polling station from having an opportunity of voting at that polling station. (3) If any person who has been so removed from a polling station re-enters the polling station without the permission of the polling officer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine or with both. (4) An offence punishable under sub-section (3) shall be cognizable. Explanation :- In this section, the expression 'polling officer' has the same meaning as in section 56-H.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56-J--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of a candidate or his agent shall hire or procure whether on payment or otherwise any vehicle, or vessel for the conveyance of any elector (other than the candidate himself, the members of his family or his agent) to or from any polling station : Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to (a) the hiring of a vehicle or vessel by an elector or several electors at their joint costs for the purpose of conveying him or them to or from the polling station, if the vehicle or vessel so hired is a vehicle or vessel not propelled by mechanical power; and (b) the use of any public transport vehicle or vessel or any railway carriage by any elector at his own cost for the purpose of going to or coming from the polling station. Explanation :- In this sub-section the expression 'vehicle' means any vehicle used or capable or being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise and whether used for drawing other vehicles or otherwise. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) at or in connection with an election shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56K--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person to who this section applies is without reasonable cause guilty of any act or omission in breach of his official duty, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. (2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against any such person for damages in respect of any such act or omission as aforesaid. (3) The persons to whom this section applies are the returning officers, assistant returning officers, presiding officers, polling officers and any other person appointed to perform any duty in connection with the receipt of nominations or withdrawal of candidatures, or the recording or counting of votes at an election; and the expression 'official duty' shall for the purposes; of this section be construed accordingly, but shall not include duties imposed otherwise than by or under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56-L--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person at an election shall who at any election fraudulently takes, or attempts to take, a ballot paper out of a polling station, or wilfully aids or abets the doing of any such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both. (2) If the presiding officer of a polling station has reason to believe that any person is committing or has committed an offence punishable under sub-section (1) such officer may, before such person leaves the polling station, arrest or direct a Police Officer to arrest such person and may search such person or cause him to be searched by a Police Officer : Provided that when it is necessary to cause a woman to be searched, the search shall be made by another women with strict regard to decency. (3) Any ballot paper found upon the person arrested on search shall be made over for safe custody to a Police Officer by the presiding officer, or when the search is made by a Police Officer, shall be kept by such officer in safe custody. (4) An offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall be cognizable.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56M--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person at an election shall (a) fraudulently deface or fraudulently destroy any nomination paper; or (b) fraudulently deface, destroy or remove any list, notice or other document affixed by or under the authority of a returning officer; or (c) fraudulently deface or fraudulently destroy any ballot paper or the official mark on any ballot paper; or (d) without due authority supply any ballot paper to any person or receive any ballot paper from any person or be in possession of any ballot paper; or (e) fraudulently put into any ballot box anything other than the ballot paper which he is authorized by law to put in; or (f) without due authority destroy, take, open or otherwise interfere with any ballot box or ballot papers then in use for the purposes of the election; or (g) fraudulently or without due authority, as the case may be, attempt to do any of the foregoing acts or wilfully aid or abet the doing of any such acts. (2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of subsection (1) shall- (a) if he is a returning officer or an assistant returning officer or a presiding officer at a polling station or any other officer or clerk employed on official duty in connection with the election, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both; (b) if he is any other person, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. (3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall be deemed to be on official duty if his duty is to take part in the conduct of an election or part of an election including the counting of votes or to be responsible after an election for the used ballot papers and other documents in connection with such election, but the expression 'official duty' shall not include any duty imposed otherwise than by or under this Act. (4) Any offence punishable under clause (b) of subsection (2) shall be cognizable.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 56N--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 56-F or under section 56-K or under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 56-M except on complaint in writing made by order of, or under authority from the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 57--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 58--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 59--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person convicted of an offence punishable under sections 56, 56-A, 56-B, 56-C, 56-D, 56-E, 56-F, 56-G, 56-H, 56-I, 56-L, 56-M or under Chapter IX-A of the Indian Penal Code shall be disqualified from voting or from being elected in any election to which this Act applies or from holding the office of municipal councillor for a period of five years from the date of his conviction
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If it appears to the State Government that in connection with an election under this Act - (a) any premises other than residential buildings actually occupied are needed or likely to be needed for the purpose of being used as a polling station or for the storage of ballot boxes after a poll has been taken, or (b) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or is likely to be needed for the purpose of transport of ballot boxes to or from any polling station, or transport (if members of the police force for maintaining order during the conduct of such election, or transport of any officer or other person for performance of any duties in connection with such election, the State Government may by order in writing requisition such premises, or such vehicle, vessel or animal, as the case may be, and may make such further orders as may appear to them to be necessary or expedient in connection with the requisitioning. Provided that the rent payable in respect of the premises to which the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 (Tamil Nadu Act XVIII of 1960), apply shall be the fair rent payable for the premises under that Act; (2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing addressed to the person deemed by the State Government to be the owner or person in possession of the property, and such order shall be served on the person to whom it is addressed (3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under subsection (1), the period of such requisition shall not extend beyond the period for which such property is required for any of the purposes mentioned in sub-section. (4) In this section (a) "premises" means any land, building or part of a building and includes a hut, shed or other structure or any part thereof;" (b) "vehicle" means any vehicle used or capable of being used for the purpose of road transport, whether propelled by mechanical power or otherwise
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever in pursuance of section 60-A the State Government requisition any premises, there shall be paid by the municipal council to the persons interested compensation the amount of which shall be determined by the State Government by taking into consideration the following, namely : (i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if no rent is so payable, the rent payable for similar premises in the locality: Provided that the rent payable in respect of the premises to which the provisions of the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 (Madras Act XVIII of 1960), apply shall be the fair rent payable for the premises under that Act: (ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises the person interested is compelled to change his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to such change: Provided that where any person interested, being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined, makes an application to the State Government within one month from the date of service of the order determining the compensation for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the State Government may determine. Provided further that where there is any dispute as to the title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of the amount of compensation, it shall be referred by the State Government to an arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the State Government for determination, and shall be determined in accordance with the decision of such arbitrator. Explanation :- In this sub-section, the expression "person interested" means the person who was in actual possession of the premises requisitioned under section 60-A immediately before the requisition, or where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such premises. (2) Whenever in pursuance of section 60-A the State Government requisition any vehicle, vessel or animal, there shall be paid by the municipal council to the owner thereof compensation the amount of which shall be determined by the State Government on the basis of the fares or rates prevailing in the locality for the hire of such vehicle, vessel or animal: Provided that where the owner of such vehicle, vessel or animal, being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so determined, makes an application to the State Government within one month from the date of service of the order determining the compensation for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the State Government may determine : Provided further that where immediately before the requisitioning the vehicle or vessel was by virtue of a hire purchase agreement in the possession of a person other than the owner, the amount determined under this sub-section as the total compensation payable in respect of the requisition shall be apportioned between the person and the owner is such manner as they may agree upon, and in default of agreement, in such manner as an arbitrator appointed by the State Government in this behalf may decide.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, with a view to requisitioning any property under section 60-A, or determining the compensation payable under section 60-B, by order require any person to furnish to such authority as may be specified in the order such information in his possession relating to such property as may be so specified.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may enter into any premises and inspect such premises and any vehicle, vessel or animal therein for the purpose of determining whether, and if so in what manner, an order under section 60-A should be made in relation to such premises, vehicle, vessel or animal or with a view to securing compliance with any order made under that section. (2) In this section, the expressions "premises" and "vehicle" have the same meanings as in section 60-A.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person remaining in possession of any requisitioned premises in contravention of any order made under section 60-A may be summarily evicted from the premises by any officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf. (2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any woman not appearing in public reasonable warning and facility to withdraw remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of any building or do any other act necessary for effecting such eviction.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any premises requisitioned under section 60-A are to be released from requisition, the possession thereof shall be delivered to the person from whom possession was taken at the time when the premises were requisitioned or if there were no such person, to the person deemed by the State Government to be the owner of such premises, and such delivery of possession shall be a full discharge of the State Government from all liabilities in respect of such delivery, but shall not prejudice any rights in respect of the premises which any other person may be entitled by due process of law to enforce against the person to whom possession of the premises is so delivered. (2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises requisitioned under section 60-A is to be given under sub-section (1) cannot be found or is not readily ascertainable or has no agent or any other person empowered to accept delivery on his behalf, the State Government shall cause a notice declaring that such premises are released from requisition to be affixed on some conspicuous part of such premises and publish the notice in the Official Gazette. (3) When a notice referred to in sub-section (2) is published in the Official Gazette, the premises specified in such notice shall cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such publication and be deemed to have been delivered to the person entitled to possession thereof, and the State Government shall not be liable for any compensation or other claim in respect of such premises for any period after the said date.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification, direct that any powers conferred or any duty imposed on the State Government by any of the provisions of sections 60-A to 60-F shall, under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the' direction, be exercised or discharged by such officer or class of officers as may be so specified.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 60H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person contravenes any order made under section 60-A or section 60-C, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 61--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All public streets in any municipality, with the pavements, stones and other materials thereof, and all works, materials and other things provided for such streets, all sewers, drains, drainage work, tunnels and culverts, whether made at the cost of the municipal fund or otherwise, in, alongside or under any street, whether public or private, and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto shall vest in the municipal council. (2) The State Government may by notification withdraw any such street, sewer drain, drainage works, tunnel or culvert from the control of the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 61A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any public street has been withdrawn from the control of a municipal council under sub-section (2) of section 61 and placed under the control of the Highways Department of the State Government, it shall be the duty of the municipal council to provide at the cost of the municipal fund, to such extent as the State Government may by general or special order direct, - (a) for the lighting, watering, scavenging, and drainage of such street; (b) for the provision, maintenance and repair of the water-supply mains, drains and sewers in, alongside or under such street; (c) for the provision, maintenance and repair of footways attached to such street: Provided that where in the discharge of such duties, it is necessary for the council to open and break up the soil or pavement of any such street, the council shall obtain the previous consent of such officer of the Highway Department, as the State Government may by general or special order specify: Provided further that in cases of emergency, the council may, without such consent, open and break up the soil or pavement of any such street, but shall, as fat as practicable, restore such soil or pavement to the condition in which it was opened and broken up; and a report of the action so taken and the reasons therefor shall be sent forthwith to the officer specified under the foregoing proviso.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 62--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All rubbish and filth and other matter collected by a municipal council under this Act shall belong to the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 63--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the control of the State Government the Board of Revenue may by notification, with the consent of a municipal council, make over to the council the management and superintendence of any charitable endowment in respect of which powers and duties attach to the Board of Revenue under the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Endowments and Escheats Regulation, 1817 and thereupon all powers and duties which attach to the Board of Revenue in respect thereof shall attach to the council as if it had been specially named in the said regulation, and the council shall manage and superintend such endowment. (2) The Board of Revenue may of its own motion and shall on a direction from the State Government, by notification, resume the management and superintendence of any endowment made over to a municipal council under sub-section (1); and upon such resumption, all the powers and duties attaching to the council in respect of the endowment shall cease and determine.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 64--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority shall maintain an inventory of all immovable property owned by the municipal council or to which the council has a reversionary right. (2) A copy of the said inventory shall be deposited in the office of the Revenue Divisional Officer of the division in which the municipality lies, or, where there is no division in the office of the District Collector and all changes shall be forthwith communicated to the said officer or Collector.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 65--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may accept trusts relating exclusively to the furtherance of any purpose to which the municipal fund may be applied.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 66--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, 'with the consent of a municipal council transfer to the council the management of any institution or the execution of any work not provided for by this Act, and it shall thereupon be lawful for the council to undertake such management or execution Provided that in every such case the funds required for such management or execution shall be placed at the disposal of the council by the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 67--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any immovable property which any municipal authority is authorized by this Act to acquire may be acquired under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,. 1894, and on payment of the compensation awarded under the said Act in respect of such property and of any other charges incurred in acquiring it, the, said property shall vest in the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 68--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A council of the grade specified in column (1) of the Table below may delegate to the chairman or to a committee consisting of two or more members the power of making on its behalf any contract the value or amount whereof does not exceed the sum specified in the corresponding entries in column (2) of that Table: The Table Grades Maximum value or amount (1) (2)  Rs. 1. (a) Special grade municipalities with an average annual income of more than fifty lakhs of rupees. 5,000 (b) Selection grade municipalities with an average annual income of not more than fifty lakhs of rupees but more than twenty-five lakhs of rupees 5,000 2. I Grade municipalities with an average annual income of not more than twenty -five lakhs of rupees but more than ten lakhs of rupees 4,000 3. II Grade municipalities with an average annual income of not more than ten lakhs of rupees but more than five lakhs of rupees 3,000 4. III Grade municipalities with an average annual income of not more than five lakhs of rupees 2,000 Provided that in the case of municipalities included in Schedule IX or notified under sub-section (1) of section 12-C, the power of making on behalf of the council all contracts shall be exercised by a committee consisting of the chairman, the commissioner and one member of the council elected by it; and the council shall not exercise or delegate the power of making such contracts. Explanation :- The average annual income shall for the purpose of this Table be calculated under General Account Ordinary for three consecutive financial years immediately preceding the financial year in which such calculation is made. (2) In respect of a contract the value or amount whereof exceeds the sums specified in column (2) of the Table under sub-section (1), the sanction of the council for the making thereof shall be obtained before the same is made. (3) Notwithstanding anything in the two preceding sub-sections, any person appointed by the State Government to carry any work into execution on behalf of a municipal council may, subject to such control as the State Government may prescribe, make such contracts as are necessary for the purpose of carrying such work into execution to the extent of the sum provided for such work' and the municipal council shall pay to the person so appointed such sums as may be required for the said purpose to the extent aforesaid.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 68A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The power conferred by section 68 to make or sanction contracts shall be subject to such rules as may be prescribed in regard to the conditions on which, and the mode in which, contracts may be made or sanctioned by or on behalf of municipal councils.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 69--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every contract made by, or on behalf of, a council, whereof the value or amount exceeds one hundred rupees shall be in writing and except in the case of contracts made under the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 68 shall be signed by two municipal councillors : Provided that in the case of municipalities included in Schedule IX or notified under sub-section (1) of section 12-C, every contract shall be signed by the commissioner. (2) A contract executed or made otherwise than in conformity with the provisions of this section, or section 68, and of the rules referred to in section 68-A shall not be binding on the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 70--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The sanction of the council shall be obtained for all purposes for fixing or altering the number, designations and grades of the officers and servants and the salaries, fees and allowances payable to them. (2) Such proposals shall be taken into consideration by the council only at the instance of the executive authority and the council may sanction them with or without modifications. Provided that no proposal adversely affecting any municipal officer or servant who has been in the permanent service of the municipality for more than five years and is drawing a salary of not less than fifty rupees per mensem, shall be considered except at a special meeting convened for the purpose and no such proposal shall be given effect to, unless assented to by at least one-half of the members then on the council. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), the State Government shall have power to fix or alter the number, designations and grades of, and the salaries, fees and allowances payable to, the officers and servants of any municipal council or any class of such officers and servants; and it shall not be open to the municipal council to vary the number, designations, grades, salaries, fees or allowances as so fixed or altered, except with the previous sanction of the State Government
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 71--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any municipality which is neither included in Schedule IX nor notified under sub-section (1) of section 12-C at post of secretary may be sanctioned by the council. (2) Any municipal council, by special resolution may, and every council which during three consecutive years has realized an income of one hundred thousand rupees from ordinary receipts, shall, if so required by the State Government, sanction a post of health officer and a post of municipal engineer. (2-A) Any municipal council which has undertaken the generation, transmission, or supply of electrical energy, by special resolution may, and if so required by the State Government shall, sanction a post of municipal electrical engineer. 'Any such Municipal Council, if so required by the State Government, shall also sanction by special resolution, one or more posts of assistant municipal electrical engineer. (3) The salaries of these officers shall be fixed by the municipal council subject to the approval of the State Government. (4) Every secretary, health officer engineer, electrical engineer or assistant electrical engineer shall devote his whole time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in any other profession, trade or business.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 72--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On the occurrence of a vacancy in, or after the creation of, an office of health officer, engineer, electrical engineer, or assistant electrical engineer an appointment shall be made thereto by the council subject to the approval of the State Government within four months from the date Oil which the vacancy occurred or the office was created or, in the event of any appointment so made by the council not being confirmed by State Government within thirty days of the date of the receipt by the council of the orders of the State Government. (2) In default of an appointment being made by the council as aforesaid, the State Government may appoint a person to hold the office, and such appointment shall, for all purposes, be deemed to have been made by the municipal council. (3) Pending the settlement of an appointment under sub-section (1) or (2) the municipal council may appoint a person to hold the office temporaily and may direct that the person so appointed shall receive such salary not exceeding the sanctioned salary of the post as at shall think fit. (4) No such officer shall be removed from office except with the consent of the State Government. Such consent shall be given if the removal is recommended by a resolution of the council passed at a special meeting called for the purpose and supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the sanctioned strength of the eouncil.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 73--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Save as provided in sections 12-C and 72, appointments to all posts under the municipal council the pay or the maximum pay of which exceeds fifty rupees per mensem shall be made by a committee consisting of the chairman, the commissioner and one member elected by the council and appointments to all other posts under the council shall be made by the executive authority, subject to any rules (including rules for the representation of different communities) which the State Government may make in this behalf. Provided that in case of emergency- (a) the executive authority may appoint temporarily such officers and servants as may in his opinion be required for the purposes of this Act and the employment of whom for any particular work has not been prohibited by any resolution of the municipal council; and (b) every appointment made under clause (a) shall be reported by the executive authority to the council at its next meeting.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 73A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the State Government shall have power. (a) to transfer any officer or servant of a municipality to the service of the Municipal Corporation of Chennai constituted under the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919) or the Municipal Corporation of Madurai constituted under the Madurai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1971) or the Municipal Corporation of Coimbatore constituted under the Coimbatore City Municipal Corporation Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act XXV of 1981) or any other municipal corporation constituted under any law for the time being in force; or (b) to transfer any officer or servant of any of the municipal corporation referred to the clause (a) to the service of any municipality: or (c) to transfer any officer or servant of any municipality to the service of any other municipality. (2) The State Government shall have power to issue such general or special directions as they may deem necessary for the purpose of giving due effect to any transfer made under sub-section (1)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 74--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules which the State Government may make in this behalf the council may frame regulations in respect of officers and servants on the municipal staff (a) fixing the amount and nature of security to be furnished; (b) prescribing education or other qualifications; (c) regulating the grant of leave, leave allowances, acting allowances and travelling allowances; (d) regulating the grant of pensions and gratuities; (e) establishing and maintaining provident funds and making contribution thereto compulsory; (f) regulating conduct; and (g) generally prescribing conditions of service : Provided - (i) that the amount of any leave, leave allowances, travelling allowances, pension or gratuity provided for in such regulations shall in no case without the special sanction of the State Government exceed what would be admissible in the case of Government servants of similar standing and status; (ii) that the conditions under which such allowances are granted or any leave, superannuation or retirement is sanctioned shall not without similar sanction be more favourable than those for the time being prescribed for such Government servants.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 75--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of section 77 and to such control as may be prescribed by the State Government the executive authority may censure, fine, withhold promotion from, recover the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the municipal council from the pay of, reduce, suspend, remove or dismiss any officer or servant in the service of the municipality except a health officer, a municipal engineer, a municipal electrical engineer or an assistant municipal electrical engineer for any breach of departmental rules or discipline, or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or other misconduct: Provided that a fine shall not be imposed on any municipal officer or servant unless he is a bill collector or the holder of a post which is classified by the State Government as inferior or menial.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 76--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may grant leave to all municipal officers and servants.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 76A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act:- (a) the State Government may by notification take power to appoint the health officer, the municipal engineer, the municipal electrical engineer or the assistant municipal electrical engineer in the case of any municipality or class of municipalities; (b) the State Government may recover from the municipal council concerned the whole or such proportion of the salary and allowances paid to any such health officer, engineer, electrical engineer or assistant electrical engineer and such contribution towards his leave allowances, pension and provident fund as the State Government may, by general or special order, determine; (c) the State Government may, at any time, withdraw any such health officer, engineer, electrical engineer or assistant electrical engineer and appoint another in his place: and (d) the State Government shall have power to regulate the methods of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances and discipline and conduct of the health officers, engineers, electrical engineers and assistant electrical engineers appointed under clause (a).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 77--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, on the application of any municipal council, place the services of any Government servant employed in connection with the affairs of the State at the disposal of the council to be employed by it for the purposes of this Act. The council shall pay any Government servant so employed the salary he may be entitled to receive under the rules of the branch of Government service to which he belongs, and shall also make any contribution towards the pension and leave allowances of such servant as may be required, by the conditions of his service under the Government to be paid by him or on his behalf. (2) If such servant, while employed by the municipal council or if any other servant of the council does any work for the State Government, the State Government shall contribute to the municipal fund so much of the salary of such servant as the State Government may consider to be an equivalent for such work. (3) No Government servant employed by a municipal council shall be dismissed or removed from such employment (a) in case he is employed as a medical officer, without the consent of the State Government and (b) in any other case, without the consent of the State Government or until three months notice in writing to that effect shall have been given to the chief controlling authority of the branch of the Government service to which the Government servant belongs (4) No Government servant employed by a municipal council shall, except in cases of emergency, be withdrawn from the service of the council without the consent, of the municipal, council, unless and until the State Government shall have given three months notice in writing to that effect to the municipal council or unless some other Government servant has been deputed to replace the one withdrawn. (5) Government servants employed by municipal councils shall be entitled to leave and other privileges in accordance with the regulations applicable to the department of the general administration to which they belong.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 77A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government may, by notification constitute any class of officers or servants of municipal councils into a municipal service for the Presidency of Madras : Provided that no notification shall be issued under this sub-section (i) unless all the municipal councils constituted under this Act have been consulted in respect thereof, and (ii) unless a majority of the councils so consulted have passed a resolution supporting such issue. (2) Upon the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the State Government shall have power, subject to the provisions of section 304 to make rules to regulate the classification, methods of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances and discipline and conduct of the municipal service thereby constituted and such rules may vest jurisdiction in relation to such service in the State Government or in such other authority or authorities as may be prescribed therein
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 77AA--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, on and from the 1st June. 1986- (a) all teachers (including Headmasters) and (b) all officers and servants of the municipal councils employed in connection with the municipal schools shall become whole-time Government servants. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act and subject to the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution the State Government may make rules regulating the conditions of service of the teachers (including Headmasters) and other persons referred to in sub-section (1)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 77B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a college maintained by a municipal council is affiliated to a University, the management of the college shall, if the laws of the University so require, vest in a governing body constituted in accordance with such laws and such governing body shall exercise in relation to the members of the teaching staff and the establishment of the college all powers of appointment, control and punishment, which by or under the Act vest in the committee referred to in section 73 or in the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 78--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every municipal council may levy. (a) Property tax; (b) a profession tax; (c) a tax on carriages and animals; (d) a tax on carts. (dd) a tax on advertisement other than advertisements published in the newspapers and advertisements broadcast by radio or television. (2) A hill station municipal council may also levy a tax on servants. (3) Any resolution of a municipal council determining to levy a tax shall specify the rate at which any such tax shall be levied and the date from which it shall be levied. Provided that before passing a resolution imposing a tax for the first time or increasing the rate of an existing tax the council shall publish a notice in at least one vernacular newspaper, on the notice board of the municipal office and in such other places within municipal limits as may be specified by the council and by beat of drum, of its intention, fix a reasonable period not being less than one month for submission of objections and consider the objections, if any, received within the period specified. Provided also that any resolution abolishing an existing tax or reducing the rate at which a tax is levied shall be immediately reported to the State Government and in municipalities which have an outstanding loan either from the Government or from the public or any other local body, such abolition or reduction shall not be carried into effect without the sanction, of the Stale Government. Provided also that where any resolution under this section has taken effect for a particular year, no proposals to alter the rates or date fixed in such resolution so far as that year is concerned shall be taken into consideration by the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 78A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) In every municipality, a duty shall be levied on certain transfers of property in accordance with the provisions hereinafter contained in this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 79--> State(s): Tamil Nadu With the previous sanction of the State Government and the Central Government. (a) Omitted (b) a tax on persons travelling by railway from any station notified under section 116 in or near the municipality may be levied by the council of any municipality which is resorted to by pilgrims: Provided that no portion of the proceeds of any tax levied under clause (b) shall be expended for purposes other than making arrangements for the health and comfort of the pilgrims or the improvement or development of the municipal area.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 80--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When a municipal council shall have determined subject to the provisions of sections 78 and 79 to levy any tax for the first time or at a new rate, the executive authority shall forthwith publish a notification in the district gazette and by beat of drum specifying the rate at which the date from which and the period of levy, if any, for which such tax shall be levied.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 80A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing in this part of this Act shall authorise a municipal council to levy any tax which the State Legislature has no power to impose in the State under the Constitution. Provided that a municipal council which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution was lawfully levying any such tax under this part of this Act as then in force, may continue to levy that tax until provision to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 81--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The property tax shall be levied on all buildings and lands within the Municipality. (2) (a) In relation to any building newly constructed or where any addition or alteration has been made to any existing building, the owner or occupier of such buildings. (b) where the title of any building or land is transferred, such transferee: (c) in relation to any building or land, in the event of death of the person primarily liable to the payment of property tax, the person on whom the property is transferred, shall furnish to the executive authority within such date as may be prescribed, a return for such building or land containing such details as may be prescribed for the assessment of the property tax to the said building or land. (3) In the case of reassessment or general revision of any property tax leviable under this Act, the owner or occupier of any building or land shall furnish to the executive authority within such time as may be prescribed a return in such for containing such details as may be prescribed for the assessment of property to such building or land. (4) If any owner or occupier of any building or land fails to furnish a return as required under sub-section (2) or subsection (3) or furnishes an incomplete or incorrect return the executive authority or any person authorised by him in this behalf shall cause an inspection to be made and also to make such local enquiries as may be considered necessary, and based on such inspection and information collected, shall prepare a return which shall be furnished to the owner or occupier of the building or land. (5) On receipt of a return under sub-section (2) or subsection (3) or on the basis of the return prepared by the executive authority under sub-section (4) and after considering the objections if any received, the executive authority shall determine the tax payable in accordance with the provisions of this Act and shall send an intimation to that effect to the person concerned. (5-A) In the case of failure to furnish a return under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) the executive authority shall, in addition to the tax determined under sub-section (5), direct the owner or occupier of any building or land to pay by way of penalty, a sum of rupees two hundred and fifty or five per cent of the tax determined under sub-section (5), whichever is higher. (6) For the purpose of assessment of property tax for any building or land in the Municipality the executive authority or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may enter, inspect, survey and measure any building or land, after giving due notice to the owner or occupier before such inspection and the owner or occupier shall be bound to furnish necessary information required for this purpose. (7) The property tax on building and land shall, subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if any, due to the State Government thereon, be a first charge upon the said buildings or land and upon the movable property if any found within or upon such building or land and belonging to the person liable to pay tax.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 82--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government shall prescribe the minimum and the maximum rates of- (a) basic property tax for the building or land having regard to (i) existing property tax; (ii) the value of the building and land; and (iii) the use of the building; (b) additional basic property tax for every building with reference to its location. (bb) additional basic property tax for every building with reference to its type of construction; (c) the concession with regard to age of the building.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 83--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The basic property tax, the additional basic property tax and the concession, if any, with regard to the age, for every building or land shall be determined by the municipal council subject to the minimum and maximum rates prescribed by the State Government under section 82. (2) The Municipal Council shall notify the rates determined under sub-section (1) and such other particulars in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) (i) (a) The basic property tax for every building shall relate to the carpet area of the building and its usage: Provided that the carpet area of any building shall not include the open verandah, open court-yard or any other open space which is not enclosed. (b) The classification of the building for the purpose of deciding the usage of any building shall be residential, commercial, industrial or any other classification as may be prescribed. (ii) (a) The additional basic property tax for every building shall relate to location and type of construction of the building. (b) For the purpose of this clause, the location of the building shall be classified as follows:- (A) arterial roads, bus-route roads leading to arterial roads and main roads; (B) bus-route roads other than those specified in item (A); (C) roads and streets in primarily residential colonies. (c) The type of construction of the building shall be classified into different groups as follows, namely:- (A) thatched and tiled roof; (B) reinforced concrete cement roof; (C) reinforced concrete cement roof with mosaic flooring partly or fully; (D) granite, ceramic tiles and marble flooring and walls partly or fully; (iii) A concession on the basic property tax shall be allowed in calculating the property tax having regard to the age of the building, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 84--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For the purpose of levy of property tax, every building shall be assessed together with its sites and other adjacent premises occupied as an appurtenance thereto: (2) The property tax shall be calculated as follows:- (a) Firstly, the basic property tax for a building shall be calculated at the rate fixed by the municipal council; (b) Secondly, the additional basic property tax for such building shall be calculated at the rate fixed by the municipal council and added to the basic property tax so arrived at under clause (a); (c) Thirdly, on the quantum of amount arrived at under clauses (a) and (b) the concession having regard to the age of the building at the rate fixed by the municipal council shall be deducted and the amount so arrived at shall be the property tax payable in respect of any building for every half-year and shall be paid by the owner or occupier of such building within the half-year period. Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression "half-year" shall be from the 1st day of April to the 30th day of September and from the 1st day of October to the 31st day of March of a year: Provided that in the case of any Government or railway building a concession shall be allowed in calculating the property tax in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) The executive authority shall issue a property tax book containing all the details of the building or land and the property tax payable in relation to such building or land in such form as may be prescribed. (4) (a) Where there is any land without any building situated within the municipal limits, the executive authority shall determine the property tax payable for such land at the rate fixed by the municipal council. (b) Where there is any land with building situated within the municipal limit and if the extent of the land left vacant is twice the plinth area of the building, the executive authority shall determine the property tax on the vacant land which exceeds twice the plinth area of the building at the rate fixed by the municipal council. Provided that the property tax on any land shall be levied under this sub-section if the extent of such land with or without any building thereon does not exceed two thousand and four hundred square feet. (5) The municipal council may, subject to such rules as may be made by the Government, by notification, in this behalf, exempt any building having a carpet area not exceeding one hundred square feet constructed with mud walls and thatched rood from the levy of property tax.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 85--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The general revision of the assessment of property tax in relation to the building and land situated within the municipal limit shall be made from such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint. The executive authority may revise the property tax in accordance with the provision of this Act and the rules made thereunder: Provided that there shall be an interval of five years between one general revision and another general revision.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 86--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) Places set apart for public worship and either actually so used or used for no other purpose; (b) Choultries for the occupation of which no rent is charged and choultries where the rent charged for the occupation of which is used exclusively for charitable purposes; (c) buildings used for educational purpose including hostels attached thereto and places used for the charitable purpose of sheltering the destitute or animals and orphanages, homes and schools for the deaf and dumb, asylum for the aged and fallen women and such similar institutions run purely on philanthropic lines as are approved by the council; (d) such ancient monuments protected under the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 (Central Act VII of 1904) and such ancient and historical monuments declared by or under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (Central Act 24 of 1958) to be of national importance and also such ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains protected under the Tamil Nadu Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1966 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1966) or parts thereof as are not used as residential quarters or public office; (e) charitable hospitals and dispensaries but not including residential quarters attached thereto, (f) such hospitals and dispensaries maintained by railway administration as may, from time to time, be notified by the State Government, but not including residential quarters attached thereto; (g) burial and burning grounds included in the book kept in the municipal office under section 281; (h) the bed of any river or canal or any river or canal belonging to Government which do not provide any income to Government or any Government land set apart for recreation purposes or any other Government property being neither building nor land from which in the opinion of Government any income could not be derived as may, from time to time, be notified by the Government: Provided that nothing contained in clauses (a), (c) and (e) shall be deemed to exempt any building or land from property tax for which rent or service charges is payable by the person using the same for the purposes referred to in the said clauses.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 87--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may, on his own motion or on an application made at any time within six months from the date of any order passed by him rectify any error apparent on the face of the record; Provided that no such rectification which has the effect of enhancing an assessment, shall be made unless such authority has given notice to the assessee and has allowed him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. (2) Where such rectification has the effect of reducing an assessment, the excess amount if any paid by the assessee shall be adjusted towards any tax that may accrue in future.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 88--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where a person fails to pay the property tax within the time specified the executive authority shall impose upon him, by way of fine a sum as fixed by the municipal council in this behalf in accordance with such rates as may be prescribed. (2) On verification of the return filed by the owner or occupier of the building or land alter the issue of the property tax book, the executive authority may, if he is satisfied that the owner or occupier wilfully filed false return, the executive authority may cause reassessment of such property and direct the owner or occupier to pay, in addition to the tax assessed, by way of fine, a sum which shall be one hundred per cent of the difference in the tax due; Provided that ho fine under this sub-section shall be imposed unless the owner or occupier affected has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such imposition.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 88A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council may levy education tax within its area at such rate not exceeding five per cent of the property tax and in such manner as the municipal council may determine.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 89--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) There shall be a Taxation Appeals Committee for hearing and disposing of an appeal preferred by any person who is not satisfied with the assessment order made by the executive authority under this Act other than the orders relating to the duty on transfer of property,- (i) for every town panchayat consisting of the Chairman of the municipal council who shall be the Chairman of the Taxation Appeals Committee and such number of members as may be notified by the State Government from among the members of the town panchayat; (ii) for every municipality, consisting of the Chairman of the municipal council who shall also be the Chairman of the Taxation Appeals Committee and four Councillors elected by the council, (2) The business of the Taxation Appeals Committee shall be transacted in accordance with the rules made by the State Government in this behalf (3) An appeal against the decision of the Taxation Appeals Committee may be filed within thirty days from the date of the order to the District Judge. (4) No appeal shall be entertained by the District Judge, unless the appellant deposits with the town panchayat or municipality, as the case may be, the entire amount of tax as decided by the Taxation Appeals Committee and the appellant shall continue to deposit the property tax with the town panchayat or, municipality, as the case may be, as decided by the Taxation Appeal Committee till the disposal of the appeal by the District Judge. (5) Where as a result of any order passed in an appeal any amount already deposited is in excess of the tax due, the difference, after deducting the tax due, shall be adjusted towards the tax, and fine due in respect of any other period, by the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 90--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 91--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 92--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 93--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the council by a resolution determines that a profession tax shall be levied every company which, after the date specified in the notification published under section 80, transacts business in the municipality for not less than sixty days in the aggregate in any half-year; and every person, who after the said date, in any half-year- (a) exercises a profession, art, or calling or transacts business or holds any appointment, public or private- (i) within the municipality for not less than sixty days in the aggregate, or (ii) outside the municipality but who resides in the municipality for not less than sixty days in aggregate, or (b) resides in the municipality for not less than sixty days in the aggregate and is in receipt of any pension or income from investments, shall pay a half-yearly tax assessed in accordance with the rules in Schedule IV. (2) A person shall be chargeable under the class appropriate to his aggregate income from all the sources specified in sub-section (1) as being liable to the tax. (3) If a company or person proves that it or he has paid the sum due on account of the profession tax levied under this Act, or under the Madras Local Boards Act, 1920, or the companies or profession tax levied under the Chennai City Municipal Act, 1919, or any tax of the nature of a profession tax imposed under the Cantonments Act 1924, for the same half-year to any municipal council or local board or cantonment authority in the Presidency of Madras, such company or person shall not be liable, by reason merely of change of place of business, exercise of profession, art or calling, appointment or residence to pay to any other municipal council, local board or cantonment authority more than the difference between such sum and the amount to which it or he is otherwise liable for the profession or companies tax for the half-year under this Act, or any of the aforesaid Acts. (4) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to render a person who resides within the local limits of one local authority and exercises his profession, art or calling or transacts business or holds any appointment within the limits of any other local authority or authorities liable to profession tax for more than the higher of the amounts of the tax leviable by any of the local authorities. In such a case the State Government shall apportion the tax between the local authorities in such manner as they may deem fit and the decision of the State Government shall be final; Provided that where one of the local authorities concerned is a cantonment authority or the Port authority of a major Port, the decision of the State Government shall be subject to the concurrence of the Central Government. (5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any person subject to the Army Act, 1950, the Navy Act, 1957 or the Air Force Act, 1950 who is compelled by the exigencies of military, naval or air force duty to reside within the limits of the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 94--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The profession tax leviable from a firm, association or joint Hindu family may be levied from any adult member of the firm, association or family.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 94A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If a company or person employs a servant or agent to represent it or him for the purpose of transacting business in a municipality, such company or person shall be deemed to transact business in the municipality and such servant or agent shall be liable for the profession-tax, in respect of the business of such company or person, whether or not such servant or agent has power to make binding contracts on behalf of such company or person. (2) Where one company or person is the agent of another company or person, the former company or person shall not be liable separately to the profession tax, on the same income as that of the principal.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 95--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the profession-tax due from any company or person is not paid, the executive authority shall cause a notice to be served on such company or person to pay it within fifteen days of the date of such service.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 95A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All statements made, returns furnished or accounts or documents produced in connection with the assessment of profession tax by any company or person shall be treated as confidential and copies thereof shall not be granted to the public.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 96--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building or land and every secretary or manager of a hotel, boarding or lodging house, club, or residential chambers to furnish within a specified time a list in writing containing the names of all persons occupying such building, land, hotel, boarding or lodging house, club or residential chambers and specifiying the profession, art calling, or appointment of every such person and the rent, if any paid by him and the period of such occupation.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 97--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require any employer or the head or secretary or manager of any public or private office, hotel, boarding house or club or of a firm or company- (a) to furnish within a specified time a list in writing of the names of all persons employed by such employer or by such office, hotel, boarding house, club, firm or company as officers, servants, dubashes, agents, suppliers, or contractors, with a statement, of the salary or income of such employed persons, and (b) to furnish particulars in regard to any company of which such employer, head, secretary or manager, as the case may be, is the agent.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 97A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every employer shall, on receipt of a requisition from the executive authority, deduct from the salary or wages of any person employed by the employer as an officer or a servant or from any such salary payable by the employer to any person employed by the employer as dubash, agent, supplier or contractor, such amount of profession tax, as may be specified in such requisition, as being due from such employed person. Explanation.- In this sub-section "employer" includes the head or secretary, or manager of any public or private office, hotel, boarding-house, club, firm or company. (2) Every person responsible, for making any deduction under sub-section (1) may, at the time of making the deduction, increase or reduce the amount to be deducted under sub-section (1) for the purpose of adjusting any excess or deficiency arising out of any previous deduction or failure to deduct during the half-year. (3) any deduction made in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) and paid to the municipality shall be treated as a payment of profession tax on behalf of the person from whose salary or wages the deduction was made or on behalf of the person to whom the sum from which the deduction was made is payable, and credit shall be given to him for the amount so deducted on the production of the certificate furnished under sub-section (5) in respect of the profession tax, if any, due from that person for the relevant half-year under this Act. (4) Any sum deducted in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be paid within the prescribed time to the credit of the municipality. (5) Every person making the deduction under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall, at the time of payment of the salary or wages or sum, furnish to the person to whom such payment is made a certificate to the effect that profession tax has been deducted, and specifying the amount so deducted and such other particulars as may be prescribed. (6) Where profession tax due from any employed person is deducted under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the person from whose salary or wages the deduction was made or the person to whom the sum from which the deduction was made is payable shall not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax has been so deducted. (7) Every person, making the deduction under subsection (1) or sub-section (2) shall prepare and, within such period as may be prescribed after the expiry of the half year, deliver or cause to be delivered to the executive authority in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner, a return in writing showing the name and residential address of every person from whose salary or wages deduction was made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), and of every person to whom the sum from which such deduction was made is payable, the amount so deducted, and the half year to which the deduction relates. (8) If any person responsible for making any deduction under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) fails to comply with any of the provisions of this section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of any such Government. (9) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding any law to the contrary for the time being in force.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 98--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the council by a resolution determines that a tax on carriages and animals shall be levied, the executive authority shall levy the said tax half-yearly on carriages and animals kept or used within the municipality which are of the kinds specified in Schedule IV. (2) The rates of the tax shall be determined by the council, provided always that they shall not exceed the maximum laid down in Schedule IV.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 99--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person having possession, custody or control of any taxable carriage or animal shall be liable for the full half-yearly tax if the carriage or animal has been kept or used within the municipality for an aggregate period of not less than sixty days in the half-year. (2) If such aggregate period exceeds fifteen days but is less than sixty days a moiety one half only of the half-yearly tax shall be leviable. (3) If such aggregate period does not exceed fifteen days, no tax shall be leviable for the half-year. (4) Every person having possession, custody or control of any taxable carriage or animal within the municipality shall, until the contrary is shown, be presumed to have kept or used the same within the municipality for sixty days in the half-year. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), no person shall be liable- (a) to pay tax to the municipality during any half-year on account of any carriage or animal in respect of which the full tax for the same half-year has already been paid to the municipality by some other person; or (b) to pay tax to the municipality on account of any carriage or animal in respect of which tax has already been paid to any other municipality or any local board or Cantonment Board, whether under this Act, the Chennai City Municipal Act, 1919, the Madras Local Boards Act, 1920 or the Cantonments Act, 1924, more than the excess, if any, of the tax payable in the municipality in respect of such carriage or animal, over the tax already paid to the other municipality, the local board or Cantonment Board, as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 100--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The carriage and animal tax shall not be levied on- (a) carriages and animals belonging to the Government and used for military purposes; (b) carriages and animals kept solely for sale by carriage-makers and dealers; (c) carriages which have been under repair or standing at a carriage-makers's during the whole of the half-year; (d) animals which during the whole of the half-year have been kept in any institution for the reception of infirm animals or which are certified by a veterinary surgeon to have been unfit for use during the whole of the half-year.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 101--> State(s): Tamil Nadu With the sanction of the council or in accordance with regulations framed by that body, the executive authority may compound, for any period not exceeding one year, with any livery-stable keeper or other person Reeping carriages and animals for sale or hire, for a certain sum to be paid in lieu of the carriage and animal tax.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 102--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority shall send to every person supposed to have become liable to the payment of the tax on carriages and animals a printed table to be filled up with such information respecting the carriages and animals kept or used by him as the executive authority considers necessary for the assessment of the tax. (2) Such table shall be filled up with such information in writing, and signed and dated, and returned within one week of its receipt to the municipal office by the person to whom it has been sent, (3) On the expiry of the period of one week referred to in sub-section (2), the executive authority shall cause a notice to be served on such person requiring him to pay within fifteen days of the date of such service the sum for which in the opinion of the executive authority such person is liable on account of the tax on carriages and animals.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 103--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When any person pays the amount of tax due in respect of any carriage or animal, the executive authority shall grant him a licence to keep or use such carriage or animal for the period to which the payment relates.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 104--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may direct that a municipal number shall be affixed- (a) to every carriage let out for hire within the municipality, and (b) to every bicycle and tricycle kept or used within the municipality: Provided that no municipal number shall be requisite in the case of carriages to which a number must be affixed under the provisions of any special Act. (2) the numbers affixed under sub-section (1) shall be registered in the municipal office.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 105--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the council by a resolution determines that a tax shall be levied on carts, the executive authority shall levy the said tax half-yearly at the rate (which shall not exceed four rupees per cart per half-year, fixed by the council and specified in the notification published under section 80 in pursuance of such resolution and from the date specified in such notification in respect of all carts kept or used within the municipality. (1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no person shall be liable- (a) to pay tax to the municipality during any half-year on account of any cart in respect of which the tax for the same half-year has already been paid to the municipality by some other person; or (b) to pay to the municipality on account of any cart in respect of which tax has already been paid to any other municipality or any local board or Cantonment Board, whether under this Act, the Chennai City Municipal Act, 1919, the Madras Local Boards Act, 1920, or the Cantonments Act, 1924, more than the excess, if any, of the tax payable in the municipality in respect of such cart, over the tax already paid to the other municipality, the local board or the Cantonment Board, as the case may be. (2) Every owner of any such cart shall register it once in every half-year in the municipal office. (3) The council may direct that a municipal number shall be affixed to every registered cart. (4) The executive authority shall notify certain days in every half-year for the registration and numbering of carts and the payment of the tax. (5) All registrations made and numbers affixed under this section shall be entered in a book to be kept for the purpose at the municipal office. (6) Such book shall be open to the inspection of any person who pays any tax to the municipality at all reasonable times without charge. (7) This section shall not apply to carts belonging to the Government and used for military purposes, or carts-kept solely for sale by cart-makers and dealers.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 106--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The tax on carts shall not be levied on any cart which is shown to the satisfaction of the executive authority to have been kept or used within the municipality for an aggregate period not exceeding fifteen days in the half-year or to have been under repair or standing at a cartmaker's during the whole of the half-year.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 106A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where the Tamil Nadu Hackney Carriage Act, 1911, is in force in any area of a municipality, the person appointed to perform the functions of the Commissioner under the said Act in respect of such area shall, before registering any hackney carriage thereunder satisfy himself that the municipal council has received payment of the tax, if any, due under section 98 or section 105, as the case may be, on account of the last preceding half year and the current half-year.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If a municipal number is not affixed to a carriage or cart in pursuance of a direction issued under section 104 or section 105, as the case may be, the executive authority may at any time seize and detain the vehicle and the animal, if any, by which it is drawn: Provided that no vehicle other than a bicycle, tricycle, or rickshaw shall be seized or detained when actually employed in the conveyance of any passenger or goods. (2) If the vehicle or animal seized be not claimed and the tax due thereon paid within ten days from the date of seizure the executive authority may direct that the vehicle or animal shall be sold in public auction and the proceeds of the sale applied to the payment of (i) the tax, if any due, on the vehicle or animal sold; (ii) such penalty not exceeding the amount of the tax as the executive authority may direct; and (iii) a sum of one rupee on account of charges incurred in connection with the seizure, detention and sale. (3) If the owner of the vehicle or animal or other person entitled thereto claims the same within ten days from the date of seizure or at any time before the sale, it shall be returned to him on payment of (i) the tax due thereon; (ii) such penalty not exceeding the amount of the tax as the executive authority may direct; and (iii) a sum of eight annas on account of charges incurred in connection with the seizure and detention.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person who erects, exhibits, fixes or retains upon or over any land, building, wall hoarding or structure any advertisement, or who displays any advertisement to public view in any manner whatsoever, in any place whether public or private shall pay on every advertisements which is so erected, exhibited, fixed, retained or displayed to public view, a tax calculated at such rates having regard to the location, size reach and nature of the advertisement and in such manner and subject to such exemptions as the municipal council may, with the approval of the State Government, by resolution determine; Provided that the rates shall be subject to the maxima and minima laid down by the State Government in this behalf and in any case such rate of tax shall not exceed rupees five hundred per square metre per half-year: Provided further that no tax shall be levied under this section on any advertisement or a notice- (a) of a public meeting; or (b) of an election to any legislative body or the municipal council; or (c) of a candidature in respect of such an election: Provided also that no such tax shall be levied on advertisement which is not a sky-sign and which- (a) is exhibited within the window of any building; or (b) relates to the trade or business carried on, within the land or building upon or over which such advertisement is exhibited, or to any sale or letting of such land or building or to any effects therein or to any sale, entertainment or meeting to be held upon or in the name; or (c) relates to the name of the land or building upon or over which the advertisement is exhibited, or to the name of the owner or occupier of such land or building; or (d) relates to the business of any railway administration; or (e) is exhibited within any railway station or upon any wall or other property of a railway administration except any portion of the surface of such wall or property fronting any street. Explanation I- The word "structure" in this section shall include any movable board on wheels used as an advertisement or an advertisement medium. Explanation II- The expression "sky-sign" shall, in this section, mean any advertisement supported on or attached to any post, pole, standard frame-work or other support wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure which, or any part of which sky-sign shall be visible against the sky from some point in any public place and includes all and every part of any such post, pole, standard frame-work or other support. The expression "sky-sign" shall also include any balloon, parachutes or other similar device employed wholly or in part for the purposes of any advertisement upon or over any land, building or structure or upon or over any public place but shall not include- (a) any flag staff, pole, vane or weather-cock, unless adopted or used wholly or in part for the purpose of any advertisement; (b) any sign, or any board, frame or other contrivance securely fixed to or on the top of the wall or parapet of any building or on the cornice or blocking course of any wall, or to the bridge of a roof: Provided that such board, frame or other contrivance shall be of one continuous face and not open work, and does not extend in height more than one metre above any part of the wall, or parapet, or ridge to, against or on, which it is fixed or supported; or (c) any advertisement relating to the name of the land or building, upon or over which the advertisement is exhibited, or to the name of the owner or occupier of such land or building; or (d) any advertisement relating exclusively to the business of a railway administration and placed wholly upon or over any railway station, yard, platform or station approach belonging to a railway administration, and so placed that it cannot fall into any street or public place; or (e) any notice of land or building to be sold, or let, placed upon such land or building. Explanation III:- "Public place" shall, for the purposes of this section, mean any place which is open to the use and enjoyment of the public, whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not. Explanation IV :- In this Chapter, the expression "advertisement" shall not include any advertisement published in any newspaper and advertisement broadcast by radio or television.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No advertisement shall after the levy of the tax under Section 107-A has been determined upon in the municipal council, be erected, exhibited, fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding or structure within the municipality or shall be displayed in any manner whatsoever in any place without the written permission of the executive authority. (2) The executive authority shall not grant such permission if- (i) the advertisement contravenes any by-law made by the municipal council under clause (28) of Section 306; or (ii) the tax, if any, due in respect of the advertisement has not been paid; or (iii) the erection, exhibition, fixation or retention of the advertisement is an offence under the Tamil Nadu Open Places (Prevention of Disfigurement) Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1959). (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) in the case of an advertisement liable to the advertisement tax, the executive authority shall grant permission for the period to which the payment of the tax relates and no fee shall be charged in respect of such permission." Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any advertisement, erected exhibited, fixed or retained on the premises of a railway administration relating to the business of a railway administration.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The permission granted under Section 107-B shall become void in the following cases, namely: (a) if the advertisement contravenes any by-law made by the municipal council under clause (28) of Section 306 or the Tamil Nadu Open Places (Prevention of Disfigurement) Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1959); (b) if any addition to the advertisement be made except for the purposes of making it secure under the direction of the engineer for general purposes; (c) if any material change be made in the advertisement or any part thereof; (d) if the advertisement or any part thereof falls otherwise than through accident; (e) if any addition or alteration be made to, or in the building, wall or structure upon or over which the advertisement is erected, exhibited, fixed or retained if such addition or alteration involves the disturbance of the advertisement or any part thereof; and (f) if the building, wall or structure, upon or over which the advertisement is erected, exhibited, fixed or retained be demolished or destroyed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any advertisement shall be erected, exhibited, fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding or structure in contravention of the provisions of Section 107-A or Section 107-B or after the written permission for the erection, exhibition, fixation or retention thereof for any period shall have expired or become void, the owner or person in occupation of such land, building, wall, hoarding or structure shall be deemed to be the person who has erected, exhibited, fixed or retained such advertisement in such contravention unless he proves that such contravention was committed by a person not in his employment or under his control or was committed without his connivance.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any advertisement be erected, exhibited, fixed or retained contrary to the provisions of Section 107-A or 107-B or after the written permission for the erection, exhibition, fixation, or retention thereof for any period shall have expired or become void, the executive' authority may, by notice, in writing, require the owner or occupier of the land, building wall, hoarding or structure upon or over which the same is erected, exhibited, fixed or retained to take down or remove such advertisement or may enter any building, land or property and have the advertisement removed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 107F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may farm out the collection of any tax on advertisements leviable under Section 107-A for any period not exceeding one year at a time on such terms and conditions as may be provided for by by-laws made under Section 306
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 108--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If a hill station municipal council by a resolution determines that a tax shall be levied on servants, the executive authority shall collect a monthly tax from the date and at the rates which shall not exceed two rupees a month for each servant fixed by the council and specified in the notification published under section 80 in pursuance of such resolution from every employer of private menial and of domestic servants who is not liable for the profession tax or as proprietor for the property tax. (2) The tax may differ for different classes of servants. (3) The tax shall be payable at the full monthly rate for every servant employed for not less than fifteen days in the aggregate out of every thirty days from the commencement of the employment, and at a moiety (one half) of the monthly rate for every servant employed for less than fifteen days but not less than seven days in the aggregate during such periods. (4) If the tax remains unpaid at the end of seven days or fifteen days, as the case may be, the executive authority may serve upon the employer a notice requiring him to pay within three days from the service of such notice the sum for which he is believed to be liable, and may, on the expiry of such period, recover from the said employer the sum specified in such notice. (5) Every person, who has paid the servants' tax for any period in a half-year and has also paid the profession tax or (as proprietor) the property tax in the same municipality for that half-year, shall be entitled to a refund of the sum paid as servants' tax.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 109--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by notice require- (a) every employer of private menial and domestic servants, and (b) every secretary, owner or manager of a hotel, boarding or lodging house, club, or residential chambers to furnish within a specified time a list in writing of the private menial and domestic servants employed by him or by every person resident in such place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 110--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 111--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 112--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 113--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 114--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 115--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 116--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where a municipality is restored to by pilgrims and the occasions for pilgrimage occur at intervals of years of only once or twice in a single year, a tax on persons leaving the municipality or its neighbourhood by railway, shall be levied only for a specified period in respect of each, such occasion. Where occasions for pilgrimage are more frequent or a municipality is a place of pilgrimage of perennial resort, the tax may be levied throughout the year. (2) The occasion and the period of levy of the tax shall, in consultation with the railway administration concerned, and with the previous approval of the State Government, be determined by the municipal council. (3) If the council resolves that the tax shall be levied such tax shall be collected from the date and during the period specified in the notification published under section 80 in pursuance of such resolution as a surcharge on the tickets of all passengers travelling by railway from any one of the railway stations in or near the' municipality and named in such notification to any other railway station more than a specified distance therefrom. (4) The rates at which the tax shall be levied on each class of tickets shall be determined by the municipal council but shall not exceed the rates in the following table.- Tax For limited  Throughout the   periods  year  (1) (2)  (3)   Rs. A. P. Rs. A. P For first-class tickets ... 0 8 0 0 4 0 For second-class tickets ... 0 4 0 0 2 0 For intermediate class tickets ... 0 3 0 0 1 6 For third class tickets ... 0 2 0 0 1 0 Provided that the rates leviable on season tickets, if any shall be determined by the municipal council in consultation with the railway administrations concerned but shall not for a period of one month or any less period exceed six times the rates given in column (2) of the above table. (5) The State Government may make rules not inconsistent with this Act for regulating- (i) the collection of the tax, (ii) the payment thereof to the council concerned, (iii) the deduction of any expenses incurred by railway administrations in the collection thereof, and (iv) the decision of disputes (a) between municipal councils and between municipal councils and other local authorities, and (b) between municipal councils and railway administrations in matters connected with the levy, collection or apportionment of the tax : Provided that rules relating to the decision of disputes shall not have effect in relation to a dispute to which the cantonment authority, or the port authority of a major port, or the administration of any railway as defined in clause (20) of Article 366 of the Constitution, is a party, unless the rules are made with the concurrence of the Central Government
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 116A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The duty on transfers of property shall be levied (a) in the form of a surcharge on the duty imposed by the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, as in force for the time being in the State of Tamil Nadu, on every instrument of the description specified below, which relates to immovable property situated within the limits of a municipality; and (b) at such rate as may be fixed by the State Government, not exceeding five percent, on the amount specified below against such instrument: Description of instrument Amount on which duty should be levied (i) Sale of immovable property The market value of the property as set forth in the instrument, and in a case where the market value is finally determined by any authority under section 47-A of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Central Act II of 1899), the market value as so determined by such authority. (ii) Exchange of immovable property The market value of the property as set forth in the instrument, and in a case where the market value is finally determined by any authority under section 47-A of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Central Act II of 1899), the market value as so determined by such authority. (iii) Gift of immovable property The market value of the property as set forth in the instrument, and in a case where the market value is finally determined by an authority under section 47-A of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Central Act II of 1899) the market value as so determined by such authority (iv) Mortgage with possession of immovable property The amount secured by the mortgage, as set forth in the instrument. (v) Lease in perpetuity of immovable property An amount equal to one -sixth of the whole amount or value of the rents which would be paid or delivered in respect of the first fifty years of the lease, as set forth in the instrument.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 116B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu On the introduction of the transfer duty- (a) section 27 of the said Indian Stamp Act shall be read as if it specifically required the particulars to be set forth separately in respect of property situated within the limits of a municipality and outside such limits; (b) section 64 of the same Act shall be read as if it referred to the municipal council concerned as well as the Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 116C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may make rules not inconsistent with this Act for regulating the collection of the duty, the payment thereof to the municipal councils concerned and the deduction of any expenses incurred by the Government in the collection thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 117--> State(s): Tamil Nadu With the sanction of the State Government the municipal council may exempt any person or class of persons wholly or in part from the payment of any tax But nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorize the exemption of any person solely on the ground that he is a member of a municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 117A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained this Act or the rules made thereunder, if, for any reason, any person liable to pay any of the taxes or fee leviable under this chapter has escaped assessment in any half-year or year or has been assessed in any half-year or year at a rate lower than the rate at which he is assessable or, to the case of property tax, has not been duly assessed in any half-year or year consequent on the building or land concerned having escaped proper determination of its annual value, the commissioner may, at any time within six years from the date on which such person should have been assessed serve on such person a notice assessing him to the tax or fee due and demanding payment thereof within fifteen days from the date of such service; and the provisions of this for and the rules made thereunder shall, so far as may be, apply as if the assessment was made in the half-year or year to which the tax or fee relates.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 118--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council may write off any tax, fee or other amount whatsoever due to it, whether under a contract or otherwise, or any sum payable in connection therewith if in its opinion, such tax, fee amount or sum is irrecoverable.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 119--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All moneys received by the municipal council shall constitute a fund which shall be called the municipal fund and shall be applied and disposed of subject to the provisions of this Act or other laws.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 120--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall in each year frame a budget showing the probable receipts and the expenditure which it proposes to incur during the following year and shall submit a copy of the budget to the State Government before such date as may be fixed by them in that behalf. The budget shall contain provisions adequate in the opinion of the State Government for the due discharge of all liabilities in respect of loans contracted by the council and for the maintenance of a working balance; and if the budget as submitted to the State Government fails to make these provisions, the State Government may modify any part of the budget so as to ensure that such provisions are made.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 121--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If in the course of a year a municipal council finds it necessary to modify the figures shown in the budget with regard to its receipts or to the distribution of the amounts to be expended on the different services it undertakes, it may submit a supplemental or revised budget provided that no alteration shall be made without the consent of the State Government in the amount allotted' for the service or debt or in the working balance.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 122--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government shall appoint auditors for the accounts receipt and expenditure of the municipal fund. Such auditors shall he deemed to be 'public servants' within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 123--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the expenditure incurred by the State Government or by any other municipality to which this Act applies or by any other local authority in the State of Tamil Nadu for any purpose authorized by or under Part II of schedule IV is such as to benefit the inhabitants of a municipality, the municipal council may, with the sanction of the State Government, make a contribution towards such expenditure. (2) The State Government may direct a municipal council to show cause within a month after receipt of the order containing the direction, why any contribution described in subsection (1) should not be made. (3) If the municipal council fails to show cause within the said period to the satisfaction of the State Government the State Government may direct it to make such contributions as they shall name, and it shall be paid accordingly.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The rules and tables embodied in Schedule IV shall be read as part of this chapter.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914, the State Government shall be entitled to recover in the manner provided by sub-section (4) of section 36 of this Act or by suit any loan or advance made to any municipal council for any purpose to which the funds of the said council may be applied under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Finance Commission referred to the Article 243-1 of the Constitution shall review the financial position of the municipalities and town panchayats and make recommendations to the Governor as to - (a) the principles which shall govern,- (i) the distribution between the State Government and the municipalities and the town panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State Government which may be divided between them and the allocation between the municipalities and the town panchayats of their respective shares of such proceeds; (ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to or appropriated by the municipalities and the town panchayats. (iii) the grants-in-aid to the municipalities and the town panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State; (b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the municipalities and the town panchayats; (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interest of sound finance of the municipalities and the town panchayats. (2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by Commission under this section together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For the purposes of this Chapter, (a) "employee" means a person employed on salary and includes, - (i) a Government servant receiving pay from the revenue of the Central Government or any State Government; (ii) a person in the service of a body whether incorporated or not, which is owned or controlled by the Central Government or any State Government, where such body operates within the municipal limit even though its headquarters may be outside the municipal limit; and (iii) a person engaged in any employment by an employer, not covered by sub-clauses (i) and (ii); (b) "employer" in relation to an employee earning any salary on a regular basis under this means, the person or the officer who is responsible for disbursement of such salary and includes the head of the office or any establishment as well as the Manager or Agent of the employer; (c) "half-year" shall be from the 1st day of April to the 30th day of September and from the 1st day of October to the 31st day of March of a year. (d) "month" means a calendar month; (e) "person" means any person who is engaged actively or otherwise in any profession, trade, calling or employment in the State of Tamil Nadu and includes a Hindu undivided family, firm, company, corporation or other corporate body, any society, club, body of persons or association, so engaged but does not include any person employed on a casual basis; (f) "tax" means the tax on profession, trade, calling and employment levied under this Chapter.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) There shall be levied by the Municipal Council a tax on profession, trade, calling and employment. (2) Every company which transacts business and every person, who is engaged actively or otherwise in any profession, trade, calling or employment within the Municipality on the first day of the half-year for which return is filed, shall pay half-yearly tax at the rates specified in the Table below in such manner as may be prescribed: THE TABLE Serial number Average half-yearly income Half-yearly tax. (1) (2) (3) From To  Rs. Rs. Rs. 1. Upto 21,000 .... Nil 2. 21,001 30,000 60 3. 30,001 45,000 150 4. 45,001 60,000 300 5. 60,001 75,000 450 6. 75,001 and above .... 600 (3) The rate of tax payable under sub-section (2) shall be published by the executive authority in such manner as may be prescribed. (4) Where a company or person proves that it or he has paid the sum due on account of the tax levied under this Chapter or any tax of the nature of a profession tax imposed under the Cantonments Act, 1924 for the same half-year to any local authority or cantonment authority in the State of Tamil Nadu such company or person shall not be liable, by reason merely of change of place or business, exercise of profession, trade, calling or employment, or residence, to pay the tax to any other local authority or cantonment authority. (5) The tax leviable from a firm, association or Hindu undivided family may be levied on any adult member of the firm, association or family. (6) Where a person doing the same business in the same name in one or more places within the Municipality, the income of such business in all places within the Municipality shall be computed for the purpose of levy of tax and such person shall pay the tax in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. (7) Where any company, corporate body, society, firm, body of persons or association pays the tax under this Chapter, any director, partner or member, as the case may be, of such company, corporate body, society, firm, body of persons or association shall not be liable to pay tax under this Chapter for the income derived by such director, partner or member from such company, corporate body, society, firm, body of persons or associations: Provided that such director, partner or member shall be liable to pay tax under this Chapter for the income derived from other sources. (8) Every person who is liable to pay tax, other than a person earning a salary or wage shall furnish to the executive authority a return in such form, for such period and within such date and in such manner as may be prescribed: Provided that subject to the provisions of sub-sections (10) and (11), such person may make a self assessment on the basis of average half-yearly income of the previous financial year and the return filed by him shall be accepted without calling for the accounts and without any inspection. (9) Every such return shall accompany with the proof of payment of the full amount of tax due according to the return without such proof of payment shall not be deemed to have been duly filed. (10) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to sub-section (8), the executive authority may select ten per cent of the total number of such assessment in such manner as may be prescribed for the purpose of detailed scrutiny regarding the correctness of the return submitted by a person in this connection and in such cases final assessment order shall be passed in accordance with the provision of this Chapter. (11) If no return is submitted by any person under subsection (8) within the prescribed period or if the return submitted by him appears to the executive authority to be incomplete or incorrect, the executive authority shall, after making such enquiry as he may consider necessary, assess such person to the best of his judgment: Provided that before taking action under this sub-section, the person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of proving the correctness or completeness of any return submitted by him. (12) Every person who is liable to pay tax under this section, other than a person earning salary or wage- (a) shall be issued with a pass book containing such details relating to such payment of tax as may be prescribed and if the pass book is lost or accidentally destroyed, the executive authority may, on an application made by the person accompanied by such fee as may be fixed by the Municipal Council, issue to such person a duplicate of the pass book, (b) shall be allotted a permanent account number and such person, shall- (i) quote such number in all his returns to, or correspondence with the executive authority; (ii) quote such number in all challans for the payment of any sum due under this Chapter. (13) The rate of tax specified under sub-section (2) shall be revised by the Municipal Council once in every five years and such revision of tax shall be increased not less than twenty five per cent and not more than thirty-five per cent to the tax levied immediately before the date of revision.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The tax payable by any person earning a salary or wage shall be deducted by his employer from the salary payable to such person, before such salary or wage is paid him in such manner as may be prescribed and such employer shall, irrespective of whether such deduction has been made or not when the salary or wage is paid to such person be liable to pay tax on behalf of such person: Provided that if the employer is an officer of the State or Central Government, the Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, prescribe the manner in which such employer shall discharge the said liability.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every employer liable to pay tax under this Chapter shall file a return to the executive authority in such form, for such period and by such date as may be prescribed, showing therein the salaries paid by him to the employees and the amount of tax deducted by him in respect of such employees. (2) Every such return shall accompany with the proof of payment of the full amount of tax due according to the return and a return without such proof of payment shall not be deemed to have been duly filed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority if satisfied that any return filed by any employer under sub-section (1) of Section 24-F is correct and complete, shall accept the return. (2) Where an employer has failed to file any return under sub-section (1) of Section 124-J within the time or if the return filed by him appears to the executive authority to be incorrect or incomplete the executive authority shall, after making such enquiry as he considers necessary, determine the tax due and assess the employer to the best of his judgment and issue a notice of demand for the tax so assessed : Provided that before assessing the tax due, the executive authority shall give the employer a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) In addition to the tax assessed under sub-section (11) of Section 124-D or sub-section (2) of Section 124-G in the case of submission of incorrect or incomplete return the executive authority shall direct the person or employer to pay by way of penalty of one hundred per cent of the difference of the tax assessed and the tax paid as per return: Provided that no penalty under this sub-section shall be imposed after the period of three years from the date of the order of the assessment under this Chapter and unless the person affected has had a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such imposition. (2) On any amount remaining unpaid after the dates specified for its payment, the persons or employer shall pay, in addition to the amount due, interest at such rate not exceeding one per cent per mensem of such amount for the entire period of default as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person or employer aggrieved by any order or decision of the executive authority in relation to the payment of tax (including penalty, fee and interest) may, within such time as may be prescribed appeal to the Taxation Appeals Committee. (2) The decision of the Taxation Appeals Committee shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court of law:- Provided that no such decision shall be made except after giving the person affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124-J--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to- (a) the members of the Armed Forces of the Union serving in any part of this State to whom the provisions of Army Act, 1950 (Central Act XLV of 1950) the Air Force Act, 1950 (Central Act XLV of 1950) or the Navy Act, 1957 (Central Act 62 of 1957) applies: (b) the members of the Central Reserve Police Force to whom the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (Central Act XLVI of 1949) applies and serving in any part of this State; (c) Physically disabled persons with total disability in one or both the hands or legs, spastics, totally dumb or deaf persons on totally dumb or deaf persons or totally blind persons : Provided that such physically disability shall be duly certified by a registered medical practitioner in the service of the Government not below the rank of a Civil Surgeon.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 124K--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Tamil Nadu Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1992 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1992) hereinafter in this section referred to as the 1992 Act) in its application to the municipality is hereby repealed. (2) The repeal of the 1992 Act under sub-section (1) shall not affect. (i) the previous operation of the said Act or anything done or duly suffered, thereunder; or (ii) any right, privileges, obligations or liabilities acquired, accrued or incurred under the said Act; or (iii) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed. (3) Notwithstanding the repeal of the 1992 Act, the rates of tax on professions, trades, callings and employment specified in the Schedule to the said Act shall continue to apply for the period commencing on the 1st day of April, 1992 and ending with the 30th day of September, 1998 for the levy and collection of such tax for the said period where the tax due under that Act has not been paid for the said period. (4) The provisions of this Chapter other than the rates of tax specified in sub-section (2) of Section 124-D and the provisions relating to penalty and interest shall mutatis mutandis apply to the levy and collection of tax for the period mentioned in sub-section (3). (5) The arrears of tax under the 1992 Act, shall be paid in six equal half- yearly instalments in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 125--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All public water-courses and springs and all public reservoirs, tanks, cisterns, fountains, wells, stand-pipes and other water works existing at the time of the coming into force of this Act or afterwards made, laid or erected, and whether made, laid or erected at the cost of the municipal council or otherwise, and also any adjacent land (not being private property) appertaining thereto shall vest in the council and be subject to its control: Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any work which is, or is connected with, a work or irrigation or to any adjacent land appertaining to any such work. (2) The State Government may by notification limit or define such control or may assume the administration of any public source of water-supply and public land adjacent and appertaining thereto after consulting the municipal council and giving due regard to its objection, if any.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 126--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council may, with the sanction of the State Government direct the construction of such works as it deems fit without the limits of the municipality for supplying it with water and may provide channels, tanks reservoirs, cisterns, engines, mains, wells, fountains, stand-pipes and other works as it may deem fit within the said limits for the use of the inhabitants. (2) The council may cause existing works for the supply of water to be maintained and supplied with water, or it may close any such works and substitute other such works and may cause them to be maintained and supplied with water.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 127--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall not be lawful for any person except with permission duly given and obtained to enter upon land belonging to or vested in a municipal council along which a conduit or pipe runs, or upon any premises connected with the water-supply.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 128--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Without the permission of the council no building, wall or other structure shall be newly erected and no street or railway shall be constructed over any municipal water mains. (2) If any building, wall or other structure be so erected or any street or railway be so constructed, the council may cause the same to be removed or otherwise dealt with as shall appear to it fit and the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the persons offending.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 129--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall, so far as the funds at its disposal may admit, provide a sufficient supply of water fit for the domestic use of the inhabitants.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 130--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All house connections, whether within or without the premises to which they belong, with any water-supply mains which may have been constructed by a municipal council shall be under the control of the council, but shall be altered, repaired and kept in proper order, at the expense of the owner of the premises to which they belong or for the use of which they were constructed, and in conformity with by-laws and regulations framed by the council in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 131--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) In municipalities in which there is a pipe supply of water, the executive authority, may at his discretion on application by the owner or occupier of any building, arrange, in accordance with the by-laws, to supply water thereto for domestic consumption and use; Provided that the executive authority shall not without the sanction of the council, agree to supply water to any building assessed at an annual value of less than one hundred and twenty rupees. (2) Whenever it appears to the executive authority that any dwelling house assessed at an annual value of not less than two hundred rupees is without a proper supply of water for domestic consumption and use and that such a supply can be furnished from a main not more than one hundred feet distant from any part of such building, the executive authority may by notice require the owner to obtain such supply and to execute all such works as may be necessary for that purpose in accordance with the by-laws and regulations. (3) The cost of making the connection and the cost of hire of meters shall be borne by the owner or applicant and shall be recoverable in the same manner as the property tax. Explanation:- Supply of water for domestic consumption and use shall not be deemed to include a supply. (a) for any trade, manufacture or business, (b) for gardens or for purposes of irrigation, (c) for building purposes, (d) for fountains, swimming baths, public baths within the municipality or for any ornamental or mechanical purposes, (e) for animals, or for washing vehicles, where such animals or vehicles are kept for sale or hire; but shall be deemed to include a supply :- (a) for flushing latrines, (b) for all baths other than swimming baths or public baths (c) for the consumption and use of inmates of hotels, boarding-houses and the like and for baths used by such inmates (4) Omitted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 132--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may at his discretion supply water for any purpose other than domestic consumption and use on receiving a written application specifying the purpose for which such a supply is required and the quantity likely to be consumed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 132A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) For all water supplied under section 131 or under section 132, payment shall be made on such basis, at such times, and on such conditions as may be laid down in the by-laws made by the Council and shall be recoverable in the same manner as the property-tax. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such by-laws may - (a) in cases of supply for domestic consumption and use, lay down the maximum free allowance to be made and the rates of charge to be levied in respect of water supplied in excess of such allowance; and (b) in cases of supply whether for domestic consumption and use or for other purposes, or any class of such cases, lay down that the charge for water supplied shall be based on the number of the taps allowed, irrespective of the quantity of water consumed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 133--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may with the sanction of and on such terms (if any) as may be approved by the State Government supply water to a local authority or other person without the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 134--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may cut off the supply of municipal water from any premises- (a) if the premises are unoccupied. (b) if any water-tax or any sum due for water for the cost of making a connection or for the cost or hire of a meter or for the cost of carrying out any work or test connected with the water supply which is chargeable to any person by or under this Act, is not paid within fifteen days after a bill for such tax or sum has been presented; (c) if, after receipt of a notice from the executive authority requiring him to refrain from so doing, the owner or occupier continues to use the water or to permit it to be used in contravention of any by-law made under this Act: (d) if the owner or occupier neglects within a period specified in any notice issued by the executive authority under any by-law made under this Act to put up a meter or to comply with any other lawful order or requisition; (e) if the owner or occupier wilfully or negligently damages his meter or any pipe or tap conveying municipal water; (f) if the occupier refuses to admit the executive authority into premises which he proposes to enter for the purpose of executing any work or of placing or removing any apparatus or of making any examination or inquiry in connection with the water-supply, or prevents the executive authority from doing such work, placing or removing such apparatus or making such examination or inquiry; (g) if any pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the municipal water-supply are found on examination by the executive authority to be under repair to such an extent as to cause waste or contamination of water; (h) if the owner or occupier causes pipes, taps, works or fittings connected with the municipal water-supply to be replaced, removed, repaired or otherwise interfered with in violation of the by-laws: Provided that in cases under sub-clauses (a), (g) and (h) the executive authority shall not take action unless notice of not less than twenty-four hours has been given to the owner or occupier of the premises. (2) The expense of cutting off the supply shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the premises. (3) In cases under clause (b) as soon as any money for non-payment of which water has been cut off together with the expense of cutting off the supply, has been paid by the owner or occupier, the executive authority shall cause water to be supplied as before on payment of the cost (if any) of reconnecting the premises with the municipal water-works. (4) No action taken under this section shall relieve any person from any penalties or liabilities which he may otherwise have incurred.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 135--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall not be liable to any penalty or damages for cutting off the supply of water or for not supplying water (save in the case of express stipulation in an agreement for the supply of water for other than domestic purposes) in the case of any drought, or other unavoidable cause or accident, or the necessity for re-laying or repairing pipes.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 136--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall, so far as the funds at its disposal permit, cause the public streets to be lighted and for that purpose shall provide such lamps and works as it thinks necessary.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 137--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall, so far as the funds at its disposal may admit, provide and maintain a sufficient system of public drains.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 138--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All house drains whether within or without the premises to which they belong and all private latrines and cess-pools within the municipality shall be under the control of the municipal council but shall be altered, repaired, cleaned, and kept in proper order, at the expense of the owner of the premises to which the same belong or for the use of which they were constructed, and in conformity with by-laws and regulations framed by the council in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 139--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority shall on application by the owner or occupier of any premises or the owner of a private street arrange, in accordance with the by-laws, for the connection of the applicant's drain with any public drain at a distance not exceeding three hundred feet therefrom at the applicant's expense. (2) If there, is a public drain or outfall within a distance not exceeding one hundred feet of the nearest point on any premises or if within such distance a public drain or outfall is about to be provided or is in the process of construction the executive authority may by notice direct the owner of the said premises to construct a drain leading therefrom to such drain or place of outfall, and to execute all such works as may be necessary in accordance with the by-laws and regulations at such owner's expense. (3) If any premises are in the opinion of the executive authority without sufficient means of effectual drainage, but no part thereof is situated within one hundred feet of a public drain or its place of outfall, the executive authority may by notice direct the owner of the said premise to construct a cess-pool or septic tank or filters of such material, dimensions and description, in such position and at such level as the executive authority thinks necessary, and to construct a drain or drains emptying into such cess-pool, tank or filters and to execute all such works as may be necessary in accordance with the by-laws and regulations: Provided that- (a) no requisition shall be made under this section on any person who has been exempted from payment of the property tax under sub-section (5) of section 83; (b) no person shall be required under this section to expend a sum exceeding five times the property tax on any such building, with the land assessed with it as part of the same premises, or in the case of buildings exempted under section 83, five items the property tax which would be payable on such building with the land which would be assessed with it to the property tax if such building were not exempt and if any amount exceeding the said sum is expended, the excess shall be borne by the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 140--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where a drain connecting any premises with a public drain or other place set apart by the municipal council for the discharge of drainage is sufficient for the effectual drainage thereof and is otherwise unobjectionable, but is not, in the opinion of the executive authority adapted to the general drainage system of the municipality or of the part of the municipality in which such drain is situated, the executive authority with the approval of the council may- (a) subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) close, discontinue or destroy the said drain and do any work necessary for that purpose; or (b) direct that such drain shall, from such date as he specifies in this behalf, be used for sullage and sewage only, or for water unpolluted with sullage or sewage only, and by notice require the owner of the premises to make, at his own expense, an entirely distinct drain for water unpolluted with sullage or sewage, or for sullage and sewage. (2) No drain may be closed, discontinued or destroyed by the executive authority under clause (1) (a) except on condition of his providing another drain as effectual for the drainage of the premises and communicating with a public drain or other place aforesaid; and the expense of the construction of any drain so provided by the executive authority and of any work done under clause (1) (a) shall be paid by the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 141--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When the executive authority is of opinion that any group or block of premises, any part of which is situate within one hundred feet of a municipal drain already existing, or about to be provided or in the process of construction may be drained more economically or advantageously in combination than separately, the executive authority may, with the approval of the council, cause such group or block of premises to be drained by such method as appears to the executive authority to be best suited therefor and the expenses incurred by the executive authority in so doing shall be paid by the owners in such proportions as the council may decide (2) Not less than fifteen days before any work under this section is commenced the executive authority shall give notice to the owners of- (a) the nature of the intended work, (b) the estimated expenses thereof, and (c) the proportion of such expenses payable by each owner. (3) The owners for the time being of the several premises constituting a group or block drained under sub-section (1) shall be the joint owners of every drain constructed, erected or fixed, or continued for the special use and benefit only if such premises and shall in the proportion in which it is determined that they are to contribute to the expenses incurred by the executive authority under sub-section (1), be responsible for the expense of maintaining every such drain in good repair and efficient condition.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 142--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Without the permission of the council, no person shall place or construct any fence, building, culvert, drain-covering, drain or other structure or any street, railway or cable over, under, in or across any public drain, or stop up, divert, obstruct or in any way interfere with any public drain, whether it passes through public or private ground. (2) The executive authority may remove or otherwise deal with anything, placed or constructed in contravention of sub-section (1) as he shall think fit and the cost of so doing be recoverable from the owner thereof in the matter provided in section 344.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 143--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building or land adjoining a public street to construct culverts or drain-coverings over the side-channels or ditches at the entrances to the said building or land. (2) All culverts or drain-coverings or pials maintained over side-channels or ditches by the owners or occupiers of adjacent buildings or lands shall be of such form and size and consist of such materials and be provided with such means of ventilation as the executive authority may by notice require and shall be maintained and kept free from all obstruction at the expense of the said owners or occupiers.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 144--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The owner or occupier of any building in a public street, shall, within fifteen days after receipt of notice in that behalf from the executive authority put up and thence forward maintain proper troughs and pipes for catching and carrying the water from the roof and other parts' of such building and for discharging such water in such manner as the executive authority may permit.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 145--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council shall, as far as the funds at its disposal may admit, provide and maintain in proper and convenient places a sufficient number of public latrines and shall cause the same to be daily cleansed and kept in proper order.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 146--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building within the time specified in such notice to provide a latrine or alter or remove from an unsuitable to a more suitable place any existing latrine in accordance with the directions contained in such notice for the use of the persons employed in or about or occupying such building and to keep it clean and in proper order. (2) Every owner or occupier of the ground on which any group of six or more huts stands shall provide latrines of such description and number and in such position as the executive authority may by notice require, within such time as may be fixed in the notice, for the use of the inhabitants of such huts.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 147--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person employing workmen, labourers or other persons exceeding ten in number, shall provide and maintain for the separate use of persons of each sex so employed latrines of such description and number and in such position as the executive authority may by notice require, within such time as may be fixed in the notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 148--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by notice require the owner or manager of a market, cart-stand, cattle-shed, choultry, theatre, railway station, dock, wharf or other place of public resort within the time specified in such notice to provide and maintain for the separate use of persons of each sex latrines of such description and number and in such position as may be specified in such notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 149--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All latrines shall be so constructed as to screen persons using the same and the filth from the view of persons passing by or residing in the neighbourhood and shall be kept clean and in proper order.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 150--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may carry any cable, wire, pipe drain or channel of any kind to establish or maintain any system of drainage, water-supply or lighting, through, across, under, or over any road, street or place laid out for a road or street, and after giving reasonable notice to the owner or occupier, through, across, under, over or up the side of, any land or building in the municipality, and may place and maintain posts, poles standards, brackets, or other contrivances to support wires and lights on any pole or post in the municipality not vested in the Government and may do all acts necessary or expedient for repairing or maintaining any such cable, wire, pipe, drain, channel, post, pole, standard, bracket or other similar contrivance in an effective state for the purpose of which it is intended to be used or for removing the same : Provided that such work shall be done so as to cause the least practicable nuisance or inconvenience to any person: Provided further that the executive authority shall, with the sanction of the council, pay compensation to any person who sustains damage by the exercise of such power.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 151--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall, without the permission of the executive authority, make any connection with any municipal cable, wire, pipe, drain or channel or with the house connection of any other person. The executive authority may by notice require any connection made in contravention of sub-section (1) to be demolished, removed, closed, altered or remade.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 152--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall not under-take new works beyond the limits of the municipality without the sanction of the State Government (2) The council may in the execution and for the purpose of any works beyond the limit of the municipality sanctioned by the State Government whether before or after the passing of this Act, exercise all the powers which it may exercise within the municipality throughout the line of the country which conduits, channels, pipes, lines of posts and wires and the like run and with the sanction of the State Government (a) over any lake, tank or reservoir, from which a supply of water for drinking, for producing electric energy or for other purposes is derived, and over all lands within one mile of the high water level of any such lake, tank or reservoir. (b) over any water-course from which a supply of water for drinking, for producing electric energy or for other purposes is derived, within one mile above and half a mile below any point at which water is taken for such use, and (c) over any lands used for sewage farms, sewage disposal tanks, filters and other works connected with the drainage of the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 153--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall not under-take new works beyond the limits of the municipality without the sanction of the State Government (2) The council may in the execution and for the purpose of any works beyond the limit of the municipality sanctioned by the State Government whether before or after the passing of this Act, exercise all the powers which it may exercise within the municipality throughout the line of the country which conduits, channels, pipes, lines of posts and wires and the like run and with the sanction of the State Government (a) over any lake, tank or reservoir, from which a supply of water for drinking, for producing electric energy or for other purposes is derived, and over all lands within one mile of the high water level of any such lake, tank or reservoir. (b) over any water-course from which a supply of water for drinking, for producing electric energy or for other purposes is derived, within one mile above and half a mile below any point at which water is taken for such use, and (c) over any lands used for sewage farms, sewage disposal tanks, filters and other works connected with the drainage of the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 154--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 155--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 156--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where a mosque, temple, mutt or any place of religious worship or instruction or any place which is used for holding fairs, festivals or for other like purposes is situated within the limits of a municipality or in the neighbourhood thereof and attracts either throughout the year or on particular occasions a large number of persons, any special arrangements necessary for public health, safety or convenience whether permanent or temporary shall be made by the municipal council, and the council may require the trustee or other person having control over such place to make such recurring or non-recurring contribution as the State Government may determine to the funds of the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 157--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall after due provision has been made under section 153 by the municipal council for the deposit and removal of the same, (a) deposit the carcasses of animals, rubbish or filth, in any street, or on the verandah of any building, or on any unoccupied ground alongside any street, or on any public quay, jetty or landing-place or on the bank of a water-course or tank; or (b) deposit filth or carcasses of animals in any dust-bin or in any vehicle not intended for the removal of the same; or (c) deposit rubbish in any vehicle or vessel intended for the removal of filth save for the purpose of deodorizing or disinfecting the filth.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 158--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No owner or occupier of any premises shall keep or allow to be kept for more than twenty-four hours any filth on such premises or any building or on the roof thereof or in any out-building or any place belonging thereto, or fail to comply with any requisition of the executive authority as to the construction, repair, paving or cleansing of any latrine on or belonging to the premises.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 159--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No owner or occupier of any premises shall allow the water from any sink, drain, latrine or stable, or any other filth to flow out of such premises to any portion of a street except a drain or a cess-pool or to flow out of such premises in such a manner as to cause an avoidable nuisance by the soakage of the said water or filth into the walls or ground at the side of a drain forming a portion of a street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 160--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall, in the removal of filth, use any cart or receptacle not having a covering proper for preventing the escape of the contents thereof, or of the stench therefrom, or intentionally or negligently spill any filth in the removal thereof, or omit carefully to sweep and clean every place in which any such filth has been spilled, or place or set down in any public place any filth whether in a vessel closed or open.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 161--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall put or cause to be put any rubbish or filth into any drain not intended for rubbish or filth or into any drain communicating with any such public drain.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 162--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall, at the cost of the municipal fund, cause the public streets and bridges to be maintained and repaired and may from the same fund meet the cost of all improvements to the same which are necessary or expedient for the public safety or convenience. (2) The council may entrust to any other local authority with the consent of such authority the maintenance of any public street or portion thereof, the cost of maintenance being provided by the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 162A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Municipal council may, at the cost of the municipal fund cause trees to be planted at all convenient places on the sides of all public streets and make adequate arrangements to preserve such trees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 163--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may- (a) lay out and make new public streets; (b) construct bridges and sub-ways; (c) turn, divert or with the special sanction of the State Government permanently close any public street or part thereof; (d) widen open, extend or otherwise improve any public street. (2) Reasonable compensation shall be paid to the owners and occupiers of any land or buildings which are required for or affected by any such purposes.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 164--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When a public street is permanently closed under section 163, the municipal council may, with the sanction of the State Government dispose of the site or of so much thereof as is no longer required, in such manner as may be approved by the State Government, provided that due compensation is made to any person injured by such closing. (2) In determining such compensation, allowance shall be made for any benefit accruing to the same permises or any adjacent premises belonging to the same owner from the construction or improvement of any other public street at or about the same time that the public street, on account of which the compensation is paid, is closed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 165--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may acquire- (a) any land required for opening, widening, extending, or otherwise improving any public street, or of making any new public street, and the buildings, if any, standing upon such land; and (b) any land outside the proposed street alignment, with the building, if any, standing thereupon: Provided that, in any case in which it is decided to acquire any land under clause (b) of this sub-section, the owner of such land may retain it by paying to the municipal council an annual sum to be fixed by the council in that behalf, or a lump sum to be fixed by the council, not being less than twenty-five times such annual sum and subject to such conditions as the council thinks fit as to the removal of the existing building, if any, the description of the new building (if any) to be erected, the period within which the new building (if any) shall be completed and any other similar matters. (2) If any sum payable in pursuance of the proviso to sub-section (1) in respect of any land be not duly paid, it shall be recoverable in the manner provided by this Act for the collection of taxes, and if not so recovered, the executive authority may enter upon the land, and sell it, with any erections standing thereon, by public auction subject to the conditions, if any imposed under sub-section (1) above and may deduct the said sum and the expenses of the sale from the proceeds of the sale and shall pay the balance (if any) to the defaulter. (3) Any sum paid in pursuance of the proviso to sub-section (1) or recovered under sub-section (2) in respect of any land shall be left out of account in determining the annual value of such land for the purpose of assessing it to the property tax. (4) Any land or building acquired under sub-section (1), clause (b), may be sold, leased or otherwise disposed of after public advertisement, and any conveyance made for that purpose may comprise such conditions as the council thinks fit as to the removal of the existing building, if any, the description of the new building (if any) to be erected, the period within which the new building (if any) shall be completed and any other similar matters. (5) The council may require any person to whom any land or building is transferred under sub-section (4) to comply with any conditions comprised in the said conveyance before it places him in possession of the land or building.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 166--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may- (a) Prescribe for any public street a building line or a street alignment or both; (b) from time to time define a fresh line in substitution for any line so defined or for any part thereof; Provided that in either case- (i) at least one month before the meeting of the council at which the matter is decided, public notice of the proposal has been given and special notice thereof has also been put up in the street or part of the street for which such line is proposed to be defined; and (ii) the council consider all objections to the said proposal made in writing and delivered at the municipal office not less than three clear days before the day of such meeting.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 167--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall construct any portion of any building within a street alignment defined under section 166. (2) No person shall erect or add to any building between a street alignment and a building line defined under section 166 except with the permission of the executive authority who may when granting the permission impose such conditions as the council may lay down for such cases.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 168--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any building or part thereof abutting on a public street is within a street alignment defined under section 166, the executive authority may, whenever it is proposed- (a) to rebuild such building or take it down to an extent exceeding one-half thereof above the ground level, such half to be measured in cubic feet,' or (b) to remove, reconstruct or make any addition to any portion of such building which is within the street alignment, in any order which he issues concerning the rebuilding, alteration or repair of such building, require such building, to be set back to the street alignment. (2) When any building or any part thereof within the street alignment falls down or is burnt down or is, whether by order of the executive authority or otherwise, taken down or when any private land without any building thereon lies within the street alignment, the executive authority may forthwith take possession on behalf of the council of the portion of land within the street alignment and if necessary, clear it. (3) Land acquired under this section shall be deemed a part of the public street and shall vest in the municipal council. (4) When any building is set back in pursuance of any requisition made under sub-section (1), or when the executive authority takes possession of any land under sub-section (2), the council shall forthwith make full compensation to the owner for any direct damage which he may sustain thereby Explanation.- The expression 'direct damage' as used in sub-section (4) with reference to land means the market value of the land taken and the depreciation, if any, in the ordinary market value of the rest of the land resulting from the area being reduced in size; but does not include damage due to the prospective loss of any particular use to which the owner may allege that he intended to put the land, although such use may be injuriously affected by the reduction of the site.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 169--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may, upon such terms as it thinks fit, allow any building to be set forward for the purpose of improving the line of a public street and may, by notice, require any building to be so set forward in the case of reconstruction thereof or of a new construction. Explanation.- For the purpose of this section a wall separating any premises from public street shall be deemed to be a building; and it shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with permission or requisition to set forward a building to the street alignment if a wall of such material and dimensions as are approved by the executive authority is erected along the said line.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 170--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may prepare schemes and plans of proposed public streets, showing the direction of such streets, the street alignment and building line on each side of them, the intended width and such other details as may appear desirable. (2) The width of such proposed streets shall not ordinarily be less than forty feet or in any area covered by huts, twenty feet. (3) It shall be the duty of the council to lay out public street in areas covered by huts, so far as may be practicable, both for the purpose of securing proper ventilation for huts in such areas, and in view to the contingency of buildings being erected therein. (4) When any plan has been prepared under sub-section (1), the street to which it refers shall be deemed to be a projected public street, and the provisions of section 168 shall apply to all buildings, so far as they stand across the street alignment or building line of the projected street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 171--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council shall, so far as it considers it requisite for the public convenience, and so far as funds permit, cause the chief public streets to be watered, and for that purpose may provide such water-carts, animals and apparatus as it thinks necessary.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 172--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by an order in writing temporarily close any street to traffic for repair, or in order to carry out any work connected with drainage, water-supply or lighting or any of the purposes of this Act: Provided that such work shall be completed and such street reopened to traffic with all reasonable speed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 173--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall not be lawful for any person, without the permission of the executive authority, to displace, take up, or make any alteration in the fences, posts, pavement, flags or other materials of any public street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 174--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When by a certificate of an officer of the Government Public Works Department of a rank not below that of Executive Engineer it appears to the council that, having regard to the average expense of repairing roads in the neighbourhood extraordinary expenses have been incurred by the municipal council in repairing a street by reason of the damage caused by excessive weight passing along the street, or extraordinary traffic thereon, the council may recover in the Civil Court having jurisdiction from any person by or in consequence of whose order such weight or traffic has been conducted the amount of such expenses as may be proved to the satisfaction of such Court to have been incurred by such council by reason of the damage arising from such weight or traffic as aforesaid: Provided that any person against whom expenses are or may be recoverable under this section may enter into an agreement with the council for the payment to it of a composition in respect of such weight or traffic and thereupon the persons so paying shall not be subject to any proceedings under this section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 174A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 175--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the owner of any land utilizes, sells, leases or otherwise disposes of such land or any portion or portions of the same as sites for the construction of buildings, he shall, save in such cases as the site or sites may abut on an existing public or private street, lay down and make a street or streets or road or roads giving access to the site or sites and connecting with an existing public or private street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 176--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person intending to make or lay out a new private street, shall send to the municipal office a written application with plans and sections showing the following particulars, namely:- (a) the intended level, direction and width of the street, (b) the street alignment and the building line, and (c) the arrangements to be made for levelling, paving, metalling, flagging, channelling, sewering, draining, conserving and lighting the street. (2) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or by-laws made under this Act as to the level and width of public streets and the height of buildings abutting thereon shall apply also in the case of streets referred to in sub-section (1); and all the particulars referred to in that sub-section shall be subject to approval by the council. (3) Within sixty days after the receipt of any application under sub-section (1) the council shall either sanction the making of the street on such conditions as it may think fit, or disallow it, or ask, for further information with respect to it. (4) Such sanction may be refused- (i) if the proposed street would conflict with any arrangements which have been made, or which are in the opinion of the council likely to be made, for carrying out any general scheme for the laying out of streets; (ii) if the proposed street does not conform to the provisions of the Act, rules and by-laws referred to in sub-section (2); or (iii) if the proposed street is not designed so as to connect at one end with a street which is already open. (5) No person shall make or lay out any new private street without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of the council. If further information is asked for no steps shall be taken to make or lay out the street until orders have been passed upon receipt of such information: Provided that the passing of such order shall not in any case be delayed for more than sixty days after the council has received all the information which it considers necessary to enable it to deal finally with the said application. Any application not disallowed within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of receipt in the municipal office shall be deemed to have been sanctioned.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 177--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person makes or lays out any street referred to in section 176 without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of the council, the executive authority may, whether or not the offender be prosecuted under this Act, by notice- (a) require the offender to show sufficient cause, by a written statement signed by him and sent to the executive authority on or before such day as may be specified in the notice, why such street should not be altered to the satisfaction of the executive authority or if such alteration be impracticable, why such street should not be demolished, or (b) require the offender to appear before the executive authority either personally or by a duly authorized agent on such day and at such time and place as may be specified in the notice, and show cause as aforesaid. (2) If any person on whom such notice is served fails to show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the executive authority why such street should not be so altered or demolished, the executive authority may pass an order directing the alteration or demolition of such street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 178--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any private street or part thereof is not levelled, paved, metalled, flagged, channelled, drained, conserved or lighted to the satisfaction of the executive authority he may by notice require the owners or occupiers of buildings or lands fronting or abutting on such street or part thereof to carry out any work which in his opinion may be necessary and within such time as may be specified in such notice. (2) If such work is not carried out within the time specified in the notice, the executive authority may, if he thinks fit, execute it and the expenses incurred shall be paid by the owners or occupiers in default according to the frontage of their respective buildings, or lands and in such proportion as may be settled by the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 179--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any street has been levelled, paved, metalled, flagged, channelled, drained, conserved and lighted under the provisions of section 178 such street shall, on the requisition of not less than three-fourths of the owners thereof, be declared a public street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 180--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No one shall build any wall or erect any fence or other obstruction, or projection, or make any encroachment in or over any street except as hereinafter provided.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 180A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All streets vested in or to be vested in or maintained by a municipal council shall be open to persons of whatever caste or creed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 181--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No door, gate, bar or ground-floor window shall without a licence from the executive authority be hung or placed so as to open outwards upon any street. (2) The executive authority may by notice require the owner of such door, gate, bar or window to alter it so that no part thereof when open shall project over the street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 182--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any premises to remove or alter any projection, encroachment or obstruction (other than a door, gate, bar or ground-floor window) situated against or in front of such premises and in or over any street (2) If the owner or occupier of the premises proves that any such projection, encroachment or obstruction has existed for a period sufficient under the law of limitation to give any person a prescriptive title thereto or that it was erected or made with the permission or licence of any municipal authority duly empowered in that behalf, and that the period, if any, for which the permission or licence is valid has not expired, the municipal council shall make reasonable compensation to every persons who suffers damage by the removal or alteration of the same.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 183--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may grant a licence, subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may think fit, to the owner or occupier of any premises to put up verandas, balconies, sunshades, weather-frames and the like, to project over a street, or in street in which the construction of arcades has been sanctioned by the council, to put up an arcade; or to construct any step or drain-covering necessary for access to the premises. (2) The executive authority may grant a licence, subject to such conditions and restrictions as he may think fit, for the temporary erection of pandals and other structures in a public street vested in the council or in any other public place the control of which is vested in the council. (3) The council shall have power to lease road sides and street margins vested in it for occupation on such terms and conditions and for such period as the council may fix. (4) But neither a licence under sub-section (1) nor a lease under sub-section (3) shall be granted if the projection, construction or occupation is likely to be injurious to health or cause public inconvenience or otherwise materially interfere with the use of the road as such. (5) The State Government may, by notification, restrict and place under such control as they may think fit, the exercise by municipal councils in general or by any municipal council in particular, of the powers under sub-sections (1) and (3). (6) On the expiry of any period for which a licence has been granted under this section, the executive authority may, without notice, cause any projection or construction put up under sub-section (1) or (2) to be removed, and the cost of so doing shall be recoverable in the manner provided in section 344 from the person to whom the licence was granted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 184--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority shall, during the construction or repair of any street, drain or premises vested in the municipal council- (a) cause the same to be fenced and guarded, (b) take proper precautions against accident by shoring up and protecting the adjoining buildings, and (c) cause such bars, chains or posts to be fixed across or in any street in which any such work is under execution as are necessary in order to prevent the passage of vehicles or animals and avert danger. (2) The executive authority shall cause such drain, street, or premises to be sufficiently lighted or guarded during the night while under construction or repair. (3) The executive authority shall, with all reasonable speed, complete the said work, fill in the ground, and repair the said drain, street, or premises and remove the rubbish occasioned thereby.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 185--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall without lawful authority remove any bar, chain, post or shoring timber or remove or extinguish any light set up under section 184.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 186--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall make a hole or cause any obstruction in any street, unless, he previously obtains the permission of the executive authority and complies with such conditions as that officer may impose. (2) When such permission is granted, such person shall, at his own expense, cause such hole or obstruction to be sufficiently fenced and enclosed until the hole or obstruction is filled up or removed and shall cause such hole or obstruction to be sufficiently lighted during the night.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 187--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person intends to construct or demolish any building or to alter or repair the outward part thereof, and if any street or footway is likely to be obstructed or rendered inconvenient by means of such work, he shall first obtain a licence from the executive authority in that behalf and shall also:- (a) cause the said building to be fenced and guarded, (b) sufficiently light it during the night, and (c) take proper precautions against accidents during such times as the public safety or convenience requires.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 188--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any obstruction is caused in any street by the fall of trees, structures or fences, the owner or occupier of the premises concerned shall within twelve hours of the occurrence of such fall, or within such further period as the executive authority may by notice allow, clear the street of such obstruction.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 189--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) With the approval of the State Government, the Council shall give names or numbers to new public streets and shall also give name to park, playground, bus-stand, arch or new municipal property and may, subject to the approval of the State Government, alter the name or number of any public street, park, playground, bus-stand, arch or municipal property: (2) The executive authority shall cause to be put up or painted in English and in at least one vernacular language on a conspicuous part of some building, wall or place, at or near each end, corner or entrance the name of every public street. (3) No person shall without lawful authority destroy, pull down, or deface any such name or put up any name different from that put up by order of the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 190--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may cause a number to be affixed to the side or outer door of any building or to some place at the entrance of the premises. (2) No person shall without lawful authority destroy, pull down or deface any such number. (3) When a number has been affixed under sub-section (1), the owner of the building shall be bound to maintain such number and to replace it if removed or defaced; and if he fails to do so, the executive authority may by notice require him to replace it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 191--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may make rules- (a) for the regulation or restriction of the use of sites for building, and (b) for the regulation or restriction of building. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub-section (1), clause (a), rules made under that clause may provide- (a) that no insanitary or dangerous site shall be used for building, and (b) that no site shall be used for the construction of a building intended for public worship, if the construction of the building thereon will wound the religious feelings of any class of persons. (3) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub-section (1), clause (b), rules made under that clause may provide for the following matters:- (a) information and plans to be submitted together with applications for permission to build; (b) height of buildings, whether absolute or relative to the width of streets; (c) level and width of foundation, level of lowest floor, and stability of structure; (d) number and height of storeys composing a building and height of rooms; (e) provision of sufficient open space, external or internal, and adequate means of ventilation; (ee) number of trees to be planted and preserved around a building (f) provision of means of egress in case of fire; (g) provision of secondary means of access for the removal of filth; (h) materials and methods of construction of external and partition walls, roofs and floors; (i) position, material and methods of construction of hearths, smoke-escapes, chimneys, staircases, latrines, drains, cess-pools; (j) paving of yards; (k) restrictions on the use of inflammable materials in building; and (l) in the case of wells, the dimensions of the well, the manner of enclosing it, and if the well is intended for drinking purposes, the means which shall be used to prevent pollution of the water.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 192--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No piece of land shall be used as a site for the construction of a building and no building shall be constructed or reconstructed otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Part and of any rules or by-laws, made under this Act relating to the use of building-sites or the construction or reconstruction of buildings: Provided that the State Government may in respect of all municipalities or with the consent of the municipal council, in respect of any particular municipality or portion thereof, exempt all buildings or any class of buildings from all or any of the provisions of this chapter or the said rules.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 193--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may give public notice of its intention to declare- (a) that in any streets or portions of streets specified in the notice- (i) continuous building will be allowed. (ii) the elevation and construction of the frontage of all buildings thereafter constructed or reconstructed shall, in respect of their architectural features, be such as the council may consider suitable to the locality, or (b) that in any localities specified in the notice, the construction of only detached buildings will be allowed, or (c) that in any streets, portions of streets or localities specified in the notice, the construction of shops, factories, warehouses, huts or buildings of a specified architectural character or buildings destined for particular uses will not be allowed, without the special permission of the council. (2) No objections to any such declaration shall be received after a period of three months from the publication of such notice. (3) The council shall consider all objections received within the said period and may then confirm the declaration, and before doing so, may modify it but not so as to extend its effect. (4) The executive authority shall publish any declaration so confirmed and it shall take effect from the date of publication. (5) No person shall, after the date of publication of such declaration, construct of reconstruct any building in contravention of any such declaration.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 194--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may require any building intended to be erected at the corner of two streets to be rounded off or splayed off to such height and to such extent or otherwise as it may determine, and may acquire such portion of the site at the corner as it may consider necessary for public convenience or amenity. (2) For any land so acquired the municipal council shall pay compensation. (3) In determining such compensation allowance shall be made for any benefit accruing to the same premises from the improvement of the streets.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 195--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No external roof, veranda, pandal or wall of a building shall be constructed or reconstructed of grass, leaves, mats or other inflammable materials except with the permission of the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 196--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No door, gate, bar or ground-floor window which opens on any public street shall be constructed or reconstructed so as to open outwards except with the licence of the executive authority under section 181.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 197--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person intends to construct or reconstruct a building other than a hut, he shall send to the executive authority- (a) an application in writing for the approval of the site, together with a site plan of the land, and (b) an application in writing for permission to execute the work together with a ground-plan, elevations and sections of the building, and a specification of the work. Explanation.- 'Building' in this sub-section shall include a wall or fence of whatever height bounding or abutting on any public street. (2) Every document furnished under sub-section (1) shall contain such particulars and be prepared in such manner as may be required under rules or by-laws.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 198--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority shall not grant permission to construct or reconstruct a building unless and until he has approved of the site on an application made under section 197.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 199--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The construction or reconstruction of a building shall not be begun unless and until the executive authority has granted permission for the execution of the work.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 200--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Within thirty days after the receipt of any application made under section 197 for approval of a site or of any information or further information required under rules or by-laws, the executive authority shall by written order either approve the site or refuse on one or more of the grounds mentioned in section 203 to approve the site.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 201--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Within thirty days after the receipt of any application made under section 197 for permission to execute any work, or of any information or of documents or further information or documents required under rules or by-laws, the executive authority shall by written order either grant such permission or refuse on one or more of the grounds mentioned in section 203 to grant it: Provided that the said period of thirty days shall not begin to run until the site has been approved under section 200.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 202--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, within the period prescribed by section 200 or section 201, as the case may be, the executive authority has neither given nor refused his approval of a building site, or his permission to execute any work, as the case may be, the council shall be bound, on the written request of the applicant, to determine by written order whether such approval or permission should be given or not. (2) If the council does not, within one month from the receipt of such written request, determine whether such approval or permission should be given or not, such approval or permission shall be deemed to have been given; and the applicant may proceed to execute the work, but not so as to contravene any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or by-laws made under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 203--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The only grounds on which approval of a site for the construction or reconstruction of a building or permission to construct or reconstruct a building may be refused are the following, namely:- (1) that the work, or use of the site for the work or any of the particulars comprised in the site plan, ground plan, elevations, sections or specification would contravene some specified provision of any law, or some specified order, rule, declaration or by-law made under any law; (2) that the application for such permission does not contain the particulars or is not prepared in the manner required under rules or by-laws; (3) that any of the documents referred to in section 197 have not been signed as required under rules or by-laws; (4) that any information or documents required by the executive authority under rules or by-laws has or have not been duly furnished; (5) that streets or roads have not been made as required by section 175; or (6) that the proposed building would be an encroachment upon Government or municipal land. Whenever the executive authority or the council refuses to approve a building-site for a building or to grant permission to construct or reconstruct a building, the reasons for such refusal shall be specifically stated in the order or resolution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 204--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the construction or reconstruction of any building is not completed within the period specified, the permission shall lapse and a fresh application shall be made before the work is continued.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 205--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the executive authority finds that the work- (a) is otherwise than in accordance with the plans or specifications which have been approved, or (b) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any by-law, rule, or declaration made thereunder, he may by notice require the owner of the building within a period stated either- (i) to make such alterations as may be specified in the said notice with the object of bringing the work into conformity with the said plans or provisions, or (ii) to show cause why such alterations should not be made. (2) If the owner does not show cause as aforesaid, he shall be bound to make the alterations specified in such notice. (3) If the owner shows cause as aforesaid, the executive authority shall by an order cancel the notice issued under sub-section (1), or confirm the same subject to such modifications as he may think fit.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 206--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in any of the preceding sections, the executive authority may at any time stop the construction or reconstruction of any building if in his opinion the work in progress endangers human life.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 207--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of section 197, section 198, section 199, section 204, section 205 and section 206 shall, so far as may be, apply to a well.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 208--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person who intends to construct or reconstruct a hut shall send to the executive authority- (a) an application for permission to execute the work, and (b) a site-plan of the land. (2) Every such application and plan shall contain the particulars and be prepared in the manner required by rule or by-law.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 209--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The construction or reconstruction of a hut shall not be begun unless and until the executive authority has granted permission for the execution of the work on an application sent to him under section 208.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 210--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Within fourteen days after the receipt of any application made under section 208 for permission to construct or reconstruct a hut or of any information or plan or further information or fresh plan required under rules or by-laws, the executive authority shall by written order either grant such permission or refuse on one or more of the grounds mentioned in section 212 to grant it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 211--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, within the period prescribed by section 210, the executive authority has neither granted nor refused to grant permission to construct or reconstruct a hut, the council shall be bound, on the written request of the applicant, to determine by written order whether such permission should be granted or not. (2) If the council does not, within thirty days from the receipt of such written request, determine whether such permission should be granted or not, such permission shall be deemed to have been granted; and the applicant may proceed to execute the work but not so as to contravene any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or by-laws made under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 212--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The only grounds on which permission to construct or reconstruct a hut may be refused are the following, namely:- (1) that the work or use of the site for the work would contravene some specified provision of any law or some specified order, rule, by-law or declaration made under any law; (2) that the application for permission does not contain the particulars or is not prepared in the manner required under rules or by-laws; (3) that any information or plan required by the executive authority under rules or by-laws has not been duly furnished; (4) that streets or roads have not been made as required by section 175; or (5) that the proposed building would be an encroachment upon Government or municipal land. Whenever the executive authority or the council refuses to grant permission to construct or reconstruct a hut the reasons for such refusal shall be specifically stated in the order or resolution.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 213--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the construction or reconstruction of any hut is not completed within the period specified the permission shall lapse and a fresh application shall be made before the work is continued.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 214--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The owner or occupier of any building adjoining a public street shall keep the external part thereof in proper repair with lime-plaster or other material to the satisfaction of the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 215--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The provisions of this chapter and of any rules or by-laws made under this Act relating to construction and reconstruction of buildings shall also be applicable to any alteration thereof or addition thereto: Provided that works of necessary repair which do not affect the position or dimension of a building or any room therein shall not be deemed an alteration or addition for the purposes of this section. (2) If any question arises as to whether any addition or alteration is a necessary repair not affecting the position or dimensions of a building or room such question shall be referred to the council whose decision shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 216--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the executive authority is satisfied, (i) that the construction or reconstruction of any building or well- (a) has been commenced without obtaining the permission of the executive authority or (where an appeal or reference has been made to the council) in contravention of any order passed by the council, or (b) is being carried on, or has been completed otherwise than in accordance with the plans or particulars on which such permission or order was based, or (c) is being carried on, or has been completed in breach of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or by-law made under this Act or of any direction or requisition lawfully given or made under this Act or such rules or by-laws, or (ii) that any alterations required by any notice issued under section 205 have not been duly made, or (iii) that any alterations of or addition to any buildings or any other work made or done for any purpose, into or upon any building, has been commenced or is being carried on or has been completed in breach of section 215, he may make a provisional order requiring the owner or the builder to demolish the work done or so much of it as, in the opinion, of the executive authority, has been unlawfully executed or to make such alterations as may in the opinion of the executive authority be necessary to bring the work into conformity with the Act, by-laws, rules, direction or requisitions as aforesaid, or with the plans and particulars on which such permission or order was based; and may also direct that until the said order is complied with the owner or builder shall refrain from proceedings with the building or well. (2) The executive authority shall serve a copy of the provisional order made under sub-section (1) on the owner of the building or well together with a notice requiring him to show cause within a reasonable time to be named in such notice why the order should not be confirmed. (3) If the owner fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the executive authority, the executive authority may confirm the order with any modifications he may think fit to make, and such order shall then be binding on the owner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any building constructed and used, or intended to he constructed and used, exclusively for the purpose of a plant-house, summer-house (not being a dwelling-house), poultry-house or aviary, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter other than section 196 provided the building be wholly detached from, and situated at a distance of at least ten feet from, the nearest adjacent building. (2) The executive authority may grant permission at his discretion on such terms as he may decide in each case to erect for a specified period temporary huts or sheds for stabling, for watching crops, for storing tools or materials, or for other similar purposes. On expiry of the period specified, the executive authority may by notice require the owner of such hut or shed to demolish it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Chapter shall apply only to hill stations.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person other than the Central or State Government or local authority, shall- (a) construct or reconstruct a building on any land; or (b) put to use any agricultural land to any non-agricultural purpose; or (c) carry out any engineering, mining or other allied operations on any land, within the area of the hill station without a licence granted by the State Government and except in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in such licence. Explanation :- For the purpose of the provisions of this Chapter, "agriculture" includes, horticulture, fruit growing, seed growing, animal husbandry (including breeding of livestock), agriculture, pisciculture and sericulture and "agricultural" shall be construed accordingly. (2) (a) When any department of the Central Government or State Government or any local authority proposes to carry out any construction or reconstruction of building on any land or put to use any agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose or carry out any engineering, mining or other allied operations on any land within the area of the hill station, the officer-in-charge thereof shall inform, in writing, to the Committee for Architectural and Aesthetic Aspects constituted under section 217-C (hereinafter in this Chapter referred to as the Committee) the intention to do so, giving full particulars thereof, and accompanied by such plans and documents at least three months before commencing such activities. (b) Where the Committee raises any objection to the proposed construction and reconstruction or putting to use any agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose or the carrying out any engineering, mining or other allied operations, on the ground that such proposal is not in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder or for any other material consideration, the officers of Central Government or the State Government or any local authority, as the case may be, shall- (i) either make necessary modifications in the proposed construction or re-construction of building or putting to use any agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose or the carrying out of any engineering, mining or other allied operations to meet the objection raised by the Committee; or (ii) submit such proposal together with the objections raised by the Committee to the State Government for approval. (c) The State Government on receipt of such proposal together with the objection of the Committee shall in consultation with the Committee, either approve the proposal with or without modification or direct the officer to make such modification in the proposal as they consider necessary in the circumstances and the officer concerned shall be bound to make such modifications as proposed by the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every application for a licence under section 217-B shall be in such form, contain such particulars and be accompanied by such plans and fee as may be prescribed and shall be submitted to the executive authority (2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the executive authority shall, within such time as may be prescribed, examine the application with reference to such building rules as may be prescribed for the purpose of this Chapter, and forward the same to the Committee. (3) (a) For the purpose of this Chapter, the State Government may constitute a Committee called the Committee for Architectural and Aesthetic Aspects for all the hill stations in the State of Tamil Nadu, with such number of officials and non-officials and having such qualifications as may be prescribed. (b) The term of office of the non-official members of the Committee and other matters relating to the conduct of the meeting of the said Committee including the allowances payable to the non-official members shall be such as may be prescribed. (4) The Committee shall examine every application received from the executive authority in all aspects and forward the same to the State Government with its remarks. (5) The Committee shall while examining the applications under sub-section (4), shall have regard to the following matters, namely:- (a) the application for grant of a licence complies with the provisions of this Chapter and rules made thereunder; (b) the proposed construction or reconstruction of the building or the purpose for which the land is proposed to be used will not be detrimental to the scenic beauty and natural environment of the hill station; (c) the proposed construction or reconstruction of a building will aesthetically and architecturally harmonize with the landscape of the hill station; (d) the possibility of the construction or reconstruction of building, the non-agricultural purpose for which the land is to be used or carrying out of any engineering, mining or other allied operations, (i) creating unfavourable conditions upon the scenic beauty and natural environment of the hill station; or (ii) resulting in concentration of population in and around the hill station; (e) that the proposed use of land will not lead to deforestation and soil erosion; (f) that the proposed use of land will preserve the special characteristics of the hill station as regards landscape, vegetative cover and climate of the hill station; (g) the free passage or way to be left in front of the building as may be prescribed;. (h) the open space to be left about the building to secure free circulation of air and the prevention of fire and to facilitate scavenging; (i) the ventilation of the building, the minimum cubic area of the rooms and the numbers and height of the storeys of which the building may consist; (j) the provision and position of drains, latrines, urinals and cesspools or other receptacles for rubbish or filth; (k) the level and width of the foundation, the level of the lowest floor and the stability of the structure; (l) the line of frontage, with neighbouring buildings if the building abuts on a street; (m) the means of egress from the building in case of fire; (n) the materials to be used for, and the method of construction of, external and partition walls, rooms, floor, fireplaces and chimneys; (o) the height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor on which human beings are to live or cooking is to be done; (p) any other matter affecting the ventilation and sanitation of the building; and (q) such other matters as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu On receipt of an application from the Committee with its remarks, the State Government if satisfied that the grant of a licence will not result in the deterioration of scenic beauty or destruction of the environment and ecosystem of the hill station, may, grant a licence subject to such terms and conditions as they may think fit to impose, or refuse to grant a licence: Provided that a licence shall not be refused unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of making his representation.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217DD--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained the sections 217-B, 217-C, 217-D and 217-P, the executive authority shall on receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of service 217-C for construction or reconstruction of any residential building on any land within the area of the hill station having plinth area. (a) not exceeding two hundred and fifty square metres in the ground floor; or (b) not exceeding two hundred and fifty square metres in the ground floor and in the first floor in the aggregate; or (c) In the case of improvement or enlargement of an existing residential building the construction of which does not exceed two hundred and fifty square metres, the remaining area for such improvement or enlargement of such building including first floor in the aggregate. Examine such application with reference to building rules prescribed for the purpose of the chapters and the matters specified in sub-section (5) of section 217-C and if he is satisfied that the grant of a licence will not result in the deterioration of scenic beauty or destruction of the environment and ecosystem of the hill station, he may grant a licence subject, to such terms and conditions as he may think fit to impose or refuse to grant a licence. Provided that the licence shall not be refused unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of making his representation. (2) (a) Any person aggrieved by an order of the executive authority under sub-section (1) may within a period of sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order was communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the State Government in such form, in such manner and in with such fee as may be prescribed. (b) On receipt of an appeal under this sub-section, the State Government shall after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard pass such orders thereon as they deem fit. (c) Every order passed by the State Government under this sub-section shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government or the executive authority may at any time cancel or suspend any licence granted under section 217-D or section 217-DD. as the case may be if (a) such licence has been obtained by fraud, misrepresentation or suppression of material particulars; or (b) the holder of the licence has contravened any of the provisions of this Act and in particular the provisions of this Chapter or any rules made thereunder or any of the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted. (2) Before cancelling or suspending a licence under sub-section (1), the State Government or the executive authority, as the case may be shall give the holder of the licence, an opportunity of making his representation.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every licence granted under section 217-D or section 217-DD shall be valid for a period of one year from the date on which it is granted and if the construction or reconstruction of a building or the user of agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose, or the engineering, mining or other allied operations for which the licence is granted is not commenced within the said period, it shall not be commenced thereafter unless the State Government or the executive authority, as the case may be on applications made therefor has extended the period of licence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whoever within the area of a hill station begins, continues or completes the construction or reconstruction of a building or puts to use any agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose or carries out any engineering, mining or other allied operations- (a) without a licence; or (b) without complying with any of the terms and conditions of a licence; or (c) when a licence has been refused; or (d) after the expiry of the licence granted under Section 217-D or Section 217-DD, as the case may be, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees. (2) Whoever within the area of a hill station- (a) uses any building constructed or reconstructed for a purpose other than that specified in the licence; (b) puts to use any agricultural land to non-agricultural purpose other than the purpose for which the use of the land was permitted under the licence, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever, after having been convicted of an offence under this Chapter, continues to commit such offence, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees for each day after the previous date of conviction during which the offence continues.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the person committing an offence under this Chapter is a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Chapter, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Chapter has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation :- For the purpose of this section,- (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm, society or other association of individuals; and (b) "director" in relation to- (i) a 'firm' means a partner in the firm; (ii) a society or other association of individuals, means the person who is entrusted, under the rules of the society or other association, with the management of the affairs of the society or other Association as the case may be
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217-J--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government or the executive authority as the case may be may, at any time by notice in writing, direct the owner, lessee or occupier of any land in a hill station- (a) to stop the construction or reconstruction of any building on such land; or (b) to stop the user of any building or land for any purpose; or (c) to alter or demolish, within such time as may be specified in the notice, any building or any part thereof; or (d) to stop the user of any agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose; or (e) to stop the building, engineering, mining or other allied operations, if in the opinion of the State Government or the executive authority as the case may be the constructions or reconstructions of the building or part thereof, the user of the building or land or the user of any agricultural and for non- agricultural purpose or the carrying out of the building, engineering, mining or other allied operations is in contraventions of any of the provisions of this Act and in particular, the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder or any of the terms and conditions subject to which a licence is granted under this Chapter. (2) If any direction given under sub-section (1) is not complied with, within the time specified in the notice, the State Government or the executive authority as the case may be may have such directions carried into effect at the cost of the local authority of the hill station concerned and the amount thereof shall be recovered from the defaulter by the said local authority as if it were an arrears of land revenue.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217K--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may, on application, review any order, decision or direction made by them including the grant or refusal of a licence, if it appears to them that any such order, decision or direction or the terms and conditions of the licence should be modified, annulled or reversed and pass orders accordingly. (2) No order under this section adversely affecting a person shall be made unless that person has had a reasonable opportunity of making his representation. (3) The State Government may stay the operation of any order, decision or direction made by them including the grant of licence pending the exercise of their power under sub-section (1) in respect thereof. (4) Every application to the State Government for the exercise of their power under this section shall be made within two months from the date on which the order, decision or direction made by the State Government including the grant of a licence to which the application relate; was communicated to the applicant: Provided that the State Government may entertain an application made after the expiration of the said period of two months, if they are satisfied that the applicant had sufficient cause for not making such application in time.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217L--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the State Government under section 217-K may within a period of sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order was communicated to him, file an application for revision of such order to the High Court. Provided that the High Court may within a further period of thirty days entertain an application made after the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the petitioner had sufficient cause for not making the application within the said period of sixty days. (2) The application shall be in the prescribed form shall be verified in the prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed. (3) In disposing, the application for revision, the High Court may confirm, cancel or vary such order. Provided that no order prejudicial to any party shall be passed unless such party has been given an opportunity of being heard. (4) Every order passed under this section shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217M--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No compensation, shall be claimed by any person for any damage or loss sustained by him in consequence of- (a) the refusal to grant any licence by the State Government or the executive authority as the case may be (b) any terms and conditions subject to which any such licence is granted. (c) any direction issued under section 217 -J; (d) the operation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217N--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No civil court shall have jurisdiction to decide or deal with any of questions which is by or under this chapter required to be decided or dealt with by The State Government or the executive authority as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217-O--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in this Act or any other law, custom, usage or contract. (2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the provisions of this Chapter shall, be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217P--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may by notification, authorise the Collector to exercise any of the powers vested in them under any of the provisions of this Chapter in respect of a hill station. (2) The exercise of any power delegated under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in the notification and subject also to control and revision by the State Government. (3) (a) Whenever any power is delegated under sub-section (1) to the Collector of any district, the State Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 217-C, constitute for such district a committee called the committee for Architectural and Aesthetic aspects for all the hill stations for that district with such number of officials and non-officials and having such qualifications as may be prescribed. (b) The term of office of the non-official members of a committee constituted under clause (a) and other matters relating to the conduct of the meeting of the said committee including the allowances payable to the non-official members shall be such as may be prescribed. (c) The provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 217-C shall, as, far as may be, apply in relation to a committee constituted under this sub-section, as they apply in relation to the committee constituted under clause (a) of sub-section (3), of section 217-G
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 217Q--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, if satisfied that it will not result in the deterioration of scenic beauty or destruction of the environment and eco-system of the hill station, by order, - (a) exempt, subject to such conditions if any, as may be specified, in the order, the Central Government or the State Government or any building or class of buildings from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or Chapter X of this Act; or (b) relax, subject to such conditions if any, as may be specified in the order, any rule made under this Chapter or Chapter X of this Act, in favour of the Central Government or the State Government or in respect of any building or class of buildings
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 218--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any structure appears to the executive authority to be in a ruinous state and dangerous to the passers-by or to the occupiers of neighbouring structures the executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier to fence off, take down, secure or repairs such structure so as to prevent any danger therefrom. (2) If immediate action is necessary the executive authority shall himself before giving such notice or before the period of such notice expires, fence off, take down, secure or repair such structure or fence off a part of any street or take such temporary measures as he thinks fit to prevent danger and the cost of doing so shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier in the manner provided in section 344. (3) If in the opinion of the executive authority the said structure is imminently dangerous to the inmates thereof, the executive authority shall order the immediate evacuation thereof and any person disobeying may be removed by any police officer.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 219--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any tree or any branch of a tree, the fruit of any tree appears to the executive authority to be likely to fall and thereby endanger any person or any structure, the executive authority may by notice require the owner of the said tree to secure lop or cut down the said tree so as to prevent any danger therefrom. (2) If immediate action is necessary the executive authority shall himself before giving such notice or before the period of such notice expires, secure, lop or cut down the said tree or remove the fruit thereof or fence off a part of any street or take such other temporary measures as he thinks lit to prevent danger, and the cost of so doing shall be recoverable from the owner of the tree in the manner provided in section 344.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 220--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any tank, pond, well, hole, stream, dam, bank or other place appears to the executive authority to be for want of sufficient repair, protection or enclosure dangerous to the passers-by or to persons living in the neighbourhood, the executive authority may by notice require the owner to fill in, remove, repair, protect or enclose the same as to prevent any danger therefrom. (2) If immediate action is necessary he shall before giving such notice or before the period of notice expires, himself take such temporary measures as he thinks fit to prevent danger and the cost of doing so shall be recoverable from the owner in the manner provided in section 344.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 221--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If in the opinion of the executive authority the working of any quarry or the removal of stone, earth or other material from any place is dangerous to persons residing in or having legal access to the neighbourhood thereof or creates or is likely to create a nuisance the executive authority may require the owner or person having control of the said quarry or place to discontinue working the same or to discontinue removal of stone, earth or other material from such place or to take such order with such quarry or place as he shall deem necessary for the purpose of preventing danger or of abating the nuisance arising or likely to arise therefrom.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 222--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require the owner of any structure, booth or tent partly or entirely composed of, or having any external roof, verandah, pandal or wall partly or entirely composed of cloth, grass, leaves mats, or other highly inflammable materials to remove or alter such tent, booth structure, roof, verandah pandal or wall, or may grant him permission to retain the same on such conditions as the executive authority may think necessary to prevent danger from fire. (2) The executive authority may by notice require any person using any place for the storage for private use of timber, firewood, or other combustible things to take special steps to guard against danger from fire (3) Where the executive authority is of opinion that the means of egress from any building are insufficient to allow of safe exit in the event of fire, he may with the sanction of the council by notice require the owner or occupier of the building to alter or reconstruct any staircase in such manner or to provide such additional or emergency staircases as he may direct: and when any building, booth or tent is used for purposes of public entertainment he may require, "subject to such sanction as aforesaid, that it shall be provided with an adequate number of clearly indicated exits so placed and maintained as readily to afford the audience ample means of safe egress that the seating be so arranged as not to interfere with free access to the exits and that gangways, passages, and staircases leading to the exits shall during the presence of the public be kept clear of obstructions.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 223--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No new well, tank, pond, cistern, fountain or the like shall be dug or constructed without the permission of the executive authority. (2) The executive authority may grant permission subject to such conditions as he may deem necessary, or may, for reasons to be recorded by him, refuse it. (3) If any such work is begun or completed without such permission, the executive authority may either (a) by notice require the owner or other person who has done such work to fill up or demolish such work in such manner as the executive authority shall direct, or (b) grant permission to retain such work, but such permission shall not exempt such owner from proceedings for contravening the provisions of sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 224--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If in the opinion of the executive authority (a) any pool, ditch, tank, well, pond, bog, swamp, quarry-hole, drain, cesspool, pit, water-course, or any collection of water, or (b) any land on which water may at any time accumulate, is or is likely to become a breeding-place of mosquitoes or in any other respect a nuisance the executive authority may by notice require the owner or person having control thereof to fill up, cover over, weed and stock with larvicidal fish, petrolize, drain or drain off the same in such manner and with such materials as the executive authority shall direct or take such order with the same for removing or abating the nuisance as the executive authority shall direct. (2) If a person on whom a requisition is made under sub-section (1) to fill up, cover over, or drain off a well, delivers to the executive authority within the time specified for compliance therewith written objection to such requisition, the executive authority shall report such objection to the council, and shall make further inquiry into the case, and he shall not institute any prosecution for failure to comply with such requisition except with the approval of the council, but the executive authority may nevertheless, if he deems the execution of the work called for by such requisition to be of urgent importance, proceed in accordance with section 339 and, pending the council's disposal of the question whether the said well shall be permanently filled up, covered over, or otherwise dealt with, may cause such well to be securely covered over so as to prevent the ingress of mosquitoes, and in every such case, the executive authority shall determine with the approval of the council whether the expenses of any work already done as aforesaid shall be paid by such owner or by the executive authority out of the municipal fund or shall be shared, and, if so, in what proportions.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 225--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council on the report of the Director of Public Health, the Health Officer or the Local Medical Officer that the cultivation of any description of crop, or the use of any kind of manure, or the irrigation of land in any place within the limits of the municipality is injurious to the public health may, with the previous sanction of the State Government by public notice regulate or prohibit the cultivation, use of manure or irrigation so reported to be injurious: Provided that when such cultivation or irrigation has been practiced during the five years preceding the date of such public notice with such continuity as the ordinary course of husbandry admits of, compensation shall be paid from the municipal fund to all persons interested for any damage caused to them by absolute prohibition.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 226--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may by notice require the owner of person having control over any private water-course, spring tank, well or other place, the water of which is used for drinking, bathing or washing clothes to keep the same in good repair and to cleanse it of silt, refuse or vegetation and to protect it from pollution by surface drainage in such manner as the executive authority may think fit. (2) If the water of any place which is used for drinking, bathing or washing clothes, as the case may be, is proved to the satisfaction of the executive authority to be unfit for the purpose, the executive authority may by notice require the owner or person having control thereof to. (a) refrain from using or permitting the use of such water, or, (b) close or fill up such place or enclose it with a substantial wall or fence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 227--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council shall maintain in a cleanly conditions all wells, tanks and reservoirs which are not private property, and may fill them up or drain them when it appears necessary to do so.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 227A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All such wells, tanks and reservoirs when maintained by the municipal council shall be open to use and enjoyment by persons of whatever caste or creed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 228--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may, in the interest, of the public health, regulate or prohibit the washing of animals, clothes or other things, or fishing in any public spring, tank, well, public water-course or part thereof within the municipality and may set apart any such place for drinking or for bathing or for washing clothes, or animals, respectively, or for any other specified purpose.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 229--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may construct or provide and maintain public wash-houses or places for the washing of clothes, and may require the payment of such rents and fees for the use of any such wash-house or place as it may determine. (2) The council may farm out the collection of such rents and fees for any period not exceeding three years at a time on such terms and conditions as it may think fit. (3) If a sufficient number of public wash-houses or places be not maintained under sub-section (1), the council may without making any charge therefor appoint suitable places for the exercise by washermen of their calling.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 230--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may by public notice prohibit the washing of clothes by washermen in the exercise of their calling, either within the municipality or outside the municipality within three miles of the boundary thereof, except at- (a) public wash-houses or places maintained or provided under section 229, or (b) such other places as it may appoint for the purpose. (2) When any such prohibition has been made no person who is by calling a washerman shall, in contravention of such prohibition, wash clothes, except for himself or for personal and family service or for hire on and within the premises of the hire, at any place within or without municipal limits other than a public wash-house or a place maintained or appointed under this Act: - Provided that this section shall apply only to clothes washed within or to be brought within the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 231--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall not be lawful for any person to- (a) bathe in or in any manner defile the water in any place set apart by the council or by the owner thereof for drinking purposes; or (b) deposit any offensive or deleterious matter in the dry bed of any place set apart as aforesaid for drinking purposes; or (c) wash clothes in any place set apart as aforesaid for drinking or bathing; or (d) wash any animal or any cooking utensil or wool, skins or other foul or offensive substance or deposit any offensive or deleterious matter in any place set apart as aforesaid for drinking or washing clothes; or (e) cause or suffer to drain into or upon any place set apart as aforesaid for drinking, bathing or washing clothes, or cause or suffer anything to be brought there into or do anything whereby the water may be fouled or corrupted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 232--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any building or land, by reason of abandonment, disputed ownership or other cause remains untenanted, and thereby becomes a resort of idle and disorderly persons or in the opinion of the executive authority becomes a nuisance, the executive authority may after due inquiry give notice and require the owner or person claiming to be the owner to secure, enclose, clear or cleanse the same.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 233--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building or land which appears to him to be in filthy or unwholesome slate, or overgrown with any thick or noxious vegetation, trees or undergrowth injurious to health or offensive to the neighbourhood, to clear, cleanse or otherwise put the land in proper slate or to clear away and remove such vegetation, trees or undergrowth within twenty-four hours or such longer period and in such manner as may be specified in the notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 234--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building or land near a public street to- (a) fence the same to the satisfaction of the executive authority; or (b) trim or prune any hedges bordering on the said street so that they may not exceed such height from the level of the adjoining roadway as the executive authority may determine; or (c) cut and trim any hedges or trees overhanging the said street and obstructing it of the view of traffic or causing it damage; or (d) lower an enclosing wall or fence which by reason of its height and situation obstructs the view of traffic so as to cause danger.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 235--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority if it appears to him necessary for sanitary purposes so to do, may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building to limewash or otherwise cleanse the building inside and outside in the manner and within a period to be specified in the notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 236--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the executive authority considers- (a) that any building or portion thereof is, by reason of its having no plinth, or having a plinth of insufficient height, or by reason of the want of proper drainage or ventilation or by reason of the impracticability of cleansing, attended with danger of disease to the occupiers thereof or to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, or is, for any reason, likely to endanger the public health or safety, or (b) that a block or group of buildings is, for any of the said reasons, or by reason of the manner in which the buildings are crowded together, attended with such risk as aforesaid, he may by notice require the owners or occupiers of such buildings or portions of buildings or at his option, the owners of the land occupied by such buildings or portions of buildings, to execute such works or to take such measures as he may deem necessary for the prevention of such danger. (2) No person shall be entitled to compensation for damages sustained by reason of any action taken under or in pursuance of this section save when a building is demolished in pursuance of an order made hereunder, or so far demolished as to require reconstruction, in which cases the municipal council shall make compensation to the owner thereof. (3) When any building is entirely demolished under this section and the demolition thereof adds to the value of other buildings in the immediate vicinity, the owners of such other buildings shall be bound to contribute towards the compensation payable to the owner of the first-named building in proportion to the increased value acquired by their own property. (4) When any building is so far demolished under this section as to require reconstruction, allowance shall be made in determining the compensation for the benefit accruing to the premises from the improvement thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 237--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any building or portion thereof intended for or used as a dwelling place appears to the executive authority to be unfit for human habitation, he may apply to the council to prohibit further use of such structure for such purpose; and the council may, after giving the owners and occupiers of the structure a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such order should not be made, make a prohibitory order as aforesaid. (2) When any such prohibitory order has been made, the executive authority shall communicate the purport thereof to the owners and occupiers of the structure and on expiry of such period as is specified in the notice, not being less than thirty days after the service of the notice, no owner or occupier of such structure shall use or suffer it to be used for human habitation until the executive authority certifies in writing that the causes rendering it unfit for human habitation have been removed to his satisfaction, or the council withdraws the prohibition. (3) When such prohibitory order has remained in operation for three months the executive authority shall report the case to the council, which shall thereupon consider whether the structure should not be demolished. The council shall give the owner not less than thirty days' notice of the time and place at which the question will be considered and the owner shall be entitled to be heard when the question is taken into consideration. (4) If upon such consideration the council is of opinion that the structure has not been rendered fit for human habitation and that steps are not being taken with due diligence to render it so fit and that the continuance of the structure is a nuisance or dangerous or injurious to the health of the public or to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood, it shall record a decision to that effect, with the grounds of the decision, and the executive authority shall in pursuance of the said decision by notice require the owner to demolish the structure. (5) If the owner undertakes to execute forthwith the works necessary to render the structure fit for human habitation and the executive authority considers that it can be so made fit, the executive authority may postpone the execution of the decision of the council for such time not exceeding six months as he thinks sufficient for the purpose of giving the owner an opportunity of executing the necessary works.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 238--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If it appears to the executive authority that any dwelling-house or other building which is used as a dwelling-place, or any room in such a dwelling-house or building, is so over-crowded as to endanger the health of the inmates thereof, he may apply to a Magistrate, to abate such overcrowding; and the Magistrate after such inquiry as he thinks fit to make, may, by written order, require the owner of the building, or room, within a reasonable time not exceeding four weeks to be specified in the said order, to abate such overcrowding by reducing the number of lodgers, tenants or other inmates of the building or room, or may pass such other order as he may deem just and proper. (2) The council may, by written order, declare what amount of superficial and cubic space shall be deemed for the purposes of sub-section (1) to be necessary for each occupant of a building or room. (3) If any building or room referred to in sub-section (1) has been sublet, the landlord of the lodgers, tenants, or other actual inmates of the same, shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be the owner of the building or room. (4) It shall be incumbent on every tenant, lodger or other inmate of a building or room to vacate on being required by the owner so to do, in pursuance of any requisition made under sub-section (1)
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 239--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall feed or permit any animal, which is kept for dairy purpose or may be used for food, to be fed on filth.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 240--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall keep any animal on his premises so as to be a nuisance or so as to be dangerous.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 241--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may, and, if so directed by the District Magistrate, shall, give public notice that unlicensed pigs or dogs straying within specified limits will be destroyed. (2) When such notice has been given any person may destroy, in any manner not inconsistent with the terms of the notice, any unlicensed pig or dog (as the case may be) found straying within such limits.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 242--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When the executive authority takes down any structure or part thereof or cuts down any tree or hedge or shrub or part thereof or removes any fruit in virtue of his powers under this chapter, the executive authority may sell the materials or things taken down, cut down or removed, and apply the proceeds in or towards payment of the expenses incurred. (2) If after reasonable inquiry it appears to the executive authority that there is no owner or occupier to whom notice can be given under any section in this chapter he may himself take such order with the property mentioned in such section as may appear to him to be necessary and may recover the expense incurred by the sale of such property (not being land) or of any portion thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 243--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall be entitled save as provided in sections 224, 225 and 236 to compensation for any damages sustained by reason of any action taken by the municipal authorities in pursuance of their powers under this chapter.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 244--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing in this Act or in any rule, by-law or regulation made thereunder shall be construed as requiring the taking out of any licence or the obtaining of any permission under this Act or any such rule, by-law or regulation in respect of any place in the occupation or under the control of the Central or the State Government or of a market committee established under the Tamil Nadu Commercial Crops Markets Act, 1933, or in respect of any Government property or of any property belonging to such market committee.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 245--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The owner or occupier of any stable, veterinary, infirmary, stand, shed, yard, or other place in which quadrupeds are kept or taken in for purposes of profit shall apply to executive authority for a licence not less than thirty and not more than ninety days before the opening of such place, or the commencement of the year for which the licence is sought to be renewed, as the case may be. (2) The executive authority may, by an order and under such restrictions and regulations as he thinks fit, grant or refuse to grant such licence; Provided that this section shall not apply to any such place licenced as a place of public entertainment or resort under the Madras Places of Public Resort Act, 1888. (3) No person shall without or otherwise than in conformity with a licence use any place for such a purpose.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 246--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) All stables, cattle-sheds and cow-houses shall be under the survey and control of the executive authority as regards their site, construction, materials and dimensions. (2) The executive authority may by notice require that any stable, cattle-shed or cow-house be altered, paved, drained, repaired, disinfected or kept in such a state as to admit of its being sufficiently cleaned or be supplied with water, or be connected with a sewer, or be demolished. (3) Every such notice shall be addressed to the owner of the building or land to which the stable, cattle-shed or cow-house belongs, or for the use of the occupants of which the same was constructed or is continued. (4) The expense of executing any work in pursuance of any such notice shall be borne by the said owner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 247--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any stable, cattle-shed or cow-house is not constructed or maintained in the manner required by or under this Act, the executive authority may by notice direct that the same shall no longer be used as a stable, cattle-shed or cow-house. Every such notice shall state the grounds on which it proceeds.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 248--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Omitted
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 249--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may publish a notification in the district gazette and by beat of drum that no place within municipal limits or at a distance within three miles of such limits shall be used for any one or more of the purposes specified in Schedule V without the licence of the executive authority and except in accordance with the conditions specified therein: Provided that no such notification shall take effect (a) until sixty days from the date of publication, and (b) except with the previous sanction of the State Government in any area outside the municipal limits. (2) The owner or occupier of every such place shall within thirty days of the publication of such notification apply to the executive authority for a licence for the use of such place for such purpose. (3) The executive authority may by an order and under such restrictions and regulations as he thinks fit, grant or refuse to grant such licence. (4) Every such licence shall expire at the end of the year unless for special reasons the executive authority considers it should expire at an earlier date, when it shall expire at such earlier date as may be specified therein (5) Applications for renewal of such licences shall be made not less than thirty and not more than ninety days before the end of every year and applications for licences for places to be newly opened shall be made not less than thirty days and not more than ninety days before they are opened. (6) Where a licence is granted or renewed under this section for the use of any place outside the municipal limits, the municipal council shall pay to the panchayat, if any, having jurisdiction over such place, or if there is no such panchayat to the district board having such jurisdiction, such portion of the fee received for the grant or renewal of the licence as the State Government may, by general or special order, direct.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 250--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every person intending (a) to construct or establish any factory, workshop or work-place in which it is proposed to employ steam-power, water-power, or other mechanical power or electrical power, or (b) to install in any premises any machinery or manufacturing plant driven by steam, water or other power as aforesaid, not being machinery or manufacturing plant exempted by rules shall, before beginning such construction, establishment or installation, make an application in writing to the municipal council for permission to undertake the intended work. (2) The application shall specify the maximum number of workers proposed to be employed on any day in the factory, workshop, work-place or premises and shall be accompanied by- (i) a plan of the factory, workshop, work-place or premises prepared in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf by the State Government, and (ii) such particulars as to the power, machinery, plant or premises as the municipal council may require by by-laws made in this behalf. (3) The municipal council shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the application, (a) grant the permission applied for, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as it thinks fit to impose, or (b) refuse permission, if it is of opinion that such construction, establishment or installation is objectionable by reason of the density of the population in the neighbourhood or that it is likely to cause a nuisance. (4) Before granting permission under sub-section (3), the municipal council- (a) shall if more than nine workers are proposed to be employed on any day in the factory, workshop, work-place or premises obtain the approval of the Inspector of Factories appointed under the Indian Factories Act, 1911, having jurisdiction in the area of the municipality, or if there is more than one such inspector, or the inspector designated by the State Government in this behalf by general or special order, as regards the plan of the factory, workshop, work-place or premises with reference to- (i) the adequacy of the provision for ventilation and light, (ii) the sufficiency of the height and dimensions of the rooms and doors, (iii) the suitability of the exits to be used in case of fire, and (iv) such other matters as may be prescribed by rules made by the State Government: and (b) shall consult and have due regard to the opinion of the municipal health officer where the municipal council employs such an officer and of the district health officer in other cases, as regards the suitability of the site of the factory, workshop, work-place or premises for the purpose specified in the application. (5) More than nine workers shall not be employed on any day in any factory, workshop, work-place or premises, unless the permission granted in respect thereof under sub-section (3) authorizes such employment, or unless fresh permission authorizing such employment has been obtained from the municipal council. Before granting such fresh permission, the council shall obtain the approval of the Inspector of Factories referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) as regards the plan of the factory, workshop, work-place or premises, with reference to the matters specified in that clause. (6) The grant of permission under this section- (a) shall, in regard to the replacement of machinery, the levy of fees, the conditions to be observed and the like, be subject to such restrictions and control as may be prescribed; and (b) shall not be deemed to dispense with the provisions of sections 197 and 199 or sections 208 and 209, as the case may be. Explanation.- The word "worker" in sub-sections (2), (4) and (5) shall, in relation to any factory, workshop, workplace or premises, have the same meaning as in the Factories Act, 1934. (7) Save as otherwise specially provided in this Act, if orders on an application for permission under sub-section (1) are not received by the applicant within sixty days after the receipt of the application by the executive authority, permission shall be deemed to have been granted subject to the law, rules, by-laws, regulations and all conditions ordinarily imposed. (8) Nothing contained in clause (a) of sub-section (4) and sub-section (5) shall apply if the approval to the factory, work-shop work-place or premises, referred to therein has already been obtained under the provisions of any law relating to factories for the time being in force.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 251--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If, in any factory, workshop, or work-place in which steam-power, water power or other mechanical power or electrical power is used, nuisance is in the opinion of the municipal council caused by reason of the particular kind of fuel employed or by reason of the noise or vibration created, the municipal council may issue such directions as it thinks fit for the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time to be specified for the purpose. (2) If there has been wilful default in carrying out such directions or if abatement is found impracticable the municipal council may- (a) prohibit the use of the particular kind of fuel employed, or (b) restrict the noise or vibration by prohibiting the working of the factory, workshop or work-place between the hours of 9-30 P.M. and 5.30 A.M.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 252--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, either generally or in any particular case, make such order or give such directions as they may deem fit in respect of any action taken or omitted to be taken under section 250 or section 251.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 253--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority or any person authorized by him in this behalf may enter any factory, workshop or work-place- (a) at any time between sunrise and sunset; (b) at any time when any industry is being carried on; and (c) at any time by day or by night, if he has reason to believe that any offence is being committed under section 250 or section 251. (2) No claim shall lie against any person for any damage or inconvenience necessarily caused by the exercise of powers under this section or by the use of any force necessary for the purpose of effecting an entrance under this section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 254--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall provide a sufficient number of places for use as municipal slaughter-houses and may charge rents and fees for their use at such rates as it may think fit. (2) The council may- (a) Place the collection of such rents and fees under the management of such persons as may appear to it proper; or (b) farm out such collection for any period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and conditions as it may think fit. (3) Municipal slaughter-house may be situated within, or with the sanction of the State Government, without the municipality.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 255--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The owner of any place within municipal limits or at a distance within three miles of such limits which is used as a slaughter-house for the slaughtering of animals or for the skinning or cutting up of any carcasses, shall apply to the executive authority for a licence not less than thirty and not more than ninety days of the opening of such place as a slaughter-house or the commencement of the licence is sought to be renewed, as the case may be: Provided that this sub-section shall not take effect in any area outside the municipal limits except with the previous sanction of the State Government. (2) The executive authority may, by an order and subject to such restrictions and regulations as to supervision and inspection as he thinks fit, grant or refuse to grant such licence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 256--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may allow any animal to be slaughtered in such places as he thinks fit on occasions of festivals and ceremonies or as a special measure.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 257--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall slaughter within the municipality, except in a public or licensed slaughter-house, any cattle, horse, sheep, goat or pig for sale as food or skin or cut up any carcass without or otherwise than in conformity with a licence from the executive authority or dry or permit to be dried any skin in such a manner as to cause a nuisance: Provided that the executive authority may authorize any person to slaughter, without licence and without the payment of any fee, any animal for the purpose of a religious ceremony.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 258--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall without or otherwise than in conformity with a licence from the executive authority- (a) carry on within the municipality the trade or business of a dealer in or importer or seller or hawker of milk or dairy produce; (b) use any place in the municipality for the sale of milk or dairy-produce; Provided that no such licence shall be given to any person who is suffering from a dangerous disease. (2) Such licence may be refused or may be granted on such conditions as the executive authority may deem necessary which may extend to the construction, ventilation, conservancy, supervision and inspection of the premises, whether within or without municipal limits, where the animals, from which the milk-supply is derived are kept.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 259--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All markets which are acquired, constructed, repaired or maintained out of the municipal fund shall be deemed to be public markets; and such markets shall be open to persons of whatever caste or creed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 260--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Council may provide places for use as public markets. (2) The council may in any public market levy any one or more of the following fees at such rates and may place the collection of such fees under the management of such persons as may appear to it proper or may farm out such fees for any period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and subject to such conditions as it may deem fit:- (a) fees for the use of or, for the right to expose goods for sale in, such markets; (b) fees for the use of shops, stalls, pens or stands in such markets; (c) fees on vehicles or pack-animals carrying, or on persons bringing, goods for sale in such markets; (d) fees on animals brought for sale into, or sold in, such markets; and (e) licence fees on brokers, commission agents, weighmen and measures practising their calling in such markets (3) The council may, with the sanction of the State Government, close any public market or part thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 261--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall, without the permission of the executive authority, or if the fees have been formed out, of the farmer, sell or expose for sale any animal or article within any public market. (2) The executive authority may expel from any public market any person who or whose servant has been convicted of disobeying any by-laws at the time in force in such market and may prevent such person from further carrying on by himself or his servants, or agents, any trade or business in such market, or occupying any shop, stall or other place therein and may determine any lease or tenure which such person may possess in any such shop, stall or place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 262--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall open a new private market or continue to keep open a private market unless he obtains from the council a licence to do so. (2) Application for such licence shall be made by the owner of the place in respect of which the licence is sought not less than thirty days and not more than ninety days before such place is opened as a market, or the commencement of the year for which the licence is sought to be viewed, as the case may be. (3) The council shall, as regards private markets already lawfully established and may, at its discretion as regards new private markets, grant the licence applied for subject to such regulations as to supervision and inspection and to such conditions as to sanitation, drainage, water-supply, width of paths and ways, weights and measures to be used, and rents and fees to be charged in such market as the council may think proper; or the council may refuse to grant any such licence for any new private market. The council may, however, at any time, for breach of the conditions thereof, suspend or cancel any licence which has been granted under this section. The council may also modify the conditions of the licence to take effect from a specified date. (4) When a licence is granted, refused, suspended cancelled or modified under this section, the council shall cause a notice of such grant, refusal, suspension, cancellation or modification in English and in a regional language of the district to be pasted in some conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the place in respect of which the licence was sought or had been obtained. (5) Every licence granted under this section shall expire at the end of the year.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 262A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When a licence granted under section 262 permits the levy of any fees of the nature specified in sub-section (2) of section 260, a fee not exceeding fifteen per centum of the gross income of the owner from the market in the preceding year shall be charged by the municipal council for such licence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 263--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall not be lawful for any person to sell or expose for sale any animal or article in any unlicensed private market.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 264--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may by notice require the owner, occupier, or farmer of any private market to- (a) construct approachers, entrances, passages, gates, drains and cess-pits for such markets and provide it with latrines of such description and in such position and number as the council may think fit; (b) roof and pave the whole or any portion of it or pave any portion of the floor with such material as will in the opinion of the council secure imperviousness and ready cleansing; (c) ventilate it properly and provide it with a supply of water; (d) provide passages of sufficient width between the stalls and make such alterations in the stalls, passages, shops, doors or other parts of the market as the council may direct; and (e) keep it in a cleanly and proper state and remove all filth and refuse therefrom.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 265--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any person after notice given to him in that behalf by the council fails within the period and in the manner laid down in the said notice to carry out any of the works specified in section 264, the council may suspend the licence of the said person, or may refuse to grant him a licence, unless such works have been completed. (2) It shall not be lawful for any person to open or keep open any such market after such suspension or refusal.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 266--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No owner, occupier, agent or manager in charge of any private market, or of any shop, stall, shed or other place therein shall keep the same so that it is a nuisance or fail to cause anything that is a nuisance to be at once removed to a place to be specified by the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 267--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council or any officer duly authorized by it in that behalf may close any private market in respect of which no licence has been applied for or the licence for which has been refused, withheld or suspended or which is held or kept contrary to the provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 267A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A municipal council may acquire the rights of any person to hold a private market in any place and to levy fees therein. The acquisition shall be made under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and such rights shall be deemed to be land for the purposes of that Act. (2) On payment by the municipal council of the compensation awarded under the said Act in respect of such property and any other charges incurred in acquiring it, the rights of such person to hold a private market and to levy fees therein shall vest in the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 268--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The person incharge of a market shall prevent the entry therein or expel therefrom any person suffering from leprosy in whom the process of ulceration has commenced or from any infectious or contagious disease who sells or exposes for sale therein any article or who, not having purchased the same, handles any articles exposed for sale therein, and he may expel therefrom any person who is creating a disturbance therein.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 269--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall without or otherwise than in conformity with a licence from the executive authority carry on the trade of a butcher, fishmonger or poulterer, or use any place for the sale of flesh or fish intended for human food in any place within municipal limits or at a distance within three miles of such limits: Provided that no licence shall be required for a place used for the selling or storing for sale of preserved flesh or fish contained in airtight and hermetically sealed receptacles: Provided further that no licence shall be required for any place included in a public market as defined in section 167 of the Tamil Nadu Local Board Act, 1920. (2) The executive authority may, by an order and subject to such restrictions as to supervision and inspection as he thinks fit, grant or refuse to grant such licence. (3) Every such licence shall expire at the end of the year in which it is granted unless for special reasons the executive authority considers it should expire at an earlier date when it shall expire at such earlier date as may be specified therein.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may, with the sanction of the council, prohibit by public notice or licence, or regulate the sale or exposure for sale, of any animals or articles in or on any public street or part thereof.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any question arises whether any place where persons assemble for the sale or purchase of articles of food or clothing of livestock or poultry, of cotton, groundnut or other industrial crops or of any other raw or manufactured products is a market or not the municipal council shall make a reference to the State Government and the decision of the State Government on the question shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council may construct or provide and maintain public landing places, halting places and cart-stands and may levy fees for the use of the same. (1-A) The council may- (a) place the collections of any such fees under the management of such persons as may appear to it proper; or (b) farm out the collection of any such fees for any period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and conditions as it may think fit. (1-B) Any agreement entered into by a municipal council, farming out the collection of such fees for a period, not exceeding three years, commencing on or after the 1st April, 1941, shall be valid, notwithstanding that such agreement was entered into before the commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities and Local Boards (Amendment) Act, 1941. (2) A statement in English and a vernacular language of the district of the fees fixed by the council for the use of such place shall be put up in a conspicuous part thereof. Explanation.- A cart-stand shall, for the purposes of this Act, include a stand for carriages including motor vehicles within the meaning of the Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1914 and animals.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where a municipal council has provided a public landing place, halting place or cart-stand, the executive authority may prohibit the use for the same purpose by any person within such distance thereof, as may be determined by the municipal council, of any public place or the sides of any public street.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the fee leviable under sub-section (1) of section 270-B in respect of a vehicle or animal is not paid on demand, the person appointed to collect such fee may seize and detain such portion of the appurtenances or load of such vehicle or animal as will, in his opinion, suffice to defray the amount due; in the absence of any such appurtenances or load or in the event of this value being insufficient to defray the amount due he may seize and detain the vehicle or animal. (2) All property seized under sub-section (I) shall be sent within twenty-four hours to the executive authority or to such person as he may have authorized to receive and sell such property and the executive authority shall forthwith give notice to the proprietor of the property seized, or if the proprietor is no known or is not resident within the municipality or the person cannot be found, publish by beat of drum, that after the expiry of two days, exclusive of Sunday, from the date of service or publication of such notice, the property will be sold by auction at a place to be specified in the notice. (3) If, at any time before the sale has begun, the amount due on account of the fee, together with a sum of four annas on account of charges incurred in connection with the seizure and detention, is tendered to the executive authority or other person authorized as aforesaid, the property seized shall be forthwith released. (4) If no such tender is made, the property may be sold and the proceeds of the sale applied to the payment of- (i) the amount due on account of the fee; (ii) such penalty not exceeding the amount of the fee as the executive authority may direct; and (iii) a sum of eight annas on account of charges incurred in connection with the seizure, detention and sale.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 270E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall open a new private cart-stand or continue to keep open a private cart-stand unless he obtains from the council a licence to do so. (2) Application for such licence shall be made by the owner of the place in respect of which the licence is sought not less than thirty and not more than ninety days of such place as cart-stand, or the commencement of the year for which the licence is sought to be renewed as the case may be. (3) The council shall as regards private cart-stands already lawfully established and may, at its discretion, as regards new private cart-stands grant the licence applied for subject to such regulations as to supervision and inspection and to such conditions as to conservancy as the council may think proper; or the council may refuse to grant any such licence for any new private cart-stand. The council may, however, at any time for breach of the conditions thereof suspend or cancel any licence which has been granted under this section. The council may also modify the conditions of the licence to take effect from a specified date. (4) When a licence is granted, refused, suspended, cancelled or modified under this section the council shall cause a notice of such grant, refusal, suspension, cancellation or modification, in English and a vernacular language of the district to be pasted in some conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the place in respect of which the licence was sought or had been obtained. (5) The council may levy for every licence granted under this section a fee not exceeding three hundred rupees per annum. (6) Every licence granted under this section shall expire at the end of the year.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 271--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be the duty of the executive authority to make provision for the constant and vigilant inspection of animals, carcasses, meat, poultry, game, flesh, fish, fruit, vegetables, corn, bread, flour, milk, ghee, butter, oil and any other articles exposed or hawked about for sale or deposited in or brought to any place for the purpose of sale or preparation for sale.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 272--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority or any person authorized by him in writing for the purpose may without notice enter any slaughter-house or any place where animals, poultry or fish intended for food are exposed for sale or where articles of food are being manufactured or exposed for sale at any time by day or night, when the slaughter, exposure for sale or manufacture is being carried on and inspect the same and any utensil or vessel used for manufacturing, preparing or containing any such articles. (2) If the executive authority or any person so authorized by him has reason to believe that in any place any animals intended for human food is being slaughtered or any carcass is being skinned or cut up or that any food is being manufactured, stored, prepared, packed, cleansed, kept or exposed for sale, or sold without, or otherwise than in conformity with a licence, he may enter any such place without notice, at any time by day or night for the purpose of satisfying himself whether any provisions of laws, by-laws, or regulations or any condition of a licence is being contravened. (3) No claim shall lie against an executive authority or any person acting under his authority or the council for any damage or inconvenience necessarily caused by the exercise of powers under this section or by the use of any force necessary for effecting an entry into any place under this section. (4) In any legal proceedings in respect of powers exercised under this section in which it is alleged that any animals, poultry, fish or articles of food were not kept, exposed, hawked about, manufactured, prepared, stored, packed, or cleansed for sale, or were not intended for human food, the burden of proof shall lie on the party so alleging.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 273--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall in any manner whatsoever prevent the executive authority or person duly authorised by him exercising his powers under the last preceding section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 274--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any animal, poultry or fish intended for food appears to the executive authority or to a person duly authorized by him, to be diseased, or any food appears to him to be noxious, or if any vessel or utensil used in manufacturing, preparing or continuing such article appears to be of such kind or in such state as to render the article noxious, he may seize or carry away or secure such animals, article, utensil or vessel, in order that the same may be dealt with as hereinafter provided. Explanation.- Meat subject to the process of blowing shall be deemed to be noxious.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 275--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall remove or in any way interfere with an animal or article secured under the last preceding section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 276--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any animal or article of food is seized under section 274 it may, with the consent of the owner or person in whose possession it was found, be forthwith destroyed in such manner as to prevent its being used for human food or exposed for sale, and if the article is perishable, without such consent. (2) Any expense incurred in destroying any animal or article under sub-section (1) shall be paid by the owner or person in whose possession it was at the time of its seizure.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 277--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Articles of food, animals, poultry, fish, utensils, vessels, etc., seized under section 274 and not destroyed under section 276 shall as soon as possible be produced before a magistrate. (2) Whether or not complaint is laid before a magistrate of any offence under the Indian Penal Code or under this Act, if it appears to the magistrate on taking such evidence as he thinks necessary that any such animal, poultry or fish is diseased, or any such article in noxious or any such utensil or vessel is of kind or in such state as is described in section 274 he may order the same- (a) to be forfeited to the council; (b) to be destroyed at the charge of the owner or person in whose possession it was at the time of seizure, in such manner as to prevent the same being again exposed or hawked about for sale, or used for human food or for the manufacture or preparation of, or for containing, any such article as aforesaid.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 278--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every owner or person having the control of any place used at the date of the coming into operation of this Act, as a place for burying, burning, or otherwise disposing of the dead shall, if such place be not already registered, apply to the council to have such place registered. (2) If it appears to the council that there is no owner or person having the control of such place it shall assume such control and register such place, or may, with the sanction of the State Government, close it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 279--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No new place for the disposal of the dead, whether public or private, shall be opened, formed, constructed, or used unless a licence has been obtained from the council on application. (2) Such application for a licence shall be accompanied by a plan of the place to be registered, showing the locality, boundary and extent thereof, the name of the owner or person or community interested therein, the system of management and such further particulars as the council may require. (3) The council may- (a) grant or refuse a licence, or (b) postpone the grant of a licence until objections to the site have been removed or any particulars called for by it have been furnished.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 280--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The council may, and shall if no sufficient provision exists provide at the cost of the municipal fund places to be used as burial or burning grounds or crematoria, either within or without the limits of the municipality, and may charge rents and fees for the use thereof. (2) The council may farm out the collection of such rents and fees for any period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and conditions as it may think fit. (3) If the council provides any such place without the limits of the municipality, all the provisions of this Act and all by-laws framed under this Act for the management of such places within the municipality shall apply to such place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 281--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A book shall be kept at the municipal office in which the places registered, licensed or provided under sections 278, 279 or 280 and all such places registered, licensed or provided before the commencement of this Act, shall be recorded, and the plans of such places shall be filed in such office. (2) Notice that such place has been registered, licensed or provided as aforesaid shall be affixed in English and in at least one vernacular language to some conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the burial or burning ground or other place as aforesaid. (3) No person shall bury, burn or otherwise dispose of any corpse except in a place which has been registered, licensed or provided, as aforesaid,
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 282--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The person having control of a place for disposing of the dead shall give information of every burning or other disposal of a corpse at such place to any person appointed by the executive authority in that behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 283--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the council is satisfied- (a) that any registered or licensed place for the disposal of the dead is in such a state or situation as to be, or to be likely to become, dangerous to the health of persons living in the neighbourhood thereof, or (b) that any burial ground is overcrowded with graves, and if in the case of a public burial or burning ground or other place as aforesaid another convenient place duly authorized for the disposal of the dead exists or has been provided for the persons who would ordinarily make use of such place, it may with the previous sanction of the State Government, give notice that it shall not be lawful after a period to be named in such notice to bury, burn or otherwise dispose of any corpse of such place. (2) Every notice given under sub-section (1) shall be published in the district gazette and by beat of drum. (3) After the expiry of the period named in such notice it shall not be lawful to bury, burn or otherwise dispose of a corpse at such place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 284--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) bury or cause to be buried any corpse or part thereof in a grave whether dug, or constructed, of masonry or otherwise, in such manner that the surface of the coffin or the surface of the body where no coffin is used, is at a less depth than five feet from the surface of the ground; or. (b) build or dig or cause to be built or dug any grave in any burial ground at a less distance than two feet from the margin of any other existing grave, or (c) without the sanction in writing of the executive authority, or an order in writing of a magistrate, reopen a grave already occupied; or (d) convey or cause to be conveyed a corpse or part thereof to any burial or burning ground, and not cause the burial or burning of the same to commence within six hours after its arrival at such place; or (e) when burning or causing to be burnt a corpse or part thereof permit the same or any part thereof or its clothes to remain without being completely reduced to ashes; or (f) carry through any street a corpse or part thereof not decently covered; or (g) while carrying a corpse or part thereof within the municipality leave the same in or near any street for any purpose whatever; or (h) remove, otherwise than in a closed receptacle, any corpse or part thereof kept or used for the purpose of dissection.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall discharge the office of grave-digger or other attendant, at a public place for the disposal of the dead (other than a place provided by the Government) unless he has been licensed in that behalf by the executive authority. Such licence may be withdrawn or cancelled at the discretion of the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Chapter, "hoarding" means any screen of boards at any place whether public or private used or intended to be used for exhibiting advertisement including the frame work or other support, erected, wholly or in part upon or over any land, building, wall or structure, visible to public wholly or partly.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No hoarding shall be erected at any place, on or after the 23rd day of July, 1998 (hereafter in this section referred to as the said date), by any person without obtaining a licence from the District Collector. (2) Every person who has erected any hoarding without obtaining a licence and which is in existence immediately before the said date, shall apply for a licence in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter within thirty days from the said date.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285C--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every application for licence under this Chapter shall be made to the District Collector in such form, containing such particulars and with such fee, as may be prescribed. (2) The District Collector may, after local inspection, grant a licence with such conditions or directions, subject to such rules as may be prescribed. (3) The District Collector may refuse to grant licence for reasons to be recorded in writing: Provided that a licence shall not be refused unless the applicant has been given an opportunity of making his representation. (4) Every licence granted under sub-section (2) shall be valid for such period as may be prescribed and may be renewed from time to time. (5) The fee paid under sub-section (1) shall be credited to the State Government account in such manner as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285CC--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every person, who is granted licence under section 285-C shall pay, on every advertisement on hoardings, a tax calculated at such rates as may be prescribed, having regard to the location, size, reach and nature of the advertisement but subject to the maxima and minima specified in the Table below:- THE TABLE Location and Nature Rates of tax per square metre per half year (Rupees) (1) (2) Municipalities Minimum Maximum 1. Hoardings in arterial road with bus route-  (a) without lighting 75 300 (b) with ordinary lighting 90 400 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 100 500 2. Hoardings in main road with bus route-  (a) without lighting 60 200 (b) with ordinary lighting 70 300 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 80 400 3. Hoardings in other road or street-  (a) without lighting 50 100 (b) with ordinary lighting 60 200 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 70 250 Town Panchayats  1. Hoardings in arterial road with bus route-  (a) without lighting 60 180 (b) with ordinary lighting 80 360 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 90 450 2. Hoardings in main road with bus route-  (a) without lighting 40 120 (b) with ordinary lighting 60 240 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 70 300 3. Hoardings in other road or street-  (a) without lighting 20 60 (b) with ordinary lighting 30 120 (c) with neon or mercury lighting 60 150 (2) Seventy-five per cent of the tax paid by every person, under sub-section (1) shall be credited to the State Government account and the balance of twenty-five percent shall be credited to the concerned Municipality or Town Panchayat account within whose jurisdiction such tax has been collected in such manner as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285D--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Without prejudice to any other penalty to which the licensee may be liable under this Chapter, the District Collector may, at any time, by order in writing, cancel or suspend any licence granted or renewed under Section 285-C, if (a) such licence has been obtained by fraud, misrepresentation or suppression of material particulars; or (b) the licensee has contravened any of the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made thereunder or any of the conditions subject to which the licence was granted. (2) Before cancelling or suspending a licence under sub-section (1), the District Collector shall give the licensee, an opportunity of making his representation.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any hoarding erected without a licence shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without giving any notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285F--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where any hoarding is retained after the expiry of the licence or erected contrary to the conditions of licence, District Collector may by notice in writing, require the licensee to remove such hoarding within such time as may be prescribed. (2) Where the hoarding is not removed within the time specified in the notice, the District Collector shall, without further notice, remove such hoarding and recover the expenditure for such removal as an arrear of land revenue.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285G--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to any hoarding on which is exhibited any advertisement which relates to, (i) the trade or business carried on within the land or building, upon or over, which such hoarding is erected or to any sale or letting of such land or building or any effects therein or to any sale, entertainment or meeting, to be held upon or in such land or building; or (ii) the name of the land or building, upon or over which the hoarding is erected or to the name of the owner or occupier of such land or building. Provided that the exemption under this section shall be subject to such size and nature of the hoarding as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285H--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) An appeal shall lie to the State Government from an order of refusal to grant or renew a licence or cancelling or suspending a licence by the District Collector under this Chapter within thirty days from the date of receipt of the order. (2) The appeal shall be in such form and in such manner and shall accompany with such fee, as may be prescribed. (3) On receipt of such appeal, the State Government may, after making such inquiry as may be necessary and giving a reasonable opportunity to the appellant to be heard, pass such orders as it deemed fit.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285-I--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule or order made thereunder or obstructs lawful exercise of any power conferred by or under this Chapter shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both."
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 285-J--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority: (a) (i) where any hoarding (other than traffic sign and road sign) visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement, so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic and which is in existence immediately before the date of the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Municipal Laws (Amendment) Act, 2000 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the amendment Act), the District Collector shall, by notice in writing, require the licensee or any person in possession, of such hoarding, to remove such hoarding within such time as may be specified in the notice. Provided that such time shall not exceed fifteen days from the date of issue of such notice; (ii) where the hoarding referred to in sub-clause (i) is not removed within the time specified in the notice, the District Collector shall, without further notice, remove such hoarding and recover the expenditure for such removal as an arrear of land revenue; (b) (i) where the District Collector is satisfied that the erection of any hoarding (other than traffic sign and road sign) visible to the traffic on the road is hazardous and disturbance to the safe traffic movement so as to adversely affect free and safe flow of traffic, he shall not grant any licence under Sec.285-C and no such hoarding shall be erected, on and from the date of the commencement of the amendment Act by any person; (ii) Where any hoarding is erected in contravention of sub-clause (i), it shall be confiscated and removed by the District Collector without any notice.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 286--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The municipal council shall register all births and deaths occuring in the municipality. (3) Information of births and deaths shall be given and their registration shall be made and enforced in the prescribed manner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 287--> State(s): Tamil Nadu "Dangerous disease" means a disease specified in Schedule VI.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 288--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any medical practitioner becomes cognizant of the exercise of any dangerous disease in any private or public dwelling not being a public hospital in the municipality, he shall inform the executive authority with the least practicable delay. (2) The information shall be communicated in such form and with such details as the executive authority may require. The executive authority may pay a fee not exceeding one rupee for each intimation by a private medical practitioner of a case occurring in his practice. (3) This section shall apply to a hakeem or a vaidyan. (4) With the previous approval in all cases of the Collector of the District the executive authority may direct the compulsory notification by the owner or occupier of every house within the municipal limits during such period and to such officer as the executive authority may prescribe of all deaths from or occurrence of dangerous diseases in his house.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 289--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority or health officer may at any time by day or by night without notice, or after giving such notice as may appear to him reasonable, inspect any place in which any dangerous disease is reported or suspected to exist, and take such measures as he may think fit to prevent the spread of such disease beyond such place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 290--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the executive authority or health officer is of opinion that the cleansing or disinfecting of any premises or part thereof or of any article therein which is likely to retain infection, will tend to prevent or check the spread of any dangerous disease, he may by notice require the occupier to cleanse or disinfect the same in the manner and within the time specified in such notice. (2) If the executive authority or health officer considers that immediate action is necessary, or that the occupier is, by reason of poverty or otherwise unable effectually to comply with his requisition, the executive authority or health officer may himself, without notice, cause such premises or article to be cleansed or disinfected and for this purpose may cause such article to be removed from the premises; and the expenses incurred by the executive authority or health officer shall be recoverable from the said occupier in cases in which he is, in the opinion of the executive authority or health officer, not unable by reason of poverty effectually to comply with such requisition.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 291--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority shall from time to time notify places at which conveyances, clothing, bedding, or other articles, which have been exposed to infection from any dangerous disease shall be washed or disinfected. (2) The executive authority may direct any clothing, bedding or other articles likely to retain such infection to be disinfected or destroyed and shall, on demand, give compensation for any article destroyed under this sub-section. (3) No person shall wash such clothing or bedding or other articles in any place other than those set apart for such purposes under sub-section (1).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 292--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall, without previously disinfecting it, give, lend, let, hire sell, transmit or otherwise dispose of any article which he knows or has reason to know has been exposed to infection from any dangerous disease: Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who transmits with proper precautions any article for the purpose of having it disinfected.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 293--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the chief medical officer of the district, the health officer or the local medical officer certifies that the water in any well, tank or other place within the limits of the municipality is likely, if used for drinking, to endanger or cause the spread of any dangerous disease, the council may, by public notice, prohibit the removal or use of such water for drinking and domestive purpose during a specified period.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 294--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When a hospital or other place for the reception of persons suffering from dangerous diseases is provided by the municipal council the executive authority may, on a certificate signed by a medical practitioner registered under the Tamil Nadu Medical Registration Act, 1914, arrange for, or direct the removal to such hospital or place if any person suffering from dangerous disease who is, in the opinion of such medical practitioner, without proper lodging or accommodation, or without medical supervision directed to prevent the spread of the disease, or who is in a place occupied by more than one family.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 295--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person knows or has been certified by the health officer, the local medical officer, or a registered medical practitioner that he is suffereing from a dangerous disease he shall not engage in any occupation, or carry on any trade or business unless he can do so without risk of spreading the disease.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 296--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person who is suffering from any dangerous disease shall, without taking proper precautions against spreading such disease, cause or suffer himself to be conveyed in a public conveyance. (2) No person who is suffering from any dangerous disease shall enter a public conveyance without previously notifying to the owner or driver or person in charge of such conveyance that he is so suffering. (3) No owner, driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall knowingly carry or permit to be carried in such conveyance any person suffering as aforesaid in contravention of sub-section (1) (4) No owner or-driver or person in charge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey any person suffering as aforesaid unless and until the said person pays or tenders a sum sufficient to cover any loss and costs that may be incurred in disinfecting such conveyance, anything in any Act relating to public conveyances for the time being in force to the contrary notwithstanding. (5) A Court convicting any person of contravening sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may levy, in addition to the penalty for the offence provided in this Act, an additional fine of such amount as the Court deems sufficient to cover the loss and costs which the owner or driver must incur for the purpose of disinfecting the conveyance. The amount of any additional fine so imposed shall be awarded by the Court to the owner or driver of the conveyance: Provided that if such additional fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal the amount shall not be paid to the owner or driver before the period allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed: or if an appeal is presented, before the decision of the appeal. (6) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter the Court shall take into account any sum which the plaintiff shall have received under this section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 297--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No person shall let or sub-let or for that purpose allow any person to enter a building or any part of a building in which he knows or has reason to know that a person has been suffering from any dangerous disease without having the same and all articles therein liable to retain infection disinfected to the satisfaction of the executive authority. (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the keeper of a hotel or lodging-house shall be deemed to let the same or part of the same to any person accommodated therein.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 298--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the event of the prevalence of any dangerous disease within the municipality, the council may by notice require the owner or occupier of any building, booth or tent used for purposes of public entertainment to close the same for such period as it may fix.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 299--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person being the parent or having the care of charge of a minor who is or has been suffering from a dangerous disease or has been exposed to infection therefrom shall, after a notice from the health officer or the local medical officer that the minor is not to be sent to school or college, permit such minor to attend school or college without having procured from the health officer, the local medical officer or a registered medical practitioner a certificate that in his opinion such minor may attend without undue risk of communicating such disease to others. No fee shall be charged by the health officer or the local medical officer for the grant of a certificate under this section.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 300--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Vaccination shall be compulsory in every municipality in respect of such persons and to such extent as may be prescribed. (2) The procedure prescribed in such rules for enforcing vaccination shall be observed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 301--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an inmate of any dwelling place in suffering from smallpox the head of the family to which the immate belongs and in his default, the occupier or person in charge of such place shall inform the executive authority with the least practicable delay.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 302--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Inoculation for smallpox is thereby prohibited. (2) No person who has undergone the operation of inoculation shall enter any municipality before the lapse of forty days from the date of inoculation without a certificate from a medical practitioner of such class as the council may authorize to grant such certificates, stating that such person is no longer likely to produce smallpox by contact or near approach.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 303--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act not inconsistent therewith. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power they may make rules. (a) with reference to all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) Omitted (c) Omitted (d) as to the conditions on which property may be acquired by the municipal council or on which property vested in or belonging to the municipal council may be transferred by sale, mortgage, lease, exchange or otherwise; (e) as to the working of provident funds; (f) as to the matters mentioned in rule 37 of the Taxation and Finance Rules in Schedule IV; as to the conditions on which grants-in-aid shall be paid from the municipal fund for purposes of education and medical relief and as to the conditions on which grants and loans may be made to co-operative building societies. (g) as to the intermediate offices, if any, through which correspondence between the municipal authorities and the State Government or officers of that Government shall pass; (h) as to preparation of plans and estimates for works which are to be partly or wholly constructed at the expense of the municipal council and the power of the municipal authorities or officers of the State Government to accord professional or administrative sanction estimates; (i) as to the accounts to be kept by the municipal council, the manner in which such accounts shall be audited and published and as to the conditions under which the rate-payers may appear before auditors, inspect books and vouchers and take exception to items entered or omitted therein; (j) as to the estimates of receipts and expenditure, returns, statements and reports to be submitted by municipal councils; (k) as to the mode in which the officers of the State Government shall; advise and assist municipal councils in carrying out the purposes of this Act; (l) as to the interpellation of the chairman by the members of the council; (m) as to the moving of resolutions at the meetings of the council; (n) for regulating the sharing between local authorities in the Presidency of Madras of the proceeds of the profession tax on carriages and animals, tax on carts, and other taxes or income, levied or obtained under this or any other Act; (o) Omitted (p) as to the form of registers and returns of births and deaths and the manner in which the registers shall be maintained, the dates on which returns shall be made and the officer to whom returns shall be sent; (q) as to the transfer of allotments entered in the sanctioned budget of a municipal council from one head to another; (r) as to the powers of auditors, inspecting and superintending officers and officers authorized to hold inquiries, to summon and examine witnesses, and to compel the production of documents and all other matters connected with audit, inspection and superintendence; and (s) for determining the cost of buildings and lands. (3) In making any rules the State Government may provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 304--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) (a) All rules made under sub-section (2) of section 77-A or under section 303 shall be published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette and unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so published. (b) All notifications issued under this Act shall, unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, come into force on the day on which they are published. (2) Every rule made under sub-section (2) of section 77-A or under section 103 and every notification issued under this Act shall, as soon as possible after it is made or issued, be placed on the table of both Houses of the State Legislature, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modification in any such rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification or amendment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or notification.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 305--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may make rules whether prospectively or retrospectively altering, adding to or cancelling any of the following Schedules to this Act, namely- Schedules II, III, IV, V and VI. (2) The State Government may by notification under sub-section (1) of section 12-C include any municipality in Schedule X but shall not remove therefrom any municipality so included. (3) All references made in this Act to any of the aforesaid Schedules shall be construed as referring to such Schedules as for the time being amended in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 305A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A draft of the rules proposed to be made under sub-section (1) of section 305 shall be laid before each of the Houses of the State Legislature and the rules shall not be made unless both Houses approve the draft either without modification or addition or with modifications or additions to which both the Houses agree; but upon such approval being given, the rules may be made in the form in which they have been approved and such rules on being so made shall be notified in the Official Gazette and shall thereafter be of full force and effect.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 306--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The council may make by-laws, not inconsistent with this Act or with any other law to provide- (1) for all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be provided for by by-laws; (1-A) for the due performance by all municipal officers and servants of the duties assigned to them; (2) for the regulation of the time and mode of collecting the taxes and duties under this Act; (2-A) for determining the conditions under which lands shall be deemed to be appurtenant to buildings; (3) (a) for the use of public tanks, wells, conduits and other places or works for water-supply; (b) for the regulation of public bathing, washing and the like; (c) for the maintenance and protection of the water-supply system, and the protection of the water-supply from contamination. (d) for the conditions on which house-connections with the council's water-supply mains may be made; for their alteration and repair and for their being kept in proper order; (e) for supply of water for domestic consumption and use; (f) for the prevention of waste of water; (g) for the measurement of water; (h) for the compulsory provision of cisterns and meters; (i) for the supply of water in case of fire; (4) for the maintenance and protection of the lighting system; (5) (a) for the maintenance and protection of the drainage system; (b) for the construction of house drains, and for regulating their situation, mode of construction and materials; (c) for the alteration and repair of house drains; (d) for the cleansing of house drains; (e) for the construction of cess-pools, septic tanks, filters and drains; (f) for the payment or apportionment of money payable on account of pipes or drains common to more premises than one; (6) for the cleansing of latrines, earth-closets, ash-pits and cess-pools, and the keeping of latrines supplied with sufficient water for flushing; (7) (a) for the testing of water pipes and drains in private premises, the recovery or the apportionment of the cost of such testing, and the breaking up of ground or of buildings for the purpose of such testing; (b) for the licensing of plumbers and fitters, and for the compulsory employment of licensed plumbers and fitters; (8) (a) for the laying out of streets, and for determining the information and plans to be submitted with applications for permission to lay out streets; and for regulating the level and width of public streets and the height of buildings abutting thereon; (b) for the protection of avenues, trees, grass and other appurtenances of public streets and other place; (9) for the regulation of the use of parks, gardens and other public or municipal places but not including the regulation of traffic therein, the reservation thereof for particular kinds of traffic, or the closing thereof or parts thereof to traffic; (10) (a) for the regulation of building; (b) for determining the information and plans to be submitted with applications to build; (c) for the licensing of builders and surveyors and for the compulsory employment of licensed builders and surveyors; (11) for the regulation of hotels, lodging houses, boarding houses, choultries, rest-houses, emigration depots, restaurants, eating houses, cafes, refreshment rooms, coffee-houses, and any premises to which the Public are admitted for repose for the consumption of any food or drink; (12) for regulating the mode of constructing stables, cattle-sheds and cow-houses and connecting them with municipal drains; (13) for the sanitary control and supervision of places used for any of the purposes specified in Schedule V and of any trade or manufacture carried on therein; (14) (a) for the control and supervision of slaughterhouses and of places used for skinning and cutting up carcasses; (b) for the control and supervision of the methods of slaughtering; (c) for the control and supervision of butchers carrying on business in the municipality or at any slaughter-houses without the municipality provided by the municipal council or licensed by the executive authority; as the case may be. (15) for the inspection of milch cattle, and the regulation of the ventilation, lighting, cleaning, drainage and water-supply of dairies and cattle-sheds in the occupation of persons following the trade of dairy man or milk seller; (16) for enforcing the cleanliness of milk stores and milk shops and vessels and utensils used by the keepers thereof or by hawkers for containing or measuring milk or preparing any milk product and for enforcing the cleanliness of persons employed in the milk trade; (17) for requiring notice to be given whenever any milch animals is affected with any contagious disease and prescribing the precautions to be taken in order to protect milch cattle and milk against infection and contamination; (18) (a) for the inspection of public and private markets and shops other places therein; (b) for the regulation of their use and the control of their sanitary condition. (c) for licensing and controlling brokers, commission agents, weighmen and measures practising their calling in markets; (19) for prescribing the method of sale of articles whether by measure, weight, or piece; (20) for prescribing and providing standard weights, scales and measures and preventing the use of any others; (21) for the prevention of the sale or exposure for sale of unwholesome meat, fish or provisions and securing the efficient inspection and sanitary regulation of shops in which articles intended for human food are kept or sold; (22) (a) for the regulation of burial and burning grounds and other places for the disposal of corpses; (b) for the levy of fees for the use of such burial and burning grounds and crematoria as are maintained by the council; (c) for the verification of deaths and the causes of death; (d) for the period for which corpses must be kept for inspection. (e) for the period within which corpses must be conveyed to a burial or burning ground, and the mode of conveyance of corpses through public places; (23) for the registration of births, deaths and marriages; (23-A) for the training and licensing of dhais and midwives; (24) for the enumeration of the inhabitants of the city; (25) for the prevention of dangerous diseases of men and animals; (26) for the enforcement of compulsory vaccination; (27) for the prevention of outbreaks of fire; (28) for the prohibition and regulation of advertisements in public streets or parks; (29) in general for securing cleanliness, safety and order and the good Government and well-being of the municipality and for carrying out all the purposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 307--> State(s): Tamil Nadu By-laws with regard to the drainage of, and supply of water to, buildings and water-closets, earth-closets, privies, ash-pits and cess-pools in connection with buildings and the keeping of water-closets supplied with sufficient water for flushing may be made so as to affect buildings erected before the passing of the by-laws or this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 308--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In making a by-law, the municipal council may subject to the provisions of clause (1) of Article 20 of the Constitution, provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable- (a) with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and in case of a continuing breach with fine which may extend to fifteen rupees for every day during which the breach continues after conviction for the first breach, or (b) with fine which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which the breach continues after receipt of notice from the executive authority to discontinue such breach.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 309--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The municipal council, shall, before making or altering by-laws, publish a draft of the proposed by-laws and alterations together with a notice specifying a date at or after which such draft will be taken into consideration, and shall, before making the by-laws or alterations, receive and consider any objection or suggestion which may be made in respect of such draft by any person interested therein before the date so specified.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 310--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No by-laws or cancellation or alteration of a by-law shall have effect until the same shall have been approved and confirmed by the State Government. (2) Any by-law or cancellation or alteration of a by-law when it shall have been duly confirmed shall be published in the district gazette in English and shall come into operation three months after it has been so published.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 311--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Complete copies in English and in a vernacular language of the district- (a) of this Act, (b) of all rules framed by the State Government under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 303, and (c) of all by-laws in force for the time being shall be kept at the municipal office and shall be sold to the public at cost price.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 312--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Regulations made by the municipal authorities under this Act shall be published in such manner as the council may determine.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 313--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whoever- (a) contravenes any provision of any of the sections or rules specified in the first column of Schedule VII, or (b) contravenes any rule or order made under any of the specified sections or rules, or (c) fails to comply with any direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully made upon him under or in pursuance of the provisions of any of the said sections or rules, shall on conviction be punished with fine which may extend to the amount mentioned in the behalf in the fourth column of the said schedule. (2) Whoever after having been convicted of- (a) contravening any provision of the section or rules specified in the first column of Schedule VIII, or (b) contravenes any rule or order made under any of the specified sections or rules, (c) failing to comply with any direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully made upon him under or in pursuance of any of the said sections or rules, continues to contravene the said provision or to neglect to comply with the said direction or requisition, as the case may be, shall on conviction be punished, for each day after the previous date of conviction during which he continues so to offend, with fine which may extend to the amount mentioned in that behalf in the fourth column of the said schedule. Explanation.- The entries in the third column of Schedules VII and VIII headed "subject" are not intended as definitions of the offences described in the sections, sub-sections or clauses mentioned in the first and second columns or even as abstracts of those sections, sub-sections or clauses, but are inserted merely as references to the subject of the sections, sub-sections or clauses as the case may be.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 314--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whoever acts as a member of a municipal council knowing that under this Act or the rules made thereunder he is not entitled or has ceased to be entitled to hold such office shall, on conviction, be punished with fine not exceeding two hundred rupees for every such offence. (2) Whoever acts as or exercises the functions of the chairman or vice-chairman of a municipal council knowing that under this Act or the Rules made thereunder he is not entitled or has ceased to be entitled to hold such office or to exercise such functions shall, on conviction, be punished with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such offence. (3) If the chairman or vice-chairman of a municipal council fails to hand over any documents of, or any moneys or other properties vested in, or belonging to, the municipal council which are in or have come into his possession or control, to his successor in office or other prescribed authority, in every case as soon as his term of office as chairman or vice-chairman expires and in the case of the vice-chairman also on demand by the chairman, such chairman or vice-chairman shall, on conviction, be punished with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such offence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 314A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whoever undertakes a trip to any foreign country in violation of section 12-BB shall be punished with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 315--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any municipal officer or servant knowingly acquires, directly or indirectly, by himself or by a partner or employer or servant, any personal share or interest in any contract or employment with, by, or on behalf of the municipal council he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code: Provided that no person shall, by reason of being a shareholder in, or member of, any company, be held to be interested in any contract entered into between such company and the council, unless he is a director of such company: Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to a teacher employed by a municipal council who, with the sanction of the State Government, enters into a contract with the municipal council with regard to the utilization for the purpose of a school of any land or building owned by him or in which he has a share or interest.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 316--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every owner or person in charge of any vehicle or animal liable to tax under section 98 who omits to obtain a licence shall on conviction be punished with fine not exceeding fifty rupees and shall also pay the amount of the tax payable by him in respect of such vehicle or animal. (2) On payment of such fine and tax and of such costs as may be awarded, such owner or person shall receive a licence for the vehicle or animal in respect of which he has been fined and for the period during which he has been found to be in default. (3) The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who, having compounded for the payment of a certain sum under section 101, fails to pay such sum, and the amount due for a licence shall in such case be taken as the amount so compounded for.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 317--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the construction or re-construction of any building or well- (a) is commenced without permission of the executive authority, or (b) is carried on or complete otherwise than in accordance with the particulars on which such permission was based, or (c) is carried on or completed in contravention of any lawful order or in breach of any provision contained in this Act or in any rule or by-law made hereunder or of any direction or requisition lawfully given or made, or if any alterations or additions required by any notice issued under section 205 or section 215 are not duly made, or if any person to whom a direction is given by the executive authority to alter or demolish a building or well under section 216 fails to obey such direction, the owner of the building or well or the said person, as the case may be, shall be liable on conviction to a fine which may extend in the case of a building to five hundred rupees and in the case of a well or hut to fifty rupees, and to a further fine which may extend in the case of a building to one hundred rupees, and in the case of a well or hut to ten rupees, for each day during which the offence is proved to have continued after the first day.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 318--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) In the absence of a written contract to the contrary, every scavenger employed by the municipal council shall be entitled to one month's notice before discharge or to one month's wages in lieu thereof, unless he is discharged for misconduct or was engaged for a specified term and discharged at the end of it. (2) Penalty for withdrawal of scavengers without notice:- Should any scavenger employed by the council, in the absence of a written contract authorizing him so to do, and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himself from his duties without giving one month's notice to the council, or neglect or refuse to perform his duties, or any of them he shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees or to imprisonment of either description which may extend of two months. (3) Application of sub-sections (1) and (2) to other municipal servants:- The State Government may, by notification, direct that, on and from a date to be specified in the notification, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) with respect to scavengers shall apply also to any specified class of municipal servants whose functions intimately concern the public health or safety.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 319--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every person who prevents the executive authority or any person to whom the executive authority has lawfully delegated his powers of entering into or on any land or building, from exercising his lawful power of entering thereinto or thereon shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 341 of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 320--> State(s): 							Tamil Nadu If any person who is required by the provisions of this Act or by any notice or other proceedings issued under this Act to furnish any information (a) omits to furnish it, or (b) knowingly or negligently furnishes false information such person shall be liable to a fine not exceeding Rs.100.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 321--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every licence and permission granted under this Act or any rule or by-law made under this Act shall specify the period, if any, for which the restrictions, limitations and conditions, subject to which the same is granted, and shall be signed by the executive authority. (2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in or may be prescribed under this Act, or every such licence or permission, fees may be charged on such rates and at such rates as may be fixed by the municipal council (3) The council may (a) place the collection of such fees under the management of such persons as may appear to it proper; or (b) farm out such collection for any period not exceeding three years at a time and on such terms and conditions as it may think fit. (3-A) Every order of municipal authority granting or refusing a licence or permission shall be published on the notice board of the municipal council. (4) Every order of a municipal authority refusing, suspending, cancelling or modifying a licence or permission shall be in writing and shall state the grounds on which it proceeds. (5) Subject to the special provisions in Chapters X and XII regarding buildings and private markets, and subject to such sanction as may be required for the refusal of a licence or permission, any licence or permission granted under this Act or any rule or by - law made under it may at anytime be suspended or revoked by the executive authority if any of its restrictions, limitations or conditions is evaded or infringed by the grantee, or if the grantee is convicted of a breach of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, by-law or regulation made under it any licence or permission granted under this Act or any rule or by-law or regulation made under it in any matter to which such licence or permission relates, or if the grantee has obtained the same by misrepresentation of fraud. (6) If shall be the duty of the executive authority to inspect places in respect to which a licence or permission is required by or under this Act, and he may enter any such place between sunrise and sunset and also between sunset and sunrise if it is open to the public or any industry is being carried on in it at the time; and if he has reason to believe that anything is being done in any place without notice enter such place for satisfying himself whether any provision of said rule by-laws on regulations any condition of a licence or permission or any lawful direction or prohibition is being contravened and no claim shall lie against any person for any damage or inconvenience necessarily caused by the exercise of powers under this sub-section, by the executive authority or any person to whom he has lawfully delegated his powers, or by any force necessary for effecting an entrance under this sub-section. (7) When any licence or permission is suspended or revoked, or when the period for which it was granted, or within which application for renewal should be made has expired, whichever expires later the grantee shall, for all purposes, of this Act or any rule or by-law made under this Act be deemed to be without a licence or permission until the order suspending or revoking the licence or permission is cancelled or, subject to sub-section (11), until the licence or permission is renewed, as the case may be. (8) Every grantee of any licence or permission shall at all reasonable times, while such licence or permission remains in force, produce the same at the request of the executive authority. (9) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence in respect of the failure to obtain a licence or permission or to make a registration required by the provisions of this Act or any rule or by-law made under this Act, the magistrate shall in addition to any fine which may be imposed, recover summarily and pay over to the municipal council the amount of the fee chargeable for the licence or permission or for registration; and may in this discretion also recover summarily and pay over to the council such amount, if any, as he may fix as the costs of the prosecution. (9-A) Save as otherwise expressly provided in or may be prescribed under this Act every application for a licence or permission or for registration or the renewal of a licence or permission or registration, shall be made not less than thirty and not more than ninety days before the commencement of the year or such less period as mentioned in the application (10) Such recovery of the fee under sub-section (9) shall not entitle the person convicted to a licence or permission or to registration as aforesaid. (11) The acceptance by the municipal council of the prepayment of the fee for a licence or permission or for registration shall not entitle the person making such pre-payment to the licence or permission or to registration, as the case may be, but only to refund of that fee in case of refusal of the licence or permission or of registration; but an applicant for the renewal of a licence or permission shall until communication of orders on his application be entitled to act as if the licence or permission or registration has been renewed; and save as otherwise specially provided in this Act, if the orders on an application for licence or permission or for registration are not received by the applicant within sixty days after the receipt of the application by the executive authority the application shall be deemed to have been allowed for the year or for such less period as is mentioned in application, and subject to the law, rules, by-laws, regulations and all conditions ordinarily imposed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 322--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) An appeal shall He to the council from - (a) any notice issued or other action taken or proposed to be taken by the executive authority. (i) under sections 131, 139, 146, 147, 148, 150, 205 sub-section (1) and sub-section (3) of 216, sub-section (3) of 218, sub-section (1) of 219, sub-section (1) of 224, sub-section (1) of 226, 236, 246 or 247 (ii) under any by-law concerning house drainage and the connection of house drains with municipal drains or house connections with municipal water supply or lighting mains; or (b) any refusal by the executive authority to approve a building site under section 200; or (c) any order of the executive authority granting or refusing a licence or permission (d) any order of the executive authority made under section 321, sub-section (5), suspending or revoking a licence; or (e) any other order of the executive authority that may be made appealable by rules under section 303. (2) The decision of the council on any such appeal shall be final.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 323--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any case in which no time is prescribed by the foregoing provisions of this Act for the presentation of an appeal allowed thereunder, such appeal subject to the provisions of section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, must be presented- (a) where the appeal is against an order granting a licence or permission, within thirty days after the date of the publication of the order on the notice board of the municipal council, and (b) in other cases, within thirty days after the date of the receipt of the order or proceeding against which the appeal is made.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 324--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All persons authorized by rule to conduct enquiries relating to elections and all inspecting or superintending officers holding any enquiries into matters falling within the scope of their duties shall have for the purposes of such enquiries the same powers in regard to the issue of summonses for the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents as are conferred upon revenue officers by the Tamil Nadu Revenue Summonses Act, 1869, and the provisions of sections 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the Act shall apply to summonses issued and to persons summoned by virtue of the powers conferred by this section; and all persons to whom summonses are issued, by virtue of the said powers shall be bound to obey such summonses.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 325--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may summon any person to attend before him and to give evidence or produce documents, as the case may be, in respect of any question relating to taxation, or inspection, or registration, or to the grant of any licence or permission under the provisions of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 326--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All notices and permissions given, issued, or granted, as the case may be, under the provisions of this Act must be in writing.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 327--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every licence, permission, notice, bill, schedule summons or other document which is required by this Act or by any rule, by-law or regulation made under it to bear the signature of the chairman or executive authority or of any municipal officer shall be deemed to be properly signed if it bears a facsimile of the signature of the chairman or executive authority or of such municipal officer, as the case may be, stamped thereon. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to apply to a cheque drawn upon the municipal fund or to any deed of contract entered into by the municipal council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 328--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Save as otherwise provided, every notification under this Act other than one issued by the State Government shall be published in the official gazette of the district in which the municipality is situated both in English and in a vernacular language of the district: Provided that the State Government shall have power to direct that any such notification- (i) shall be published in the said gazette either in English or in a vernacular language of the district; or (ii) shall, instead of being published in the said gazette, be published in any other manner specified by them.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 329--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every by-law, notice or other document directed to be published under this Act shall, unless a different method be prescribed by this Act, or by the council, be written in or translated into, the vernacular of the district and deposited at the municipal office, and a copy shall be pasted up in a conspicuous position at such office and such other places as the council may direct. And a public proclamation shall be made throughout the municipality by beat of drum that such copy has been so pasted up and that the original is open to inspection at the municipal office.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 330--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever the municipal council shall have set apart any place for any purpose authorized by this Act or shall have prohibited the doing of anything in any place, the executive authority shall forthwith cause to be put up a notice in English and in a vernacular language of the district at or near such place. Such notice shall specify the purpose for which such place has been set apart or the act prohibited in such place.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 331--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any notice or other document is required by this Act, or by any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it, to be served on, or sent to any person, the service or sending thereof may be effected- (a) by giving or tendering the said document to such person; or (b) if such person is not found, by leaving such document at his last known place of abode or business or by giving or tendering the same to some adult member or, servant of his family; or (c) if such person does not reside in the municipality and his address elsewhere is known to the executive authority by sending the same to him by post registered; or (d) if none of the means aforesaid be available, by affixing the same on some conspicuous part of such place of abode or business. (2) When the person is an owner or occupier of any building or land, it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupier in the document, and in the case of joint owners and occupiers it shall be sufficient to serve it on, or send it to, one of such owners or occupiers. (3) Whenever in any bill, notice, form or other document served or sent under this Act a period is fixed within which any tax or other sum is to be paid or any work executed, or anything provided, such period shall, in the absence from this Act of any distinct provision to the contrary, be calculated from the date of such service or sending.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 332--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the occupier of any building or land makes on behalf of the owner thereof any payment for which under this Act, the owner, but not the occupier, is liable, such occupier shall be entitled to recover the same from the owner and may deduct the same from the rent then or thereafter due by him to the owner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 333--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the occupier of any building or land prevents the owner from carrying into effect in respect thereof any of the provision of this Act, the executive authority may by an order require the said occupier to permit the owner, within eight days from the date of service of such order, to execute all such works as may be necessary. (2) Such owner shall, for the period during which he is prevented as aforesaid, be exempt from any fine or penalty to which he might otherwise have become liable by reason of default in executing such works.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 334--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If the owner of any building or land fails to execute any work which he is required to execute under the provisions of this Act, or of any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it, the occupier of such building or land may, with the approval of the executive authority, execute the said work, and shall be entitled to recover from the owner the reasonable expenses incurred in the execution thereof, from the rent, then or thereafter due by him to the owner.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 335--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority or any person authorized by him in this behalf may enter into or on any building or land with or without assistants or workmen in order to make any inquiry, inspection, test, examination, survey, measurement or valuation or for the purpose of lawfully placing or removing pipes or meters, or to execute any other work which is authorized by the provisions of this Act or of any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it, or which it is necessary for any of the purposes of this Act or in pursuance of any of the said provisions to, make or execute: Provided that- (a) except when it is in this Act otherwise expressly provided, no such entry shall be made between sunset and sunrise; (b) except when it is in this Act otherwise expressly provided, no dwelling house and no part of a public building used as a dwelling place, shall be so entered without the consent of the occupier thereof, unless the said occupier has received at least six hours' previous notice of the intention to make such entry; (c) sufficient notice shall be given in every case even when any premises may otherwise be entered without notice, to enable the inmates of any apartment appropriated to women to move to some part of the premises where their privacy may be preserved; (d) due regard shall be paid, so far as may be compatible with the exigencies of the purpose of the entry, to the social and religious usages of the occupants of the premises.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 336--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority or any person authorized by him in this behalf may with or without assistants or workmen enter on any land adjoining or within fifty yards of any work authorized by this Act or by any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it, for the purpose of depositing on such land any soil, gravel, stone, or other materials, or of obtaining access to such work, or for any other purpose connected with the carrying on thereof. (2) The executive authority or person authorized by him as aforesaid, shall, before entering on any land, under sub-section (1), give the owner or occupier three days previous notice of the intention to make such entry, and state the purpose thereof, and shall, if so required by the owner or occupier fence off so much of the land as may be required for such purpose. (3) The executive authority shall not be bound to make any payment, tender or deposit before entering on any land under sub-section (1), but as little damage as may be shall be done and the executive authority shall pay compensation to the owner or occupier of the land for such entry and for any temporary or permanent damage that may result therefrom. (4) If such owner or. occupier is dissatisfied with the amount of compensation paid to him by the executive authority he may appeal to the council.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 337--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority or any person authorized by him in this behalf may examine and test weights and measures used in markets and shops in the municipality with a view to the prevention and punishment of offences relating to such weights and measures under Chapter XIII of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 338--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If, under this Act, or any rule, by-law or regulation made under it, the licence or permission of the council or executive authority or registration in the municipal office is necessary for the doing of any act, and if such act is done without such licence or permission or registration, or in a manner inconsistent with the terms of any such licence or permission, then (a) the executive authority may by notice require the persons so doing such act to alter, remove, or as far as practicable, restore to its original state the whole or any part of any property, movable or immovable, public or private, affected thereby within a time to be specified in the notice and further. (b) if no penalty has been specially provided in this Act for so doing such act, the person so doing it shall be liable on conviction before a magistrate to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees for every such offence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 339--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever by any notice, requisition, or order under this Act, or under any rule, by-law or regulation made under it, any person is required to execute any work or to take any measures or do anything, a reasonable time shall be named in such notice, requisition or order within which the work shall be executed, the measures taken, or the thing done. (2) If such notice, requisition, or order is not complied with within the time so named the. executive authority may cause such work to be executed or may take any measures or do anything which may, in his opinion, be necessary for giving due effect to the notice, requisition or order as aforesaid; and further. (3) if no penalty has been specially provided in this Act for failure to comply with such notice, the said person shall be liable on conviction before a magistrate to a fine not exceeding fifty rupees for every such offence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 340--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The executive authority may, subject to the provisions of section 139, recover any reasonable expenses incurred under section 339 from the person or any one of the persons to whom the notice, requisition or order was addressed, and may, in executing work or taking measures under section 339, utilize any materials found on the property concerned or may sell them and apply the sale-proceeds in or towards the payment of the expenses incurred. (2) If the person to whom notice is given is the owner of the property in respect of which it is given, the executive authority may (whether any action or other proceeding has been brought or taken against such owner or not) require the person, if any, who occupies such property, or any part thereof, under the owner, to pay to the municipal council instead of to the owner, the rent payable by him in respect of such property, as it falls due, up to the amount recoverable from the owner under sub-section (1) or to such smaller as the amount executive authority may think proper; and any amount so paid shall be deducted from the amount payable by the owner. (3) For the purpose of deciding whether action should be taken under sub-section (2), the executive authority may require any occupier of property to furnish information as to the sum paid by him as rent on account of such property and as to the name and address of the person to whom it is payable; and such occupier shall be bound to furnish such information. (4) The provisions of this section shall not affect any contract made between any owner and occupier respecting the payment of any such expenses.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 341--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any person by reason of his receiving the rent of immovable property as agent, trustee, guardian, manager or receiver or of his being agent, trustee, guardian, manager or receiver for the person who would receive the rent if the property were let to a tenant; would, under this Act, be bound to discharge any obligation imposed by this Act, or any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it on the proprietor of the property and for the discharge of which money is required; he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has, or, but for his own improper act or default, might have had, in his hand funds belonging to the proprietor sufficient for the purpose. (2) The burden of proving the facts entitling a person to relief under this section shall lie on him. (3) When any person has claimed and established his right to relief under this section, the executive authority may give him notice to apply to the discharge of such obligation as aforesaid the first moneys which shall come to his hands on behalf or for the use of the proprietor; and should he fail to comply with such notice he shall be deemed to be personally liable to discharge such obligation.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 342--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Instead of recovering any such expenses as aforesaid in the manner provided under section 344, the executive authority may, if he thinks fit, take an agreement from the person liable for the payment thereof, to pay the same in instalments of such amounts and at such intervals as will secure the payment of the whole amount due, with interest thereon at the rate of nine per centum per annum, within a period of not more than five years.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 343--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any case not otherwise expressly provided for in this Act, the executive authority may, with the approval of the council, pay compensation to any person who sustains damage by reason of the exercise by any municipal authority, officer or servant of any of the powers vested in them by this Act or any other law, or, by any rule, by-law or regulation made under it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 344--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All costs, damages, penalties, compensation, charges, fees (other than school fees), expenses, rents (not being rents for lands and buildings demised by the municipal council), contributions and other sums which under this Act or any other law or rules or by-laws made thereunder, or under any contract, in respect of water-supply of drainage made in accordance with this Act, the rules or by-laws are due by any persons to the council, may, if there is no special provision in this Act for their recovery be demanded by bill as provided in the rules in Schedule IV and recovered in the manner provided therein.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 345--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No distraint shall be made, no suit shall be instituted and no prosecution shall be commenced in respect of any sum due to the municipal council under this Act after the expiration of a period of three years from the date on which distraint might first have been made, a suit might first have been instituted, or prosecution might first have been commenced, as the case may be, in respect of such sum.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 346--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any property, movable or immovable, is sold under the provisions of this Act and if there is a surplus after the sum due to the municipal council and the costs have been deducted from the sale-proceeds, such surplus shall, if the owner of the property sold claims it within six months from the date of the sale, be paid to him by the executive authority, but if no such claim is preferred within such time, the said surplus shall be credited to the municipal fund, and no suit shall lie for the recovery of any sum so credited.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 347--> State(s): 							Tamil Nadu Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no Court shall take cognizance of any offence against the provisions of this Act, or of any rule, or by-law made under it unless complaint is made by the police, or the executive authority or by a person expressly authorised in this behalf by the council or the executive authority within three months of the commission of the offence. 							But nothing herein shall affect the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 in regard to the power of certain magistrates to take cognizance of offences upon information received or upon their own knowledge or suspicion : Provided that failure to take out a licence, obtain permission or secure registration under this Act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed continuing offence until the expiration of the period, if any, for which the licence, permission or registration is required and if no period is specified, complaint may be made at any time within twelve months from the commencement of the offence.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 348--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) In case any fine or costs imposed or assessed by a magistrate under this Act or under any rule or by-law made under it, shall not be paid, the magistrate may order the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment subject to all the restrictions, limitations and conditions imposed in sections 64 to 70 (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code. (2) Any fine, costs, tax or other sum imposed or assessed by a magistrate under this Act or under any rule or by-law made under it shall be recoverable by such magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure. See now the Criminal Procedure Code II of 1974, as if it were a fine and the same shall except in the case of a fine on recovery be paid to the municipal council to be applied to the pruposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 349--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If, on account of any act or omission, any person has been convicted of an offence against the provisions of this Act or against any rule or by-law made under it and by reason of such act or omission damage has been caused to any property owned by or vesting in the municipal council, the said person shall pay compensation for such damage, notwithstanding any punishment to which he may have been sentenced for the said offence. In the event of dispute, the amount of compensation payable by the said person shall be determined by the Court before whom he was convicted of the said offence on application made to him for the purpose by the executive authority not later than three months from the date of conviction; and in default of payment of the amount of compensation so determined, it shall be recovered under the warrant from the said Court as if it were a fine inflicted by him on the person liable therefor.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 350--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No suit for damages or compensation shall be instituted against the municipal council, any municipal authority, officer or servant, or any person acting under the direction of the same, in respect of any act done in pursuance or execution or intended execution of this Act or any rule, by-law, regulation or order made under it or in respect of any alleged neglect or default in execution of this Act, or any rule, by-law, regulation, or order made under it until expiration of one month after a notice has been delivered or left at the municipal office or at the place of abode of such officer, servant or person, stating the cause of action, the relief sought, and the name and the place of abode of the intending plaintiff; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left. (2) Every such suit shall be commenced within six months after the date on which the cause of action arose or in case of a continuing injury or damage during such continuance or within six months after the ceasing thereof. (3) If any person to whom any notice is given under sub-section (1) tenders amends to the plaintiff before the suit is instituted and if the plaintiff does not recover in any such action more than the amount so tendered he shall not recover any costs incurred after such tender by the person to whom such notice has been given, and the defendant shall be entitled to costs as from the date of tender. (4) Where the defendant in any such suit is the chairman, the executive authority or a municipal officer or servant, payment of the sum, or any part of any sum, payable by him in, or in consequence of, the suit whether in respect of costs, charges, expenses, compensation for damages or otherwise may be made, with the sanction of the council, from the municipal fund.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 351--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive authority may- (a) take, or withdraw from, proceedings, against any person who commits (i) any offence against this Act, the rules, by-laws or regulations; (ii) any offence which affects or is likely to affect any property or interest of the municipal council or the due administration of this Act; (iii) any nuisance whatsover; (b) compound any offence against this Act, the rules, by-laws, or regulations which may by rules made by the State Government be declared compoundable; (c) with the approval of the council take, withdraw from or compromise proceedings for the recovery of expenses or compensation claimed to be due to the municipal council; (d) with the approval of the council withdraw or compromise any claim against any person in respect of a penalty payable under a contract entered into with such person by the executive authority (e) with the approval of the council, defend any suit or other legal proceeding brought against the municipal council or against any municipal authority, officer or servant, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done in its or his official capacity; (f) with the approval of the council, compromise any claim, suit or legal proceeding brought against the council or against any municipal authority officer or servant, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done as aforesaid; (g) with the approval of the council, institute and prosecute any suit for withdrawal from or compromise any suit or claim, which has been instituted or made in the name of the municipal council or of the executive authority; (h) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he may from time to time think it necessary or expedient to obtain, or as he may be desired by the council to obtain, for any of the purposes mentioned in the foregoing clauses of this section or for securing the lawful exercise or discharge of any power or duty vesting in or imposed upon any municipal authority or municipal officer or servant
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 351B--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or in any other law for the time being in force, no Court shall grant any permanent or temporary injunction or make any interim order restraining any proceeding which is being or about to be taken under this Act for the preparation or publication of electoral rolls or for the conduct of any election.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 352--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit shall be maintainable against the State Government the District Collector, the Revenue Divisional Officer or any Municipal Chairman, executive authority, officer or servant or any person acting under direction of any municipal chairman, executive authority, officer or of a magistrate, in respect of anything in good faith done under this Act or any rule, by-law, regulation or order made there it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 353--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The chairman, every councillor, and the executive authority shall be liable for the loss, waste or misapplication of any money or other property owned by or vested in the municipal council, if such loss, waste or misapplication is a direct consequence of his neglect or misconduct and a suit for compensation may be instituted against him by the council with the previous sanction of the State Government or by the State Government. (2) Every such suit shall be commenced within three years after the date on which the cause of action arose.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 353A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When the chairman, any councillor or the executive authority is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction of the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 354--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No assessment or demand made and no charge imposed, under the authority of this Act shall be impeached or affected by reason of any clerical error or by reason of any mistake (a) in respect of the name, residence place of business or occupation of any person, or (b) in the description of any property or thing, or (c) in respect of the amount assessed, demanded or charged: provided that the provisions of this Act have been in substance and effect, complied with. And no proceedings under this Act shall merely for defect in form, be quashed or set aside by any Court of Justice. (2) No suit shall be brought in any Court to recover any sum of money collected under the authority of this Act or to recover damages on account of any assessment, or collection of money made under the said authority: Provided that the provisions of this Act have been, in effect, complied with. (3) No distraint or sale under this Act shall be deemed unlawful nor shall any person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any error, defect or want of form in the bill, notice, schedule, form, summons, notice of demand, warrant of distraint, inventory, or other proceeding relating thereto if the provisions of this Act, the rules and by-laws have in substance and effect been complied with: Provided that every person aggrieved by any irregularity may recover compensation for any special damage sustained by him.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 355--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) It shall be the duty of every police officer- (a) to communicate without delay to the proper municipal officer any information which he receives of the design to commit or of the commission of any offence under this Act, or any rule, by-law or regulation made under it, and (b) to assist the chairman, the executive authority or any municipal officer or servant reasonably demanding his aid for the lawful exercise of any power vesting in the chairman or the executive authority or in such municipal officer or servant under this Act, or any such rule, by-law or regulation. (c) Omitted (2) Any police officer who omits or refuses to perform any duty imposed on him by this Act, shall be deemed to have committed and offence under section 10 or under section 44 of the Madras District Police Act, 1859.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 356--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any police officer sees any person committing an offence against any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or by-law made under it, he shall, if the name and address of such person are unknown to him, and if the said person on demand declines to give his name and address, or gives a name and, address which such officer has reason to believe to be false, arrest such person. (2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody- (a) after his true name and address are ascertained, or (b) without the order of a magistrate for any longer time, not exceeding twenty four hours from the hour of arrest, than is necessary for bringing him before a magistrate.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 357--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may empower any municipal servant or any class of municipal servants to exercise the powers of police officer for the purposes of this Act and of the Tamil Nadu Towns Nuisances Act, 1889.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 358--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every municipal officer or servant, every contractor or agent for the collection of any municipal tax, fee or other sum due to the municipal council and every person employed by any such contractor or agent for the collection of such tax. fee or sum shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 359--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall obstruct or molest the council, the chairman, any councillor, the executive authority, or any person employed by the municipal council or any person with whom a contract has been entered into on behalf of the council in performance of their duty or of any thing which they are empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of this Act or of any by-law, rule, regulation or order made under it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 360--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall remove any mark set up for the purpose of indicating any level of direction incidental to the execution of any work authorized by this Act or by any by-law, rule or order made under it.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 361--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall, without authority in that behalf, remove, destroy, deface, or otherwise obliterate, any notice exhibited by, or under the orders of the council or the executive authority.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 362--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No person shall, without authority in that behalf, remove earth, sand or other material or deposit any matter or make any encroachment from, in or on any land vested in the municipal council, or river, estuary, canal, backwater or water-course (not being private property) or in any way obstruct the same.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 363--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The State Government may by notification authorize any person to exercise any one or more of the powers vested in them by this Act, except the powers mentioned in Chapters II and III, the power to determine the amount of contribution under section 156, the power to make rules under sub-section (2) of section 77-A and sections 303 and 305 and the power to sanction prosecution under section 353-A and may in like manner withdraw such authority. (2) The exercise of any powers delegated under sub-section (1) shall be subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed or as may be specified in the notification and also to control and revision by the State Government or by such persons as may be empowered by them in this behalf. The State Government shall also have power to control and revise the acts or proceedings of any persons so empowered.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 364--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All property, all rights of whatever kinds used, enjoyed or possessed by and all interests of whatever kind owned by, or vested in or held in trust, by, or for. a municipal council, as constituted under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884, as well as all liabilities legally subsisting against the said council shall pass to the council as constituted under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 365--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Act shall come into force on such date as the State Government may by notification direct: Provided that the power to make or approve rules, by-laws and regulations may be exercised at any time after the publication of the assent of the Governor-General under section 81 of the Government of India Act, 1915, and that any election or appointment of chairman, or councillors under this Act, or under the rules made under this Act, may be held or made at any time after such publication, but no such election or appointment shall take effect until the commencement of the Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 366--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In their application to the term of office and the election and appointment of councillors and the chairman elected or appointed for the first time after the commencement of this Act, the provisions of this Act shall be read subject to the following modifications:- (a) The term of office of the chairman and of the councillors holding office under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884, shall expire on such date or dates alter the commencement of this Act as the State Government shall determine and the State Government shall make appointments and cause arrangements for election to be made under this Act so that the newly elected and appointed councillors may come into office on the date fixed for the retirement of the former councillors and the chairman elected or appointed under this Act on the date fixed for the retirement of the chairman elected or appointed or ex-officio under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884 and until they so come into office the chairman and the councillors appointed or elected or ex-officio under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884, shall have all the powers and be subject to all the duties respectively of the chairman and councillors under this Act; and (b) on or as soon as may be after the constitution of the council under this Act, a meeting shall be held on a day and at a time fixed by the chairman, and if not held on that date shall be held on some subsequent day fixed by the chairman- (i) for ascertainment by lot (or if the State Government so direct otherwise than by lot) of one-third the number of elective seats to be vacated at noon on the first day of November, 1921 and of one-third more such seats to be vacated at noon on the first day of November, 1921 and of one-third more such seats to be vacated at noon on the first day of November, 1922 and the councillors elected for the total number of seats so ascertained or the councillors elected in their places in casual vacancies shall hold office until the first day of November, 1921 or the first day of November, 1922 as the case may be and the remaining elected councillors shall continue in office until the first day of November, 1923; and (ii) for the election of a chairman by those councils on whom this privilege has been conferred by the State Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 367--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All arrears of taxes or other payments by way of composition for a tax or due for expenses or compensation or otherwise due to a municipal council at the time this Act comes into force may be recovered as though they had accrued under this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 368--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, when a municipality is constituted for the first time, the State Government may appoint a special officer to exercise the powers, discharge the duties and perform the functions of the municipal council and its chairman and executive authority. (2) The special officer shall cause arrangements for election to be made so that the newly elected councillors may come into office on a day within six months from the date of publication of the notification under sub-section (3) of section 4 declaring the area to be a municipality. (3) The special officer shall exercise the powers, discharge the duties and perform the functions of the municipal council until the council has been constituted, of the chairman by the council and of the executive authority by the council or a commissioner has been appointed, as the case may be. (4) [Omitted by Tamil Nadu Act XXIII of 1978]. (5) The term of office of the councillors or of the councillors elected in their places at casual, vacancies shall be five years beginning and expiring at noon on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint in that behalf and different dates may be appointed for different municipal councils: (6) The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (5) shall apply save as otherwise provided in this Act and, so far as may be, to all cases of reconstitution of municipal councils, and to all cases where ordinary vacancies in the office of councillors have not been filled. (7) Where the number of seats on a municipal council is increased by or in consequence of a notification under sub-section (1) of section 7, the councillors elected for the additional seats or the councillors elected in their places at casual vacancies shall hold office until the date on which the councillors elected to the original seats at the ordinary elections immediately preceding will vacate office.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 369--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When a dispute exists between a council and one or more than one other local authority in regard to any matters arising under the provisions of this or any other Act and the State Government are of opinion that the local authorities concerned are unable to settle it, amicably among themselves, the State Government may take cognizance of the dispute, and (a) decide it themselves, or (b) refer it for inquiry and report to an arbitrator or a board of arbitrators, or to a joint committee constituted under section 26 for the purpose. (2) The report referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be submitted to the State Government who shall decide the dispute in such manner as they deem fit. (3) Any decision given, whether before or after this sub-section comes into force, under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2) may, at the instance of the local authorities concerned, be modified from time to time by the State Government in such manner as they deem fit, and any such decision with the modifications, if any, made therein under this sub-section may, at the instance of such local authorities, be cancelled at any time by the State Government. Any such decision or any modification therein or cancellation thereof shall be binding on each of the local authorities concerned and shall not be liable to be questioned in any Court of law. (4) The powers of the State Government under this section shall, where one of the local authorities concerned is a cantonment authority or the port authority of a major port only be exercisable with the concurrence of the Central Government.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 370--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any reference to the chairman contained in any enactment in force in the State of Tamil Nadu or in any notification, order, scheme, rule, form or by-law made under any such enactment and in force in the said State shall where such reference relates to the executive functions of the chairman be construed as a reference to the executive authority. (2) If any question arises as to whether any such reference relates to the executive functions of the chairman or not, the decision of the State Government shall be final. (3) Any reference to the town panchayat contained in any enactment in force in the State of Tamil Nadu or in any notification, order, scheme, rules, form or by-law made under any such enactment and in force in the said State shall be construed as a reference to the town panchayat constituted under this Act. Consequential provisions TN District Municipalities Amendment Act II of 1997. (3) Disposal of pending application-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Principal Act or the rules made thereunder, every application for grant of a licence for the construction or reconstruction of a building pending under section 217-C of the principal Act, before the executive authority of a hill station situated in a district in respect of which any power has been delegated to the Collector under section 217-P of the principal Act in the date of the publication of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1997 in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the Principal Act as amended by this Act.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 371--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994, the State Government may, by an order published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, as amended by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994 as appear to them to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as possible, after it is made, be placed on the table of the Legislative Assembly and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, the Assembly makes any modification in any such order or the Assembly decides that the order should not be issued, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any, such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 372--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Mettur Township Act, 1940 (Tamil Nadu Act XI of 1940) the Courtallam Township Act, 1954 (Tamil Nadu Act XVI of 1954) and the Bhavanisagar Township Act, 1954 (Tamil Nadu Act XXV of 1954) are hereby repealed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 373--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the State Government may, by notification, direct that the local area constituting any township shall from such date as may be specified therein (hereinafter referred to as the specified date), be a municipal area of a panchayat town and in respect thereof on and from such specified date, the following consequences shall ensue, namely:- (a) the township committee of such area shall cease to exist or to function; (b) there shall be constituted for the municipal area a municipality, or, as the case may be, for the panchayat area, town panchayat under the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994; (c) the unexpended balance of the fund and the property (including arrears of rates, taxes and fees) belonging to the township committee and all rights and powers which, prior to such notification, vested in the township committee shall, subject to all charges and liabilities affecting the same vest in the fund constituted for the municipality, or as the case may be, the town panchayat; (d) any appointment, notification, notice, tax, order, scheme, licence, permission, rule, by-law, or form made, issued, imposed or granted under any law governing such township before the specified date in respect of such local area shall continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued, imposed or granted in respect of the municipal area or town panchayat area until it is superseded or modified by any appointment, notification, notice, tax, order, scheme, licence, by-law, or form made, issued, imposed or granted under this Act; (e) all budget estimates, assessments, assessment lists, valuation or measurements made, or authenticated under any law governing such townships immediately before the specified date in respect of such local area shall be deemed to have been made or authenticated, under this Act; (f) all debts and obligations incurred and all contracts made by or on behalf of the township committee before the specified date and subsisting on the specified date shall be deemed to have been incurred and made by the municipality, or as the case may be, the town panchayat, in exercise of the powers conferred on it by this Act; (g) all officers and servants in the employment of the township committee immediately before the specified date shall be officers and servants of the municipality, or as the case may be, the town panchayat, under this Act, and shall until other provision is made in accordance with the provisions of this Act, receive salaries and allowances and subject to the conditions of service to which they were entitled or subject immediately before such date: Provided that it shall be competent to the municipality or town panchayat subject to the previous sanction of the State Government to discontinue the services of any officer or servant who, in its opinion, is not necessary or suitable to the requirements of the municipality or town panchayat service after giving such officer or servant such notice as is required to be given by the terms of his employment and every officer or servant whose services are discontinued, shall be entitled to such leave, pension, provident fund and gratuity as he would have been entitled to take or receive on being invalidated out of service as if the township committee in the employment of which he was, had not ceased to exist; (h) all proceedings pending immediately before the specified date before the township committee shall be deemed to be transferred to and be continued before the municipality or town panchayat; (i) all appeals pending immediately before the specified date before the township committee shall, so far as may be practicable, be disposed of as if such local area had been included in the municipality or town panchayat when they were filed : (j) all prosecutions instituted by or on behalf of the township committee and all suits or other legal proceedings instituted by or against such township committee or any officer of such township committee pending immediately before the specified date shall be continued by or against the municipality or town panchayat as if such local area had been included in the municipal area or panchayat town when such prosecutions, suits or proceedings were instituted.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 374--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the State Government may, by notification and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified therein, entrust to the municipality, town panchayat, the wards committee or any other committee constituted under this Act with such powers and responsibilities with respect to the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice and also with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matter listed in Schedule X.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 375--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in any other law for the time being in force the State Government may, by notification, if necessary, appoint special officers to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the municipalities or the town panchayats, as the case may be, until the day on which the first meetings of the municipal councils are held after ordinary elections to the municipalities and the town panchayats after the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994. (2) The Special Officers appointed under sub-section (1) in respect of Courtallam and Bhavanisagar Municipalities and holding office as such immediately before the 13th day of August, 1997 shall be deemed to have been appointed as Special Officers under sub-section (1) with effect on and from the 13th day of August, 1997 in respect of Courtallam and Bhavanisagar Town Panchayats and such Special Officers shall continue to hold office upto the 30th day of June, 1998 or for such shorter period as the State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section 376--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding the repeal of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1958 (Tamil Nadu XXXV of 1958) (hereafter in this section referred to as the 1958 Act), by the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994), on and from the 22nd day of April, 1994, the provisions of the 1958 Act in so far as they relate to town panchayats, shall be deemed never to have been repealed and to have been continued to be in force upto and inclusive of the date of the commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994, and the Special Officers appointed in respect of town panchayats under section 3 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayats and Panchayat Union Councils (Appointment of Special Officers) Act, 1991 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1991), shall be deemed to have exercised the powers and performed the functions conferred under the said section 3, for the period commencing on the 22nd day of April, 1994 and ending with the date of the commencement of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994, as if, in respect of town panchayats, the 1958 Act and this section had been in force at all material times, when such powers were exercised and functions were performed.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu ENACTMENTS REPEALED Year Number Short title Extent of repeal (1) (2) (3) (4) 1884 IV The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884 The whole. 1897 III The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1897. Do. 1899 I The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1899. Do. 1907 II The Tamil Nadu Hill Municipalities Act, 1907. Do. 1909 V The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1909. Do. 1913 III The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities and Local Boards (Amendment) Act, 1913. Sections 2, 3 and 4. 1914 VIII The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Decentralization Act, So much of the schedule as relates to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1884. 1916 IX The Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1916. The whole. These words were substituted for the word "Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969, as amended by the "Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws (Second Amendment) Order, 1969, which came into force on the 14th January 1969.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu LIST OF HILL STATIONS [See section 3 (10)] Udhagamandalam, the Nilgiri District Coonoor, the Nilgiri District Kodaikanal, 1 [Madurai District]2 These words were substituted for the words "Madura District" by section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act 1 of 55 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXVI of 1955). Now, Dindugal district.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu RULES REGARDING PROCEEDINGS OF THE COUNCIL (See section 25) MODE OF TRANSACTING BUSINESS 1. The Municipal Council shall provide an office and the Council shall meet therein for the transaction of business at least once in every month, upon such days and at such times as it may arrange and also at other times as often as a meeting shall be called by the Chairman: 1 [Provided that no meeting shall be held on a public holiday. Explanation. - The expression 'public holiday' includes Sunday and any other day declared by the 2 [State Government], by notification in the 3 [Official Gazette], to be a public holiday. 4 [2. (1) No meeting shall be held unless notice of the day and time when the meeting is to be held and of the business to be transacted thereat has been given at least three clear days before the day of the meeting. (2) In cases of urgency, the Chairman may convene a meeting on giving shorter notice than that specified in sub-rule (1).] 5 [(3) In Municipalities in which there is a commissioner, the agenda for the meeting shall be prepared by the commissioner in consultation with the Chairman. The commissioner may include in the agenda any subject which in his opinion should be considered by the Council and shall include therein any subject specified by the Chairman. On any subject included in the agenda, the Chairman as well as the commissioner shall have the right of recording his views in a note and such note shall be circulated to the Councillors or placed before the Council before or at the time of the consideration of such subject by the Council.] 6 [3. (1) The Chairman shall, on the requisition in writing of not less than one-third of the members then on the Council, convene a meeting of the Council, provided that the requisition specifies the day (not being a public holiday as defined in the Explanation to rule (1) when and the purpose for which the meeting is to be held. 7 [Only urgent matters of local importance relating to municipal administration which cannot wait till the next ordinary or urgent meeting shall be considered at special meetings and not more than one subject shall be considered at such meetings.] The requisition shall be delivered at the municipal office during office hours to the Chairman, secretary, manager or any other person who may then be in charge of the office at least ten clear days before the day of the meeting. (2) If the Chairman fails within forty-eight hours from the delivery of such requisition to call a meeting on the day specified therein, or within three days thereafter, the meeting may be called by the members who signed the requisition on giving the notice provided for in sub-rule (1) of rule 2 to the other members of the Council.] 4. All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public; provided that the presiding member may and at the request of the Council shall, in any particular case, for reasons to be recorded in the minute book kept under rule 9, direct that the public generally, or any particular person, shall withdraw. 5. All questions which may come before the Council at any meeting shall be decided by a majority of the members present and voting at the meeting and, in every case of equality of votes, the presiding member shall have 8 [and exercise] a second or casting vote. 6. No business shall be transacted at a meeting unless there be present at least six members or, if the number of members then on the Council exceeds sixteen, at least one-third of that number. 7. If within half an hour after the time appointed for a meeting, a quorum is not present, the meeting shall stand adjourned, unless all the members present agree to wait longer. 8. No resolution of the Council shall be modified or cancelled within three months after the passing thereof except at a meeting specially convened in that behalf and by a resolution of the Council supported by 9 [...] not less than one-half of the sanctioned number of members. 9. Minutes of the proceedings at each meeting of the Council shall be drawn up and entered in a book to be kept for that purpose; and shall be signed by the 10 [presiding member] or in his absence by some one of the members present thereat; and the said minutes shall, at all reasonable times and without charge, be open at the municipal office to the inspection of any person who pays any tax under this Act in the Municipality. 11 [10. Within three days of the date of the meeting, a copy of the minutes of the proceedings at such meeting in English and in the language of the district, shall be forwarded by the Chairman to the Collector of the district, and another copy to the 12 [Director of Municipal Administration] of Municipal Councils and Local Boards of the range in which the Municipality is situated. An authenticated copy of the said minutes shall also be affixed to the notice board of the municipal office and relevant extracts of the said minutes shall be sent to the heads of departments of the 13 [State] Government and to the superintending officers appointed under sub-section (1) of section 38 for information and necessary action. The Chairman shall also immediately submit to the said Collector any minute of dissent that may be forwarded to him within forty-eight hours of the meeting by any Councillor.] 11. The 14 [Executive Authority] shall have the custody of the proceedings and records of the Council and may grant copies of any such proceedings and records on payment of such fees as the Council may, by general or special order, determine. Copies shall be certified by the 15 [Executive Authority] as provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (Central Act I of 1872) and copies so certified may be used to prove the records of the Council in the same manner as they may, under sub-section (5) of section 78 of the said Act, be used to prove the proceedings of that body. 16 [11-A. The committees constituted by the Council under section 23 as well as the committees constituted under the proviso to section 68 (1) and under section 73 shall meet in the office provided by the Municipal Council under rule 1.] 12. The proceedings of every committee appointed by the Council shall be recorded in writing and submitted to the Council. 17 [13. ***] This proviso and the Explanation were added by section 148 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "Fort St. George Gazette" by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Rule 2 was substituted for the original rule by section 148 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This sub-rule was added by section 27 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Third Amendment) Act, 1942 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXVIII of 1942), re-enacted permanently with specified modification by section 3 of, and the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No.111) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act IX of 1948). Rule 3 was substituted for the original rule by section 148 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This sentence was inserted by G 0. Ms. No. 1461, R.D. and L.A., dated the 9th June 1966. These words were inserted by section 148 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words 'the votes' of were omitted by section 148 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "Chairman" or the member who presided at such meeting" by section 148 (v), Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule was substituted for rule 10 by Local Administration Department Notification No. 308, dated the 12th April 1943, published at page 164 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1943, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1). of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1). of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This rule was inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 775, dated the 16th October 1942, published at page 800 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 3rd November 1942, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. This rule was omitted by section 148 (vi) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu TAXATION AND FINANCE RULES PART I. - TAXATION RULES [See Section 124] DEFINITION OF TAX 1. In these rules 'tax' includes payment due by way of composition for a tax. 1 [PROVISIONS COMMON TO TAXES IN GENERAL] 2 [2. (1) The 3 [Executive Authority] shall prepare and keep assessment books in such form as may be prescribed showing the persons and property liable to taxation under this Act. (2) The assessment books and where detailed particulars relating to any assessment are kept in separate records, the portion thereof containing such particulars shall be open at all reasonable times and without charge to inspection by any person who pays any tax to the Municipality or his authorised agent and such person or agent shall be entitled to take extracts free of charge, from the said books and records. (3) The account books of the Council shall be open without charge to inspection by any person who pays any tax to the Municipality or his authorised agent on a day or days in each month be fixed by the Council.] 4 [3. The 5 [Executive Authority] shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, determine the tax to which each property or person is liable: Provided that in the case of taxes payable by the 6 [Executive Authority], the original assessment shall be made by the 7 [Regional Director of Municipal Administration]. 8 [4. (1) If at any time it appears to the 9 [Executive Authority] that any person or property has been inadequately assessed or inadvertently or improperly omitted from the assessment books relating to any tax, or that there is any clerical or arithmetical error in the said books, the 10 [Executive Authority] 11 [may] amend the said books in such manner as it deems just or necessary: Provided that no such 12 [amendment in the said books shall be made] where it involves an increase in the assessment, unless the person concerned shall have been afforded a reasonable opportunity to show cause to the 13 [Executive Authority] why the assessment books should not be amended as proposed. (2) Such amendment shall be deemed to have taken effect on the earliest date, either in the current half-year or in the two half-years immediately preceding it, on which the circumstances justifying the amendment existed.] 5. (1) The 14 [Executive Authority] shall give to every person making payment of a tax a receipt therefor signed by him or by some person duly authorised by him in that behalf. (2) Such receipt shall specify - (a) the date of the grant thereof; (b) the name of the person to whom it is granted (c) the tax in respect of which the payment has been made; (d) the period for which payment has been made; and (e) the amount paid. ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPERTY TAX 15 [6. The value of any land or building for purposes of the property tax shall be determined by the 16 [Executive Authority]: 17 [Provided that the value of any land or building, the tax for which is payable by the Executive Authority shall be determined by the Regional Director of Municipal Administration]. 18 [6-A. The Director of Municipal Administration may prescribe suitable guidelines for fixing the reasonable annual value of lands and buildings from time to time.] 19 [7. The 20 [Executive Authority] shall enter the annual or capital value of all lands and buildings determined by him and the tax payable thereon in assessment books to be kept for the purpose at the municipal office. Such books shall record the following particulars, in so far as they can be ascertained, with regard to each assessable item:- (a) the name of the owner; (b) the name of the occupier; (c) the designation, if any, of the item; (d) the name of the ward and street, if any, in which it is situated, and any survey or other number which it bears; (e) the annual or capital value, as the case may be; and (f) the amount of the tax payable.] 21 [8. (1) The assessment books shall be completely revised by the 22 [Executive Authority] once in every five years. 23 [(1-A) (a) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), the State Government may, for sufficient cause, from time to time, by order - (i) postpone the general revision of assessment of books, (ii) stay any proceedings relating to the general revision of assessment books, for a period of one or more half-years at a time but not exceeding in any case seven half-years: Provieded that such postponement or stay shall not affect any subsequent general revision of assessment books. (b) Where the stay is vacated or the period of stay expires, the State Government may direct that proceedings for the general revision of assessment books shall be either commenced de novo or continued from the stage at which such proceedings were stayed.] (2) The 24 [Executive Authority] may amend the assessment books at any time between one general revision and another by inserting therein or removing therefrom any property or by altering the valuation of any property or the amount of tax 25 [or subject to any rules which the 26 [State] Government may make in this behalf, by substituting therein for the name of the owner of any property, the name of any other person who has succeeded by transfer or otherwise to the ownership of the property.] Such amendment shall be deemed to have taken effect on the first day of the half-year in which it is made: Provided that when the amendment is made in any half-year after the demand notice for that half-year has been issued, it shall have effect only from the succeeding half-year 27 [except where the fair rent of a building together with land appurtenant to it has been determined by the 28 [Controller under the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and. Rent Control) Act, 194629 ]: 30 [Provided further that the decision of the Executive Authority in any disputed case of transfer of ownership of a property shall not give the transferee a legal title to the property.] 31 [9. When assessment books have been prepared for the first time and whenever a general revision of such books has been completed, the 32 [Executive Authority] shall give public notice stating that revision petitions will be considered if they reach the municipal office within a period of sixty days from the date of such notice in the case of the Government, a railway administration or a company, and of thirty days from the said date in other cases. The notice shall be affixed to the notice board of the municipal office and on the same day be published in the Municipality by beat of drum:] 33 [Provided that in every case where there is an enhancement in the assessment, the Executive Authority shall also cause intimation thereof to be given by a special notice to be served on the owner or occupier of the property concerned: Provided further that, in every case where a special notice is required to be served on the owner or occupier under the first proviso, the period of sixty days and thirty days referred to in this rule shall be calculated from the date of service of such special notice.] 34 [9-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where there is an enhancement in the assessment of property tax payable for the half-year commencing from the 1st October 1987 and the owner or occupier of the property concerned has been given a special notice about the enhancement of the property tax payable by such owner or occupier, the said special notice shall be treated as modified to the extent specified below, namely:- (i) In the case of buildings constructed after the 1st April 1982, but before the 1st October 1987, the enhancement of property tax shall not exceed fifty per centum of the property tax payable immediately before the 1st, October 1987. (ii) In the case of buildings used for residential purposes - (a) there shall be no enhancement of property tax for thatched buildings; (b) the enhancement of property tax shall not exceed one hundred per centum of the property tax payable immediately before the 1st October 1987, if such building is wholly or partly occupied by the owner; (c) the enhancement of the property tax shall not exceed two hundred per centum of the property tax payable immediately before the 1st October 1987, if such building is wholly let out. (iii) In the case of buildings used for non-residential purposes, the enhancement of property tax shall not exceed three hundred per centum of the property tax payable immediately before the 1st October 1987. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the revision petitions filed by the persons who have failed-to file revision petitions before the 29th October 1987 to reduce the tax in response to the special notices enhancing the property tax with effect on and from the 1st October 1987 during the period commencing from the 29th October 1987 and ending with the 31st March 1988, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been, validly filed within the period referred to in rule 9. (3) The Executive Authority shall dispose of the revision petitions to reduce the tax already filed and those deemed to have been filed in terms of sub-rule (2) subject to, and in accordance with, the provisions contained in sub-rule (1).] 35 [10. In every case in which between one general revision and another, the 36 [Executive Authority] assesses any property for the first time or increases the assessment on any property otherwise than in consequence of a general enhancement of the rate at which the property tax is leviable, the 37 [Executive Authority] shall intimate by a special notice to the owner or occupier of such property that a petition for revising the assessment will be considered if it reaches the municipal office within sixty days from the date of service of such notice in the case of the Government, a railway administration or a company, and within thirty days from the said date in other cases.] 38 [11. ***] 39 [12 No petition under rule 40 [9 or 10] or 11 shall be disposed of unless the petitioner has been given a reasonable opportunity to appear either in person or by authorised agent and to represent his case.] 13. Immediately after the disposal of a revision petition, the 41 [Executive Authority] shall inform the petitioner or his authorised agent, either orally or in writing, of the orders passed thereon, shall direct him to pay the amount fixed on revision within fifteen days 42 [after the date of receipt of such intimation], or if the amount is not yet due, within fifteen days from the date on which it becomes due, and shall, if necessary, cause the assessment books to be corrected. 43 [14. (1) On the establishment of a Municipality, assessments shall have effect from the date specified in the notification under section 80. 44 [(2) A special notice shall be served on the owner or occupier of a building in the Municipality during the period of the half year in which a general revision of property tax is to be given effect to.] (3) Any corrections in the assessment books made by the 45 [Executive Authority] under rule 13 or 27 shall be deemed to have effect o the first day of the half year to which the assessment which was sought to be revised or which was appealed against relates. Explanation. - The levy of a new class of property tax or an enhancement in the rate at which any class of property tax is leviable is no amendment or revision within the meaning of this rule, and shall have effect from the date fixed for the levy or enhancement.] 46 [15. The first payment of tax shall, save as provided in rule 13, be made with in thirty days of the date or day specified in rule 14.] ASSESSMENT OF THE PROFESSION TAX47 48 [16. (1) 49 [The classes into which companies and persons shall, for the purposes of assessment to the profession tax, be divided, and the maximum half-yearly tax leviable on each class shall be as follow:-  Class and half-yearly income, Maximum half-yearly tax. Rs. I. More than Rs, 15,000. 125 II. More than Rs. 12,000 but not more than Rs. 15,000. 100 III. More than Rs. 9,000 but not more than Rs. 12,000. 75 IV. More than Rs. 6,000 but not more than Rs. 9,000. 50 V. More than Rs. 4,800 but not more than Rs. 6,000. 25 VI. More than Rs. 3,000 but not more than Rs. 4,800. 12 VII. More than Rs. 1,800 but not more than Rs. 3,000. 6 VIII. More than Rs. 1,200 but not more than Rs. 1,800. 4 IX. More than Rs. 600 but not more than Rs. 1,200. 2 X. More than Rs. 300 but not more than Rs. 600. 1]. (2) The Council shall determine the tax leviable on each class subject to the maximum specified in sub-rule (1): Provided that the proportion which the tax on any class bears to the minimum income of that class shall, in no case, be smaller than the proportion which the tax on any lower class bears to the minimum income of such lower class. (3) The Council may exempt any one or more of the classes in sub-rule (1) from liability to profession tax, but no class shall be exempted from liability when any lower class is liable to tax.] 50 [17. A company or person shall be deemed to have transacted business and a person shall be deemed to have exercised a profession, art, or calling or held an appointment within a Municipality, if such company or person has an office or place of employment within such Municipality.] 51 [18. (1) Where a company or person transacts any business other than money-lending in any half-year exclusively in the area of a single Municipality, the income of such company or person from the transaction of such business shall, for the purpose of levying profession tax under this Act during the half-year, be deemed to be (a) where income-tax is assessed on such company or person under the Indian Income-tax Act, 192252 (Central Act XI of 1922), for the year comprising the half-year, one half of the amount at which the profits and gains of such business are computed under section 10 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 192253 (Central Act XI of 1922), for the purpose of assessing the income-tax; and (b) where the amount for the said profits and gains is not ascertainable or where such company or person is not assessed to income-tax, such percentage or percentages as the 54 [ State Government] may, subject to the approval of 55 [both 56 (Houses) of the 57 (State) Legislature], determine, of the turnover of such business transacted in the area of the Municipality during the half-year or where this is also unascertainable during the corresponding half-year of the previous year. (2) Where a company or person transacts any business other than money-lending partly in the area of a Municipality and partly outside such area, the income of such company or person from the transaction of such business in the area of the Municipality shall, for the purpose of levying profession-tax under this Act, be deemed to be the percentage referred to in clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of the turnover of such business transacted in such area, during the half-year or the corresponding half-year of the previous year, as the case may be. (3) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (2), the turnover of business in any Municipality means the aggregate money value of the goods produced, manufactured, purchased or sold or of any other business except money-lending transacted in such Municipality. Explanation. - In determining the turnover of business under this sub-rule (a) where the delivery of any goods on account of any purchase made by any company or person and the delivery on account of the sale thereof by the same company or person are both effected in the 58 [State of Tamil Nadu], only the latter transaction shall be taken into account; (b) where the delivery of any goods on account of any purchase made by any company or person is effected in any place outside the 59 [said State] and the delivery on account of the sale thereof by the same company or person is effected in any place in the 60 [said State], the latter transaction shall be taken into account; and (c) where the delivery of any goods on account of any purchase made by any company or person is effected in any place in the 61 [said State] and the delivery on account of the sale thereof by the same company or person is effected in any place outside the 62 [said State], the former transaction shall be taken into account.] 63 [19. (1) If, in the opinion of the 64 [Executive Authority], profession tax is 65 [or will be] due from any company or person for any half-year, he shall serve a notice on such company or person either in that half-year or in the succeeding half-year requiring the company or person to furnish within such period, not being less than thirty days as may be specified in the notice, a return in the prescribed form showing the income on the basis of which, according to such company or person, it or he is liable to be assessed to profession tax for the half-year in question. Thereupon, it shall be open to such company or person to submit a return showing the income derived by it or him during the half-year for which profession tax is claimed or for the corresponding half-year of the previous year and produce any evidence on which the company or person may rely in support of the return made. 66 [Explanation Where in pursuance of section 97, a statement regarding the income of a company or the salary or income of an employed person has been furnished to the Executive Authority, nothing in this sub-rule shall be deemed to require that authority to serve a notice on such company or person.] (2) If a return is made as required under sub-rule (1) 67 [or a statement regarding the income or salary is furnished under section 97] and the 68 [Executive Authority] is satisfied that it is correct and complete, he shall levy the profession tax from such company or person on the basis of 69 [such return or statement.] Explanation. - In cases not falling under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) or under sub-rule (2) of rule 18, if the company or person produces the notice of demand of income-tax served on it or him under section 29 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 192270 (Central Act XI of 1922), for the year comprising the half-year in question, the 71 [Executive Authority] shall be bound to take one-half of the income mentioned in such notice of demand as the income derived from the sources on which profession tax is leviable under this Act, as the income on the said sources for the purposes of levying profession tax. (3) 72 [If no return is made as required under sub-rule (1) or if no statement is furnished under section 97, or if the 73 [Executive Authority] is satisfied that any return so made or any statement so furnished] is incorrect or incomplete, the 74 [Executive Authority] shall assign to the company or person the class in the scale appropriate to the half-yearly income of such company or person as estimated by him. (4) The 75 [Executive Authority] may, when classifying any company or person under sub-rule (3), do so on general considerations with reference to the nature and reputed value of the business transacted, the size and rental of residential and business premises, the quantity and number of articles dealt with, the number of persons employed and the income-tax paid to Government. (5) The 76 [Executive Authority] shall not be entitled to call for the accounts of any company or person.] MAXIMAM RATES OF TAX ON CARRIAGES. AND ANIMAL [See section 98] 77 [20. ((1) The tax on carriages and animals shall be levied at rates not exceeding the following:- Tax on carriages and animals. Maximum half-yearly tax. Rs. For Every tram-car. 50 For Every four-wheeled vehicle with springs or other appliances acting as springs constructed to be drawn by one or more animals. 10 For Every two-wheeled vehicle with springs or other appliances acting as springs constructed to be drawn by one or more animals. 5 For Every bicycle or tricycle. 2 For Every other vehicle with springs or other appliances acting as springs not being a child's perambulator or go-cart. 3 For Every elephant. 12 For Every camel. 6 For Every horse or mule not under 12 hands. 6 For Every horse or mule under 12 hands. 2 For Every bullock or bull. 1 For Every male buffalo. 1 AS. For Every ass. 8 For Every dog. 8 For Every pig. 8 For Every goat. 8 (2) If within the half-year, a person replaces any carriage or animal by another carriage or animal falling under the same class in the table given in sub-rule (1), the said person, in case the replacement was due to the destruction of the carriage or the death of the animal and if he had possession, custody or control of the carriage or animal so replaced at the time of its destruction or death, shall not be liable to more than one payment of tax and the amount of such payment shall be regulated by the aggregate number of day for which the carriage which has been destroyed or the animal which has died and the carriage or animal replacing such carriage or animal have been kept during the half-year.] 78 [21.***] 79 [...] 80 [22.***1 81 [22-A. ***] APPEALS 82 [23. An appeal shall lie to the 83 [Taxation Appeals Committee] in respect of the assessment and imposition of the following taxes and of no others:- (a) assessments made by the 84 [Regional Director of Municipal Administration] under rule 3; 85 [(aa) any order passed by the Executive Authority under rule 4;] (b) the proceedings of the 86 [Executive Authority] under rule 19; 87 [(c) the order of the Executive Authority under rule 13 upon a revision petition; and ] (d) the imposition by the 88 [Executive Authority] of any tax on any carriage, animal, or cart, or of the tax on servants.] 89 [23-A. ***] 90 [24. ***] 25. An 91 [appeal] shall be made in writing and shall set forth concisely and under distinct heads the grounds of objection to the decision or other proceedings appealed against. 26. No appeal to the 92 [Taxation Appeals Committee] shall be heard - (a) 93 [unless it reached the municipal. office] - (i) within fifteen days from the service 94 [...] of the notice 95 [...] referred to in sections 95 and 102; or (ii) within fifteen days from the date upon which the tax becomes payable under section 86 or 105 or 96 [under rule 13 or 15]; or (iii) within three days from the service of the notice referred to in section 108 Provided that the 97 [Taxation Appeals Committee] may admit an appeal within fifteen days after the time prescribed in this rule, if cause be shown to its satisfaction for not preferring it within the prescribed time; and (b) unless 98 [(except when the Executive Authority otherwise directs on the ground of poverty in respect of any tax other than the property tax levied under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 78)], the tax in respect of which the appeal is presented has been deposited at the municipal office 99 [within the period specified in sub-clause (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a), as the case may be, or where an appeal is presented for admission under the proviso to the said clause] on or before the day upon which the appeal is presented. 100 [26-A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in rules 13, 15 and 26, in the case of any person preferring an appeal to the Council in respect of any order of the Executive Authority under rule 13, upon a revision petition:- (a) if the tax assessed upon such person does not exceed fifteen rupees, then, such person shall not be required to pay the tax in respect of which the appeal is preferred until the disposal of such appeal by the Council; and (b) if the tax assessed upon such person exceeds fifteen rupees but does not exceed thirty rupees, then, such person shall be required to pay only the tax payable by him before the revision made under rule 8; and such person shall not be required to pay the amount of tax enhanced in the revision in respect of which the appeal is preferred until the disposal of such appeal by the Taxation Appeals Committee.] 101 [26-B. Any appeal against the decision of the Taxation Appeals Committee may be filed within thirty days from the date of receipt of the order of the Taxation Appeals Committee in the District Court concerned.] 27. The assessment books maintained under 102 [sub-rule (1) of rule 2] shall be corrected in accordance with the 103 [decision of the Taxation Appeals Committee and]; in the event of the amount of any tax being 104 [reduced or remitted by the said committee], the 105 [Executive Authority] shall grant a refund accordingly. 106 [28. ***] 107 [28-A. 108 (1) The powers of the Executive Authority under rule 4 and of the Taxation Appeals Committee under rule 23 shall, during any period in respect of which the State Government may, by notification, so direct,. be exercised by a special officer appointed by them; and thereupon, the Executive Authority, or as the case may be, the Taxation Appeals Committee, shall cease to exercise the said powers during the said period, and (i) rule 4 shall have effect as if for the expression Executive Authority" occurring therein, the expression "special officer appointed under rule 28-A" were substituted; (ii) rule 23, rules 25 to 28 shall have effect as if for the expression "Taxation Appeals Committee" wherever it occurs in those rules, the expression "special officer appointed under rule 28-A" were substituted. (2) The special officer appointed under sub-rule (1) shall have all the powers of the Executive Authority under rule 4 and clause (b) of rule 26 and of the Taxation Appeals Committee under rule 23, rules 25 to 28, as are necessary for the purpose of exercising his powers under the said sub-rule and he shall be entitled to the same protection as the Executive Authority, or the Taxation Appeals Committee, as the case may be, is entitled.] (3) The special officer shall be paid out of the municipal fund such salary and allowances as the 109 [State Government] may, in consultation with the Council, fix. If a Government servant is appointed special officer, the Council shall also 110 [make such contribution towards the pension and leave allowances of that servant as may be required, by the conditions of his service under the 111 [Government] to be made by him or on his behalf]. COLLECTION OF TAXES [See section 124] 29.112 [(1) Where any tax not being a tax in respect of which a notice has to be served under section 95, 102 or 108 or in respect of which a direction has to be given under rule 13, is due from any person, the 113 [Executive Authority] shall serve upon such person a bill for the sum due before he proceeds to enforce the provisions of rule 30.] (2) 114 [A notice under section 95, 102 or 108 and a bill under sub-rule (1) shall be signed by the 115 [Executive Authority] and shall contain (a) a statement of the period and a description of the occupation, property or thing for which the tax is charged; and (b) a notice of the liability incurred in default of payment. 116 [(3) Where a notice, bill or direction referred to in sub-rule (1) has not been served or given either-in the half-year in which the tax became due or in the succeeding half-year, the tax for the half-year first mentioned in this sub-rule 117 (shall not be recovered in the manner laid down in rule 30)]: Provided that where the assessment books have been amended under rule 4, the notice, bill or direction, as the case may be, may be given either in the half-year in which the amendment was made or in the succeeding half-year.] 118 [(4) Nothing contained in this rule or in rule 30 shall preclude the Council from suing in a Civil Court for any tax due to it under this Act.] 30(1) If the amount due on account of any tax is not paid within fifteen days from the service 119 (xxx) of the notice 120 (xxx) or bill or the giving of the directions referred to in section 95 and 102 and rules 13 and 29 or within three days from the service of the notice referred to in section 108 and if the person from whom the tax is due has not show cause to the satisfaction of the 121 (Executive Authority)122 why it should not be paid, the 123 [Executive Authority] may recover by distraint under his warrant and sale of the movable property of the defaulter, the amount due on account of the tax together with the warrant fee and the distraint fee, and with such further sum as will satisfy the probable charges that will be incurred in connexion_ with the detention and sale of the property so distrained: Provided always that movable property described in the proviso to section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908), shall not be liable to distraint. (2) If for any reason the distraint, or a sufficient distraint, of the defaulter's property is impracticable, the 124 [Executive Authority] may prosecute the defaulter before a magistrate. (3)125 [...] (4) The warrant under sub-rule (1) shall be in the form contained in Appendix A to these rules or in some similar form; and for each such warrant, a fee of two annas 126 [shall be levied]. (5) Under a special order in writing of the 127 [Executive Authority], any officer charged with execution of a warrant of distress may, between sunrise and sunset, break open any outer or inner door or window of building in order to make the distress, if he has reasonable ground for believing that such building contains property which is liable to seizure, and if, after notifying his authority and purpose and duly demanding admittance, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance: Provided that such officer shall not enter or break open the door of any apartment appropriated to women, until he has given three hours' notice of his intention and has given such women an opportunity to withdraw. 31. (1) The officer charged with the execution of a warrant, shall, before making the distraint, demand payment of the tax due and the warrant fee. If the tax and fee are paid, no distraint shall be made, 128 [but if the tax or fee is not paid,] the officer shall - (a) seize such movable property of the defaulter as he may think necessary; (b) make an inventory of the property seized; and (c) give to the person in possession of the property seized at the time of seizure a copy of the inventory and the notice of sale in the form in Appendix B to these rules or in some similar form: 129 [Provided that a period of seven days shall be allowed for paying the amount due and redeeming the property seized.] (2) The distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained shall be as nearly as possible 130 [equal in value to the tax], due by the defaulter together with all expenses incidental to the warrant, distraint, detention and sale. 32. (1) If the amount due by the defaulter on account of the tax, the warrant fee and distraint fee and the expenses incidental to the detention of the property are not paid within the period of seven days mentioned in the notice given under rule 31 and if the distraint warrant is not suspended by the 131 [Executive Authority], the property seized or a sufficient portion thereof shall be sold by public auction under the orders of the 132 [Executive Authority], who shall apply the proceeds of the sale to the payment of the amount due on account of the tax, the warrant fee and the distraint fee and the expenses incidental to the detention and sale of the property, and shall return to the person in whose possession the property was at the time of seizure any property or sum which may remain after the sale and the application of the proceeds thereof as aforesaid. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient for the payment of the amount due on account of the tax, the warrant fee and distraint fee and the expenses incidental to the detention and sale of the property, the 133 [Executive Authority] may again proceed under rule 30 in respect of the sum remaining unpaid. (2) When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, the 134 [Executive Authority] may sell it, at any time before the expiry of the said period of seven days, unless the amount due is sooner paid. (3) The 135 [Executive Authority] shall consider any objections to the distraint of any property which are made within the said period of seven days and may postpone the sale pending investigation thereof. If the 136 [Executive Authority] decided that the property attached was not liable to distraint, he shall return it, or if it has already been sold, the proceeds of the sale to the person appearing to be entitled thereto and may again proceed under rule 30; and all fees and expenses connected with the first distraint and sale shall be recoverable from the defaulter if it shall appear to the 137 [Executive Authority] that he wilfully permitted the distraint of the property 138 [when to his knowledge it was not liable] to distraint. 33. (1) Distraint fees shall be payable at such rates not exceeding those mentioned in Appendix C to these rules as may be, from time to time, determined by the Council. (2) Such fees shall not be held to include the expenses incidental to the detention of any property distrained under this Act. 34. The property of a person in default under 139 [sub-rule (1) of rule 30] may be distrained wherever it may be found within the Municipality. 35. If the tax due on account of any building or land 140 [remains unpaid in whole or in part at the end of the period specified in sub-rule (1) of rule 30], the 141 [Executive Authority] may, if the said tax has not remained unpaid for more than twelve months, require the occupier for the time being of such building or land to pay the amount within a specified period 142 [not being less than fifteen days] and if the occupier fails to comply with 143 [such requisition], 144 [the Executive Authority] may distrain and sell any movable property 145 [found on the building or land], and the provisions of the foregoing rules shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to all distraints and sales effected under this rule: provided that no occupier shall be liable to prosecution or to a civil suit in respect of any sum recoverable from him under this rule, unless he has wilfully prevented distraint or a sufficient distraint. 146 [35-A. If any tax due from any person remains unpaid in whole or in part at the end of the period specified in sub-rule (1) of rule 30 and if such person has left 147 [...] India or cannot be found, the said tax or such part thereof as remains unpaid together with all sums payable in connexion therewith shall be recoverable as if it were an arrear of land revenue.] 36. 148 [(1)] Every person who is prosecuted 149 [under sub-rule (2) of rule 30] shall be liable, on proof to the satisfaction of the magistrate that he wilfully omitted to pay the amount due by him or that he wilfully prevented distraint or a sufficient distraint, to pay a fine not exceeding twice the amount which may be due by him on account of - (a) the tax and the warrant fee, if any, and (b) if distraint has taken place, the distraint fee and the expenses incidental to the detention and sale, if any, of the property distrained 150 [...]. 151 [(c) ***] 152 [(2) Whenever any person is convicted of an offence under sub-rule (1), the magistrate shall, in addition to any fine which may be imposed, recover summarily and pay over to the Municipal Council - the amounts, if any, due under the heads specified in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-rule (1); and may in his discretion also recover summarily and pay to the Council such amount, if any, as he may fix as the costs of the prosecution.] 153 [36-A. Neither the 154 [Executive Authority] nor any municipal officer or servant shall directly or indirectly purchase any property at any sale of distrained property held under the foregoing rules.] " PART II - FINANCE RULES [See Section 124] AUTHORISED OBJECTS OF EXPENDITURE. 37. The purposes to which the municipal fund may be applied include all objects expressly declared obligatory or discretionary by by-laws or rules, and in general everything necessary for, or conducive to the safety, health, convenience or education of the inhabitants or to the amenities of the Municipality and everything incidental to the administration; and the fund shall be applicable thereto within the Municipality subject to these rules and such further rules or special orders as the 155 [State Government] may prescribe or issue; and shall be applicable thereto without the Municipality, if the expenditure is authorised by this Act, or specially sanctioned by the 156 [State Government]. 38. The objects of expenditure connected with the public safety include the following: - (a) the lighting of public streets and the provision, purchase, exploitation and maintenance of electric, gas or other undertakings for lighting public and private streets, places and buildings; (b) extinction of fires;. (c) control, supervision or removal of dangerous places, buildings, trades and practices; (d) regulation of traffic; (e) prevention and removal of obstructions in public streets or places; (f) the giving of relief and the establishment and maintenance of relief works in time of famine or scarcity. 39. The objects of expenditure connected with the public health include the following: - (a) the construction and maintenance of hospitals and dispensaries and temporary places of reception within the Municipality or without the Municipality for the treatment of infectious diseases occurring in the Municipality; building hospitals and dispensaries and places of reception for the sick in general; contributing towards hospitals, dispensaries or places of reception provided by the 157 [State Government]; contracting for the use of a hospital or part of a hospital, dispensary or place of reception; combining with any other local authority or with the 158 [ State Government] to provide a common hospital, dispensary or place of reception; sending indigent inhabitants of the Municipality to institutions outside the Municipality for treatment; the training of medical practitioners, medical subordinates, midwives, nurses, health officers, sanitary inspectors and analysts, the-provision of nurses for attendance on patients suffering from infectious diseases at the houses of such persons; vaccination and the training and supervision of vaccinators and the provision of lymph; the registration of births, deaths and marriages; the enumeration of the inhabitants of the Municipality and other measures of a like nature; (b) the construction and maintenance of lunatic asylums (c) the construction, establishment and maintenance, supervision and control of public markets and slaughter-houses; 159 [of shops, stalls and plinths]; of latrines; 160 [of sewage farms and all works for the removal or disposal of sewage; of water-works, drinking fountains, tanks and wells;] of wash-houses and dhobykhanas; of parks, squares and gardens; the reclamation of unhealthy localities; and other sanitary measures of a like nature; (d) the cleansing and watering of streets and drains, scavenging; the removal of excessive or noxious vegetation; the abatement of all nuisances; (e) the regulation and control of offensive or dangerous trades, of unhealthy buildings or localities, and of burial and burning grounds and crematoria; the provision of sites for and the closing of burial and burning grounds; the provision of new sites for offensive and dangerous trades and of special locations for factories; the acquisition of congested areas and the provision of new sites, whether within or without municipal limits, to relieve congestion or to provide for the growth of population; improvement and reclamation of land, planning, surveying and control of town extensions, whether within or without municipal limits, re-distribution of sites in such extensions and all measures of a like nature 161 [and the acquisition of land for any of the aforesaid purposes]. 40. The objects of expenditure connected with the public convenience, education and amenities include - (a) the construction, maintenance, diversion and improvement of streets, bridges, causeways, culverts and the like and the acquisition of the land necessary for the buildings to form or improve streets; the regulation of building; the construction of model dwellings and the encouragement of co-operative building societies by loans, grants of land, or prizes; the removal of projections and encroachments; the naming of streets; the numbering of houses; the planting and preservation of trees in public streets and places; the maintenance of public monuments (b) subject to rules 47 to 52, the establishment and maintenance of schools, the construction and maintenance of school-houses, public libraries and reading-rooms, museums, art-galleries, gymnasia or any other institutions connected with the diffusion of mental or physical culture or technical instruction or the training of teachers (c) the holding of industrial exhibitions or fairs; (d) the construction, maintenance and adornment of public halls and theatres the acquisition and maintenance of recreation grounds, playing fields and promenades (e) subject to all provisions of law, the construction, maintenance and purchase or exploitation of tramways and other transport, services (railways not included), of telephone systems, grass farms, dairies, public bakeries and 162 [other agricultural, industrial or trading concerns] of public utility either within or without the municipal limits and whether or not in combination with other authorities or persons, and subscription to debenture loans of any such concerns; (f) the employment of veterinary officers, the prevention of diseases of animals, the places for the treatment of sick animals, and the prevention of cruelty to animals; (g) the construction and maintenance of rest-houses, choultries, poorhouses, pounds and other works of public utility; (h) the provision and maintenance or holding of zoological and horticultural gardens and exhibitions; (i) the provision of standard weights, scales and measures and public weighing places; (j) the provision and maintenance of public baths and bathing places; (k) the provision of music for the people; (l) the provision and maintenance of public clocks and clock towers or a time gun; (m) the organisation and maintenance of associations for the prevention of juvenile smoking and cruelty to children. 41. With the previous sanction of the 163 [State Government and of the Central Government], the Council may - (a) upon any of the public streets in the town or upon any land in or without the town which is vested in the Council construct or maintain any railway which may appear to the Council to be useful or necessary for the removal of rubbish and offensive matter or for any of the other purposes of this Act; (b) use and employ upon any such railway locomotive engines or other motive power and carriages and wagons to be drawn or propelled thereby; (c) carry and convey passengers and goods upon any such railway; (d) make such reasonable charges in respect of such passengers or goods as the Council may, from time to time, determine; (f) from time to time, enter into any contract with any person for the passage over any such railway of locomotive engines or other motive power, carriages all wagons belonging to or controlled by such person upon the payment of such tolls or rent, and under such - conditions and restrictions, as may be mutually agreed upon; and (g) lease any such railway to any person upon such terms and under such conditions and restrictions as may be mutually agreed upon. NOTE. - The term 'railways' in this rule does not include 'tramways' 42. The objects of expenditure incidental to the administration include (a) the provision and maintenance of a principal municipal office and record-room and of other offices with the cost of appurtenances and fittings and insurance; (b) salaries, allowances, liveries, pensioner contributions and provident fund contributions, gratuities, and pensions of, and the cost of hire of vehicles for, the municipal officers and servants; study leave allowances of professional officers and subordinates; sending municipal servants to the Pasteur Institute, Coonoor, for treatment; (c) stationery, printing and all office and advertising expenses; (d) legal expenses; (e) election expenses; (f) the provision and maintenance of municipal work-shops; (g) municipal surveys, the preparation of maps of the Municipality and the preparation and maintenance of a record of right immovable property. OBLIGATORY EXPENDITURE 164 [42-A. The Municipal Council - (1) shall make provision for the construction, maintenance, diversion and improvement of streets, bridges, causeways, culverts and the like to such extent as the 165 [State] Government consider necessary and practicable; and (2) shall not divert such provision to other purposes without the express sanction of the 166 [State] Government. 43. (1) Expenditure on the following objects is obligatory subject to special directions that the 167 [State Government] may issue in respect of any Municipality by notifications:- (a) the principal municipal office and record-room; (b) maintenance of public property and monuments vested in the Municipality; (c) maintenance of property owned by the Municipality; (d) salaries and pensionary and provident fund contributions, gratuities, and pensions for the municipal officers and servants according to the conditions on which such persons entered the municipal service; (e) scavenging; (f) lighting the public streets; 168 [(ff) planting and preservation of trees in public street and places;] (g) burial and burning grounds where no sufficient number is provided by other agency; (h) medical relief to the extent laid down in rules 44, 45 and 46; (i) diffusion of education to the extent laid down in rules 47 to 51; (j) registration of births and deaths (k) vaccination (l) provision of slaughter-houses; (m) payment of interest on, and amortization of, debt (if any) (n) payment of the election expenses including the cost of the preparation and revision of the electoral roll, the conduct of elections to the Municipal Council, and the maintenance of the election establishment; Explanation. - The cost of maintenance of the election establishment shall include the pay, pension and leave allowances, if any, of the officers and servants of 169 [the Government] or of any other authority, employed in the preparation and revision of the electoral roll and in the conduct of the elections. 170 [(o) payment of such contribution towards the cost of training Commissioners of Municipalities as may be fixed by the 171 [State] Government. Explanation. - The cost of training Commissioners may include the Whole or such part as the Government deem equitable, of the pay, pensionary or provident fund contribution and leave and other_ allowances, if any of the officers and servants of the 172 [Government] or of any other authority employed and other incidental expenses incurred in connexion with such training.] 173 [(p) payment of travelling allowance of a person appointed as Commissioner of the Municipality in respect of his journey to join the appointment. (q) all other objects declared obligatory by law or rule]. (2) The 174 [State Government] shall determine every year the amount of the election expenses referred to in clause (n) of sub-rule (1) and their determination shall be final and binding on the Municipal Council. Such amount shall have priority over all other charges except charges for the service of authorised loans including the loans and advances specified in section 124-A, and the expenses specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 39. OBLIGATORY MEDICAL EXPENDITURE 44. (1) The Council shall provide and maintain either from endowments or from the municipal fund or by grant-in-aid therefrom in accordance with such rules as may, from time to time, be prescribed by the 175 [State Government] - (a) a hospital or dispensary where the sick poor of the Municipality shall be entitled to receive medical and surgical advice and treatment free of charge; and (b) a hospital for the treatment of patients suffering from infectious diseases in the Municipality. The Council shall provide and maintain more than one such hospital or dispensary, if the 176 [State Government] so direct provided that the 177 [State Government] shall not so direct until the Council shall have had an opportunity of submitting its views on the subject to the 178 [State Government]: Provided further that the Council shall not be bound to provide or maintain such hospitals or dispensaries when, in the opinion of the 179 [State Government], sufficient provision has otherwise been made for the treatment free of charge of the sick poor and the treatment of patients suffering from infectious diseases in the Municipality. (2) Any inhabitant of the Municipality, who is not a fit object of public charity, may, subject to such regulations as the Council with the approval of the 180 [State Government] may from time to time, frame, obtain medical or surgical advice and treatment from any hospital or dispensary maintained by the Council from endowments or from the municipal fund; provided that any charges incurred by the Council in medical or surgical relief of persons other than the sick poor of the Municipality or those unable to pay a medical attendant shall be reimbursed by such persons. (3) The Council may also permit the treatment in the hospitals or dispensaries maintained by it from endowments or from the municipal fund of any person not resident in the Municipality. 45. The Council shall provide every hospital or dispensary provided or maintained by it with all necessary drugs, instruments, apparatus, furniture and appliances on a scale approved by the 181 [State Government], and when, in the opinion of the Council, provision for in-patients may be necessary, it shall also provide a sufficient number of cots, bedding, clothing, furniture and diet for such in-patients. 46. The Council shall employ a medical officer for any hospital or dispensary maintained by it from endowments or from the municipal fund. OBLIGATORY EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURE 47. The Council shall, so far as the funds at its disposal may admit, make provision for the instruction in schools of all children of school-going age resident within the limits of the Municipality, for whose instruction provision shall not otherwise have been made. 48. The Council may provide instruction - (i) either by schools maintained wholly from the municipal fund, or (ii) by means of grants-in-aid to private schools from the said fund in accordance with such rules as may, from time to time, be described by the 182 [State Government], or (iii) by contributing towards the cost of Government schools, or (iv) by more than one of such means. 49. The Council may, with the previous sanction of the 183 [State Government], maintain either wholly from the municipal fund, or by grants-in-aid therefrom, elementary schools to which admission may be wholly or partly free for any class of the inhabitants which, in the opinion of the Council, is by reason of poverty unable to pay the fees leviable in schools maintained by the Council whether wholly from the municipal fund or by grants-in-aid therefrom. 50. (1) If, at any time, it seems advisable to the 184 [State Government] that a grant-in-aid should be made to any school maintained solely for the instruction of the children of any particular class of the inhabitants of any Municipality 185 [they may direct] the Municipal Council to make such grant to such school; and the Council shall make it accordingly; provided that the 186 [State Government] shall not so direct until the Council shall have had an opportunity of submitting its views on the subject to the 187 [State Government]. (2) The instruction to be provided by the Council shall be of such standards as may, from time to time, be determined by the 188 [State Government]. 51. (1) The Council shall, unless otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, or in the case of elementary schools 'exempted by the 189 [State Government] on such conditions as it may prescribe, from time to time, levy in every school maintained by it, fees as may from time to time, be determined by the 190 [State Government]: Provided that if the Council is satisfied that the parent or guardian of any child, resident in the Municipality, is by reason of poverty unable to pay for the elementary education of such child, it may remit the whole or part of the fees, but it shall not compel the parent or guardian of such child in consideration of the said relief to send such child to any particular municipal school: Provided further that the Council may, in any secondary school, in accordance with a scheme framed by it and approved by the Director of Public Instruction, remit the whole or part of the fees of poor pupils, subject to the condition that the fee income thus foregone shall not exceed 10 per cent of the total fees realizable from all pupils of the school at the rates determined by the 191 [State Government]. (2) The proceeds of all fees levied by the Council as aforesaid shall be expended by the Council for the provisions of instruction by means of schools. DISCRETIONARY EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURE 52. The Council may also provide wholly from the municipal fund, or by means of grants-in-aid therefrom,- (i) for the inspection of schools maintained by it whether wholly from the municipal fund or by grants-in-aid therefrom; (ii) for the training of teachers for schools aided or maintained from the municipal fund; (iii) for the instruction and training of persons for the practice of medicine, or of vaccination, or of any technical or industrial calling; and (iv) for the maintenance of public libraries, reading rooms, gymnasia or any other institutions connected with the diffusion of education, which may be approved by the 192 [State Government]. EXTRAORDINARY EXPENDITURE 53. A Municipal Council may, with the sanction of the 193 [State Government],- (1) contribute towards the expenses of any public exhibition, ceremony or entertainment in the Municipality; (2) defray the cost of the preparation and presentation of addresses to persons of distinction visiting the Municipality; (3) contribute to any charitable fund or to a fund for the defence of the Municipality 194 [or India] or to the funds of any institution for the relief of the poor or the treatment of disease or infirmity or the reception of diseased or infirm persons or the investigation of the cases of disease; (4) pay a conveyance allowance to the Chairman or Vice-Chairman; (5) pay the expenses of the Chairman, members of the Council and municipal officers and servants travelling on municipal business; and (6) 195 [defray] any other extraordinary charges. RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS 54. All moneys received by the Council shall be lodged in the nearest Government treasury or, with the sanction of the 196 [State Government], in a bank Provided that the Municipal Council may, with the sanction of the 197 [State Government], invest any sums not required for immediate use either in a Government savings bank or in Government securities, or in any other security which may be approved by the 198 [State Government]. 55. (1) 199 [All orders or cheques against the municipal fund shall be signed by the 200 [Executive Authority], or by some person duly authorised in this behalf by him]. The treasury or bank in which the fund is lodged shall, so far as the funds to the credit of the Council admit, pay all orders or cheques against the fund which are so signed. (2) If the Council shall have given previous authority in writing, such treasury or bank may, at once, pay out of the municipal fund without such order or cheque any expense which the 201 [State Government] 202 [have incurred] on behalf of the Council. AUDIT, SURCHARGE AND DISALLOWANCE 56. The 203 [Executive Authority] shall submit all accounts to auditors as required by them. 57. The auditors may 204 [(a) by summons in writing, require the production of any book, deed, contract, account, voucher, receipt or other document the perusal or examination of which they consider necessary] (b) by summons in writing require any person having the custody or control of any such document or accountable for it to appear in person before them; (c) require any person so appearing to make and sign a declaration with respect to such document or to answer any question or to prepare and furnish any statement relating thereto. 58. The auditors shall - (a) report to the Council any material impropriety or irregularity which they may observe in the expenditure, or in the recovery of moneys due to the Council or in the municipal accounts; (b) furnish to the Council such information as it may require concerning the progress of their audit; (c) report to the Council any loss or waste of money or other property owned by or vested in the Council caused by neglect or misconduct, with the names of persons, directly or indirectly, responsible for such loss or waste; and (d) submit to the Council a final statement of the audit and a duplicate copy thereof to the 205 [State Government] within a period of three months from the end of the financial year, or within such other period as the 206 [State Government] may notify. 59. The 207 [Executive Authority] shall forthwith remedy any defects or irregularities that may be pointed out by the auditors and report the same to the Council. 60. (1) The auditors may disallow every item contrary to law and surcharge the same on the person making, or authorising the making of, the illegal payment; and may charge against any person responsible therefor the amount of any 208 [deficiency, loss or unprofitable outlay incurred] by the negligence or misconduct of that person or of any sum which ought to have been but is not brought into account by that person or of any sum which ought to have been but is not brought into account by that person and shall, in every such case, certify the amount due from such person. 209 [Explanation It shall not be open to any person whose negligence or misconduct has caused or contributed to any such deficiency or loss, to contend that notwithstanding his negligence or misconduct the deficiency or loss would not have occurred but for the negligence or misconduct of some other person.] (2) The auditors shall state in writing the reasons for their decision in respect of every disallowance, surcharge or charge and furnish by registered post a copy thereof to the person against whom it is made. (3) If the person to whom a copy of the auditor's decision is so furnished refuses to receive it, he shall nevertheless be deemed to have been duly furnished with a copy of such decision within the meaning of sub-rule (2). The period of fourteen days fixed in rules 61 and 62 shall be calculated from the date of such refusal. 210 [61. (1)] Any person aggrieved by disallowance, surcharge or charge made may, within fourteen days after he has received or been served with the decision of the auditor, either - (a) apply to the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction to set aside such disallowance, surcharge or charge and the Court, after taking such evidence as is necessary, may confirm, modify or remit such disallowance, surcharge or charge with such orders as to costs as it may think proper in the circumstances; or (b) in lieu of such application may appeal to the 211 [State Government], who shall pass such orders as they think fit. 212 [Where an application is made to the Court under clause (a), the auditor shall be the sole respondent thereto, and the applicant shall not be entitled to make either the 213 [State Government]. or any other person a party to the proceedings.] 214 [(2) From any decision of the, Court under clause (a) of sub-rule (1), an appeal shall lie to the High Court.] 62. Every sum certified to be due from any person by auditors under this Act shall be paid by such person to the 215 [Executive Authority], within fourteen days after the intimation to him of the decision of the auditors unless within that time such person has appealed to the Court or to the 216 [State Government] against the decision; and such sum if not so paid, or such sum as the Court or the 217 [State Government] shall declare to be due, shall be recoverable on an application made by the 218 [Executive Authority], to the Court in the same way as an amount decreed by the court. 219 [62-A. The Municipalities shall pay to the auditors out of the municipal fund such remuneration as the Government may determine.] 220 [63. Interest at the rate of six per cent per annum shall be charged on the disallowance, surcharge or charge amount due, with effect from the date following the last date fixed for payment of the said disallowance, surcharge or charge amount in the auditors' certificate referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 60. The interest so charged on the disallowance, surcharge or charge amount overdue shall be specified in the said certificate itself in precise terms, as laid down in section 34 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908)]. 221 [64. Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the 222 [State] Government may, at any time, direct that the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount certified to be due from any person by auditors under this Act shall be waived, if in their opinion, such a course is necessary considering all the circumstances of the case. 223 [APPENDIX A] DISTRAINT WARRANT [See Rule 30 (4)] Warrant No. To .................. .................. (Name or officer charged with execution of warrant.) (State tax or taxes due and premises, if any, in respect of which the tax or. taxes are due.) WHEREAS ........................ of ........................ has not paid or shown sufficient cause for the non-payment of the sum of Rs. ........................ due for the tax or taxes noted above for the ........................ ending ........................ 20 ........................ , although the said sum has been duly demanded from the said and fifteen days have elapsed since such demand was made. This is to command you to demand the said sum of Rs. ........................ together with annas two for warrant fee, failing payment of which you are to distrain the goods and chattels of the said ........................ (or, as the case may be, any goods and chattels found on the premises referred to), to the amount of the said sum of Rs. ........................ together with Rs. ........................ for warrant fee and distraint fee making together a sum of Rs. ........................ and such further sum as may be sufficient to defray the charges of keeping and selling such distraint ; and if within seven days next after such distraint, the amount due on account of the said tax or taxes and fee shall not be paid, together with such further sum as may be sufficient to defray the charges of keeping such distraint, to sell the said goods and chattels under orders to be hereafter issued by me, and to remit to the municipal office the sale-proceeds of the distrained property, out of which the amount due on account of the said taxes and fees, viz., Rs. ........................ and the charges on keeping, and selling such distraint will be deducted and credited to the municipal fund, and the surplus, if any, returned to the owner of the goods and chattels distrained. If distraint or sufficient distraint cannot be found of the goods and chattels of the said ........................, you are to certify the same to me together with this warrant. Station : Date : [Signature of the 224 (Executive Authority)]. [Three' days in case of tax on servants.] 225 [APPENDIX B] FORM OF INVENTORY AND NOTICE [See Rule 31 (1) (c)] (State particulars of goods and chattels seized.) Take notice that I have this day ....................... seized the goods and chattels specified in the above inventory for the sum of Rs. ....................... due for. the tax or taxes mentioned in the margin ....................... for the ....................... ending, ; 20 ....................... ; and that unless you pay into the office of the Municipality of ....................... the amount due together with the warrant fee, the distraint fee and cost of keeping the goods and chattels, within seven days from the date of this notice, the goods- and chattels will be sold on the ....................... day of ....................... 20 ......................., at the Municipal office or at such other place as the 1[Executive Authority] may direct, and that the goods and chattels may be sold at any previous date, if they are liable to speedy and natural decay. (Signature of the officer executing the warrant of distress) Station: Date: 226 [APPENDIX C] TABLE OF FEES PAYABLE ON DISTRAINTS [See Rule 33 (1)] Sum distrained for. Fees.  Rs. A. P. Under 1 rupee 0 4 0 1 rupee and over but under 5 rupees. 0 8 0 5 rupee and over but under 10 rupees. 1 0 0 10 rupee and over but under 15 rupees. 1 8 0 15 rupee and over but under 20 rupees. 2 0 0 20 rupee and over but under 25 rupees. 2 8 0 25 rupee and over but under 30 rupees. 3 0 0 30 rupee and over but under 35 rupees. 3 8 0 35 rupee and over but under 40 rupees. 4 0 0 40 rupee and over but under 45 rupees. 4 8 0 45 rupee and over but under 50 rupees. 5 0 0 50 rupee and over but under 60 rupees. 6 0 0 60 rupee and over but under 80 rupees. 7 8 0 80 rupee and over but under 100 rupees. 9 0 0 The above charge includes all expenses, except when peons are kept in charge of property distrained, in which case three annas must be paid daily for each peon.] Rules 2 to 4 and the heading thereto were substituted for the original by section 149 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Rules 2 to 4 and the heading thereto were substituted for the original by section 149 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1). of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Rules 2 to 4 and the heading thereto were substituted for the original by section 149 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. Rules 2 to 4 and the heading thereto were substituted for the original by section 149 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This word was substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. Inserted by G.O.Ms. No. 2 MA & WS dated 31.1.1995. Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This word was substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This word was substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This sub-rule was inserted by G.O.Ms.No.1959,RD & LA Dt.10.08.66 by G.O.Ms.No.555 RDLA Dt.26.03.69 This word was substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were added by L.A. Depart. Notification No.243,Dt.10.03.42 published at page 234 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette,Dt. the 31.03.42, re-enacted permanently with specified modifications by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26.04.48, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, Dt. 27.04.48. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 243, dated the 10th March 1942 published at page 234 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1942, re-enacted permanently with specified modifications by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words and figures "Controller under the Madras House Rent Control Order, 1941" by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated he 27th April 1948. See now the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 (Tamil Nadu Act 18 of 1960). This proviso was added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 243, dated the 10th march 1942, published at page 234 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1942, re-enacted permanently with specified modifications by the Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These provisos were added by the Local Administration Department Notification No. 578, dated the 6th June 1939, published at pages 401-402 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 13th June 1939. Rule 9-A was inserted by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1990 (Tamil Nadu Act 35 of 1990). Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). 3. Omitted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27.5.1999. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). 3. Omitted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27.5.1999. Rules 6 to 12 were substituted for the original rules by section 150 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Amended by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). 3. Omitted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27.5.1999. These words were inserted by section 151 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). 3. Omitted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27.5.1999. These words were inserted by section 151 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152, of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Substituted by G.O.Ms.No. 245 MA & WS dated 21-12-1998. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). 3. Omitted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27.5.1999. 1 Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This heading and rules 16 to 19 relating to professional tax were implied repealed after the enactment of Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1992. Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule was substituted by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 12th April 1950, published at page 52 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 18th April 1950, for the rule 16 (1) as substituted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 154, dated the 18th February 1942, published at page 158 of Part !-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 3rd March 1942, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). See now the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961). See now the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "the Legislative Council" by the Adaptation Order of 1937. This word was substituted for the word "Chambers" by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This expression was substituted for the expression "Presidency of Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970, which was deemed to have come into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the words "said Presidency" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970, which was deemed to have come into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the words "said Presidency" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970, which was deemed to have come into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the words "said Presidency" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970, which was deemed to have come into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the words "said Presidency" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970, which was deemed to have come into force on the 14th January 1969. Rules 14 to 19 were substituted for the original rules by section 152 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 1096, dated the 5th October 1938, published at page 625 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 11th October 1938. This explanation was added by rule (1) issued in GO. Ms. 268, Local Administration, dated the 26th February 1954, published at page 34 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1954. These words and figures were inserted by rule (2) (a), issued in GO. Ms. 268, Local Administration, dated the 26th February 1954, published at page 34 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1954. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the words "such return" by rule (2) (b), issued in GO. Ms. 268, Local Administration, dated the 26th February 1954, published at page 34 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1954. See now the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Central Act 43 of 1961). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words, brackets and figures "If no return is made as required under sub-rule (1), or if the Executive Authority is satisfied that any return so made" by rule (3), issued in GO. Ms. 268, Local Administration, dated the 26th February 1954, published at page 34 of the Rules Supplement to part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st March 1954. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This rule was substituted for the original rule by Schedule I to the Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1931 (Tamil Nadu Act III of 1931). This rule was omitted by Schedule I to the Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1931 (Tamil Nadu Act III of 1931). This rule and the headings thereof were omitted by section 155 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule and the headings thereof were omitted by section 155 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule was omitted by section 3 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). This rule was substituted for the original rule by section 156 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This clause was inserted by section (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This rule was omitted by section 3 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). This rule was omitted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. This word was substituted for the words, figures and letters "appeal under rule 22-A, 23 or 23A by section 3 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. These words were substituted for the words "unless it be presented at the Municipal Office" by Local Administration Department Notification No. 539, dated the 10th May 1941, published at page 346 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 20th May 1941, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the-27th April 1948. The words "or sending" were omitted by section 157 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words "or table" were omitted by section 157 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words and figures were substituted for the words and figures "under rule 15" by Local Administration Department Notification No. 630, dated the 18th August 1942, published at page 680 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 8th September 1942, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. This expression was substituted for the expression "(except when the Executive Authority otherwise directs on the ground of poverty) by section 3 (v) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). This expression was inserted by section 157 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). This rule was inserted by section 3 (vi) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). Inserted by G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27-5-1999. These words and figures were substituted for the word and figure "rule 3" by section 158 (i) of Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930. These words and figures were substituted for the words, figures and letters "orders passed under rule 22-A, 23, 23-A, or 24" by section 3 (vii) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). These words were substituted for the words "reduced or remitted by any officer appointed by the District Collector in this behalf or the Council" by section 3 (vii) (b) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1970). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Omitted in G.O.Ms.No. 127 MA & WS dated 27-5-1999. Rule 28-A was inserted by section 159 (2) of Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930. Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1987. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "pay the Local Government such contribution towards the pension and leave allowances of such servant as may be payable under the regulations in force for the time being of the branch of Government service to which he belongs" by the Adaptation Order of 1937. This words was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This sub-rule was substituted for the original sub-rule by section 161 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This words and figures were substituted for the words "Such bill"' by section 161 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This sub-rule was inserted by section 171 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words and figures were substituted for the words "shall not be demanded" by Local Administration Department Notification No. 735, dated the 25th June 1940, published at page 432 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 2nd July 1940, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. This sub-rule was added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 735, dated the 25th June 1940, published at page 432 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 2nd July 1940, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. The words "or sending" were omitted by section 162 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The word "table" was omitted by section 162 &lt;I&gt;(i) &lt;/I&gt;of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). Sub-rule (3) was omitted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 735, dated the 25th June 1940, published at page 432 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 2nd July 1940, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. These words were substituted for the words "shall be leviable" by section 162 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the words "but, if not" by section 163 (i) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This proviso was added by section 163 (i) (b) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "proportionate in value to the sum" by section 163 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the words "which to his knowledge was not liable" by section 164 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words and figures were substituted for the word and figures, "rule 30" by section 165 (i) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words and figures "remain unpaid at the end of the period mentioned in rule 30" by section 166 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were inserted by section 166 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "this requisition" by section 166 (iii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words and figures were substituted for the word and figures, "rule 30" by section 165 (i) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "found on the premises" by section 166 (iv), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule was inserted by section 167, of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words "British" was omitted by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. Rule 36 was re-numbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule by section 168 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words and figures were substituted for the words and figures, "under rule 30" by section 168 (1) (ii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words "and he shall also pay the said amount and the costs of the prosecution" were omitted by section 168 (1) (iii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Clause (c) was omitted by section 168 (1) (iii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This sub-rule was added by section 168 (2), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This rule was inserted by section 169, of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were inserted by section 170 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1930). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 28 of 1978. These words were added by section 170 (ii) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). 1 These words were substituted for the words "other industrial concerns" by section 171, of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The words "Provincial Government and of the Fedeal Railway Authority or the Central Government" were substituted for the words "Governor-General in Council" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950 and the words "the Federal Railway Authority or" were omitted by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order, 1950. This rule was inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 542, dated the 12th May 1941, published at page 348 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 20th May 1941, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. The word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Inserted by Tamil Nadu Act 23 of 1987. The words "the Crown" were substituted for the words "the Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "Government" was substituted for "Crown" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Original clause (o) was re-lettered as clause (p) and a new clause (o) was inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 985, dated the 28th August 1940, published at page 634 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 3rd September 1940 re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by, the Adaptation Order of 1950. Original clause (p) was re-lettered as clause (q) and a new clause (p) was inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 1165, dated the 11th November 1941, published at page 866 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 25th November 1941, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "he may direct" by the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930), The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial. Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial. Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial. Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "India or the Empire" by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. This word was inserted by the Second Schedule to the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1938 (Tamil Nadu Act XIII of 1938). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This sentence was substituted for the original first two sentences by section 172 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words "has incurred" by the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This clause was substituted for the original clause by Local Administration Department Notification No. 65.7, dated the 26th June 1939, published at page 450 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 4th July 1939. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by, section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These words were substituted for the words "deficiency or loss incurred" by Local Administration Department Notification No. 657, dated the 26th June. 1939, published at page 450 of Part IA of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 4th July 1939. This Explanation was added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 427, dated the 22nd June 1943, published at page 242 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 6th July 1943, re-enacted permanently by Local Administration Department Notification, dated the 26th April 1948, published at pages 39 to 58 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 27th April 1948. Rule 61 was re-numbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule and to the rule as so re-numbered, new sub-rule (2) was added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 657, dated the 26th June 1939, published at page 450 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 4th July 1939. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This paragraph was inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 307, dated the 6th November 1937, published at page 587 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 9th November 1937. This expression was substituted for the expression "Government of Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970,which came into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government" by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word "State" was substituted for "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This expression was substituted for the expression "Government of Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970,which came into force on the 14th January 1969. These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This expression was substituted for the expression "Government of Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970,which came into force on the 14th January 1969. Rule 62-A was inserted by G.O. Ms. No. 880, RDLA, dated 2nd June 1979. Rule 63 was re-numbered as rule 64 and the present rule 63 was inserted by GO. Ms. No. 1961 R.D. & L.A., dated the 4th September 1974. This rule was added by Local Administration Department Notification No. 657, dated the 26th June 1939, published at page 450 of Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 4th July 1939. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Appendices A, B and C were substituted for the original Appendices by section 173 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Appendices A, B and C were substituted for the original Appendices by section 173 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Appendices A, B and C were substituted for the original Appendices by section 173 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). Appendices A, B and C were substituted for the original Appendices by section 173 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu PURPOSES FOR WHICH PREMISES MAY NOT BE USED WITHOUT A LICENCE UNDER SECTION 249 [See section 249] 1 [(a) Washing soiled clothes or keeping soiled clothes for the purpose of washing them or keeping washed clothes;] (b) boiling paddy or camphor; (c) melting tallow or sulphur; (d) storing or otherwise dealing with manure, offal, blood, bones, rags, hides, fish, horns or skins; (e) washing or drying wool or hair; 2 [(ee) Storing or keeping blankets for the purpose of hiring;] (f) making fish-oil; (g) making soap, dyeing, boiling or pressing oil, 3 [burning] bricks, tiles, pottery or lime; (h) manufacturing or distilling sago; manufacturing artificial manure 4 [manufacturing beedies or cigars]; (i) manufacturing gunpowder or fireworks; (j) keeping a public halting-place, choultry or other rest-house for travellers (other than a choultry or rest-house maintained by the Government or a local authority), a hotel, restaurant, eating-house, coffee house, boarding house or lodging house (other than a students' hostel under public or recognised control); (jj) keeping a shaving or hair-dressing saloon; (k) keeping together twenty or more sheep or goats or ten or more pigs or head of cattle; (l) preparing flour or articles made of flour for human consumption or sweetmeats; (m) manufacturing ice or aerated waters; 5 [(mm) brewing beer, manufacturing arrack or other spirit containing alcohol (whether denatured or not), by distillation;] (n) selling or storing timber, firewood, thatching materials, hay, grass, straw, fibre, coal or charcoal; 6 [(o) selling wholesale or retail, or storing for wholesale or retail trade or for purposes other than private or domestic use, grain, groundnut, 7 [tamarind], chillies, jaggery, pulses, flour, bran, oil-cakes or agricultural produce which is likely to attract rats;] (p) 8 [manufacturing jaggery, sugarcandy or syrup otherwise than as a cottage industry by tappers or persons in enjoyment of the trees carried on in their own premises;] 9 [(q) storing any explosive or combustible materials:] 10 [Provided that no licence shall be required for storing petroleum and its products in quantities exceeding those to which the operation of this Act is limited by the provisions of the Petroleum Act 1934 (Central Act XXX of 1934), or the rules or notifications issued thereunder;] 11 [(qq) selling cotton wholesale or retail or storing cotton for wholesale or retail trade or for conversion into yarn;] 12 [(r) manufacturing anything from which offensive of unwholesome smells arise; (s) using for any industrial purpose any fuel or machinery 13 [other than such machinery as may, by notification, be exempted by the 14 [State] Government, from time to time]; and (t) in general, doing in the course of any industrial process anything which is likely to be dangerous to human life or health or property:] Provided that no licence shall be required for the storage of timber, firewood, thatching materials, hay, grass, straw, fibre, or coal or 15 [for boiling paddy or for keeping soiled clothes or washed clothes or for washing soiled clothes when such storage or boiling, keeping or washing is] for private use: 16 [Provided further that no licence shall be required under this Act for a lodging house as defined in the 17 [ Tamil Nadu] Public Health Act, 1939, (2[Tamil Nadu] Act III of 1939), if the keeper thereof has been registered under that Act.] This clause was substituted for the original clause by the Health Department Notification, dated the 27th November 1951, published at page 286 of Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 14th December 1951. This item was added by G.O. Ms. No. 893, L.A., dated the 27th April 1959. This word was substituted for the word "making" by section 174 (1) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "manufacturing beedies" by Public Health Department Notification No. 293, dated the 3rd July 1944, published at page 181 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 11th July 1944, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948, by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to Part 1-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April I949. This clause was inserted by Public Health Department Notification No. 381, dated the 18th October 1946, published at page 319 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 26th November 1946. This clause was substituted by Public Health Department Notification No. 30, dated the 18th December 1944, published at page 18 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 23rd January 1945, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948, by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949, for clause (o) as amended by Public Health Department Notification No. 58, dated the 18th January 1944, published at page 43 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 15th February 1944 and Public Health Department Notification No. 176, dated the 15th April 1944, published at page 108 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 25th April 1944, which were re-enacted permanently by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, referred to above. This word was inserted by Public Health Department Notification No. 254, dated the 12th June 1945, published at page 146 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 19th June 1945, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948 by Public Health Department Notification, dated the. 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to. Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949. This clause was substituted by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 31st March 1949, published at page 33 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949, for clause (p) as amended by Public Health. Department Notification No. 424, dated the 23rd November 1943, published at page 394 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 23rd November 1943, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948 by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules. Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949. Clauses (q), (r) (s) and (t) were substituted for the original clause (q) by section 174 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This proviso was added by Public Health Department Notification No. 425, dated the 29th September 1944, published at page 253 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 31st October 1944, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948 by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949. This clause was inserted by Public Health Department Notification No. 176, dated the 15th April 1944, published at page 108 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 25th April 1944, re-enacted permanently by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949. Clauses (q), (r) (s) and (t) were substituted for the original clause (q) by section 174 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were inserted by Local Administration Department Notification No. 1171, dated the 17th November 1941, published at page 868 of Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 25th November 1941, re-enacted permanently with retrospective effect on and from the 30th April 1948 by Public Health Department Notification, dated the 28th March 1949, published at pages 23 to 32 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 5th April 1949. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted by Health Department Notification, dated the 27th November 1951, published at page 286 of the Rules Supplement to Part I-A of the Fort St. George Gazette, dated the 1st December 1951, for the words "when such storage of boiling" which were inserted by section 174 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This proviso was added by section 28 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Third Amendment) Act, 1942 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXVIII of 1942), re-enacted permanently with specified modification by section 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No.111) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act IX of 1948). These words were substituted for the word "Madras" by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1969, as amended by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws (Second Amendment) Order, 1969, which came into force on the 14th January 1969.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu LIST OF DANGEROUS DISEASES [See Section 287] Acute influenza Leprosy. pneumonia. Plague. Anthrax. Smallpox. Chickenpox. Tuberculosis. Cholera. Typhoid fever. Diptheria.. Influenza. Enteric fever. Relapsing fever. Glanders. Rabies.
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu ORDINARY PENALTIES [See Section 313] Section or rule. Sub-section or clause. Subject. Fine which may be imposed. (1) (2) (3) (4) 1 [30 (1) Interested Councillor voting or taking part in discussion Fifty rupees]. 88 Failure to give notice of transfer of title or to produce documents. Fifty rupees. 89 2 [(1)] Failure to send notice to 3 [executive authority] after completion of construction or re-construction of building Do. 91 (1) Failure of owner or occupier to furnish return of rent, etc. One hundred rupees. 96 Failure of owner or occupier to obey requisition to furnish list of persons carrying on profession, art, etc. Do. 97 Failure of employer or head of an office, firm or company to obey requisition to furnish list of persons in his employ. Do. 102 4 [(2)] Failure of occupier to obey requisition to furnish statement of vehicles and animals liable to taxation or furnishing incorrect statement. Ten rupees. 104 Failure to obey order to affix and register number of carriage. Ten rupees. 105 (2) Failure of owner to register cart or other vehicle. Do (3) Failure to have or keep registration number to cart. Do. 5 [109 Failure to furnish lists of servants employed. 6 [...] Fifty rupees.] 7 [127] Trepassing on premises connected with the supply. Do. 130 Failure to maintain house connections in conformity with by-laws and regulations. Do. 131 (2) Failure to obey requisition to make house connection. Do. 138. Failure to maintain house-drains, etc., in conformity with by-laws and regulations. Do. 139 (2) & (3) Failure to obey requisition as to house drainage. Do. 140 (1) (b) Failure to obey direction as to limited use of drain or notice requiring construction of distinct drain. Do. 142 Unlawful construction of building over public drain. One hundred rupees. 8 [143] Failure to obey requisition regarding culverts, or to keep them free from obstruction. Fifty rupees. 144 Failure to obey requisition to maintain troughs and pipes for catching, etc., water from roof or other part of building. Do. 146 Failure to obey requisition to provide latrine or to remove latrine to another site and failure to keep latrines clean and in proper order. Fifty rupees. 147 Failure to provide latrines for premises used by large numbers of people or to keep them clean and in proper order. One hundred rupees. 148 Failure to obey requisition to provide latrines for market, cattle-stand or cart-stand or to keep them clean and in proper order. Do. 149 Failure to construct latrines so as to screen persons using them from view. Twenty rupees. 151 Making connection with mains without permission. Two hundred rupees. 157 Improper disposal of carcasses, rubbish and filth. Ten rupees. 9 [158 Allowing rubbish or filth to accumulate on premises for more than twenty-four hours, etc. Twenty rupees.] 159 Allowing filth to flow in streets Ten rupees. 160 Using cart without cover in removal of filth, etc. Twenty rupees. 161 Throwing rubbish or filth into drains. Do. 167 Building within regular lines of street. One thousand rupees. 10 [168 (1) Failure to obey orders to set back buildings. Five hundred rupees.] 173 Unlawful displacement, etc., of pavement or fences, posts and other materials of public street. Fifty rupees.  11 [...] 12 [175 Failure to provide roads, etc., on building sites prior to disposal. 13 [Two hundred rupees.] 176 (5) Unlawful making or laying of new private street Five hundred rupees. 178 Failure to obey requisition to metal, etc., private street. One hundred rupees. 14 [180] Building wall or erecting fence, etc., in a public street. Do. 15 [180-A Obstructing a person in the use of a street referred to in section 180-A. Do 181 Allowing doors, ground-floor windows, etc., to open outwards without licence or contrary to notice. Twenty rupees. 182 Failure to remove permanent encroachment. Two hundred rupees. 183 Failure to remove temporary encroachment Fifty rupees. 185 Unlawful removal of bar, or shoring timber, or removal or extinction of light. Twenty rupees. 186 Unlawful making of hole or placing of obstruction in street. Fifty rupees. 187 Construction, etc., of building without licence where street or footway is likely to be constructed. Do.  Failure to fence, etc., such building while under repair or failure to remove obstruction. Do. 188 Failure to remove obstruction caused in street by fall of trees, etc., within 12 hours of fall. Do. 189 (3) Unlawful destruction, etc., of name of street. Twenty rupees. 190 (2) Unlawful destruction etc., of number of building. twenty rupees. 16 [193 (5) Constructing or reconstructing building contrary to declaration issued by Council. Two hundred rupees.] 2[194 (1) Failure to obey requisition to round or splay off buildings at corners of street. One hundred rupees. 195 Construction of external roofs, etc., with inflammable materials. Fifty rupees. 196 Construction of door or window, etc., to open outwards on public street. Twenty rupees. 214 Failure to keep. external walls of premises improper repair. Do 218 (1) Failure to obey requisition to take down, repair or secure dangerous structure. Five hundred rupees. 219 (1) Failure to obey requisition to secure, lop, or cut down dangerous trees. Fifty rupees. 220 Failure to obey requisition to repair, etc., tank or other place dangerous to passers-by or persons living in neighbourhood. Do. 221 Failure to obey requisition to stop dangerous quarrying. One hundred rupees. 222 Failure to obey notice regarding precaution against fire. Do. 223 (1) Constructing well, etc., without permission. Fifty rupees. (3) Failure to obey notice to fillup or demolish well, etc. Do. 224 Failure to obey requisition to fill up, etc., tank or well, or drain off water, etc. Do. 225 Cultivating contrary to prohibition or regulations. Five hundred rupees. 226 Failure to obey requisition to cleanse or close, etc., tank, well or other source of water used for drinking. Fifty rupees. 17 [227-A Obstructing a person in the use and enjoyment of a well, tank or reservoir referred to in section 227-A. One hundred rupees. 228 Unlawful washing and fishing in river, etc., after prohibition or contrary to regulations. [Fifty rupees]18 230 Washing of clothes by washer m en at unauthorised places. [Twenty rupees]19 231 Defiling water of tanks, etc. [Fifty rupees.]20 232 Failure to obey requisition to enclose, clear or cleanse untenanted premises. Fifty rupees. 233 Failure to obey requisition to clear or cleanse, etc., building or land in filthy state or overgrown with noxious vegetation. Do: 234 Failure to obey requisition to fence building or land or trim, prune or cut hedges and trees or lower and enclosing wall. Do. 235 Failure to obey requisition to lime wash or otherwise cleanse building. Do. 236 Failure to obey requisition to execute work or take other action with respect to insanitary buildings. One hundred rupees in the case of building and fifty rupees in the case of hut. 237 (2) Using or allowing the use of buildings unfit for human habitation after prohibition. Twenty rupees for each day. 237 (4) Failure to obey requisition to demolish the same. Twenty rupees for each day. 238 (1) Allowing overcrowding in building after order to abate the same, Ten rupees for each day. (4) Failure to obey requisition to vacate overcrowded building or room. Do. 239 Feeding animals on filth Fifty rupees. 240 Unlawful keeping of animal so as to be a nuisance or 21 [danger]. Ten rupees. 245 Use of place as stable, cattle-stand, etc., without licence or contrary to licence. Fifty rupees. 246 Construction or maintenance of stable, cattle-shed, etc., contrary to Act or subsidiary legislation. Do. 247 Use of place as stable, cattle-stand, etc., contrary to notice issued by 22 [Executive Authority]. Two hundred rupees. 23 [249 (1) Using a place for any of the purposes specified in Schedule V without licence or contrary to licence. One hundred rupees. 250 Unlawful erection of factory, workshop, etc. One thousand rupees. 251 Disobedience of order regarding abatement of nuisance. One hundred rupees. 255 Use of place as slaughter-house without licence or contrary to licence. Two hundred rupees. 257 Slaughter of animals for sale or food or skinning or cutting up carcasses or drying skin so as to cause a nuisance. Twenty rupees for every animal, carcass or skin. 258 Carrying on milk trade without licence or contrary to licence. Fifty rupees. 24 [259 Obstructing a person in the use of a market referred to in section 259. Rs. 100] 261 Sale or exposure for sale in public market of animal or article 25 [...] without licence or contrary to licence. Twenty rupees. 262 Opening or keeping open Private Market without licence or contrary to licence. Five hundred rupees. 263 Sale or exposure for sale of animal or article in unlicensed Private Market. Twenty rupees. 264 Failure to obey direction to construct approaches, drains, etc., to Private Market or to pave them, etc. Fifty rupees. 265 (2) Opening or keeping open of Private Market after suspension or refusal of licence for default to carry out works. Twenty rupees for each day. 266 Nuisances in Private Markets. Twenty rupees. 269 Carrying on butcher's, fishmonger's or poulterer's trade without licence, etc. One hundred rupees. 270 26 [Sale or exposure for sale of animal or article in public street.] Ten rupees. 27 [270-C Using a public place or the sides of a public street or public landing place, etc. Two hundred rupees.] 28 [270-E Opening or keeping open a new private cart-stand without licence or contrary to licence. Two hundred rupees.] 273 Preventing the 29 [Executive Authority] or any person authorised by him from exercising his powers of entry, etc., under Fifty rupees. 275 Removing or in any way interfering with an animal or article secured under 30 [section 274]. Five hundred rupees. 31 [279 (1) Opening, etc., without licence a new place for the disposal of the dead. One hundred rupees.] 281 (3) 32 [Using or allowing the use] or burial or burning ground which has not been registered, licensed or provided. One hundred rupees.] 282 Failure to give information of burials or burning in burial or burning ground. Twenty rupees. 283 (3) Burial or burning in a place after prohibition. One hundred rupees. 284 Offences in respect of corpses Fifty rupees. 285 Discharge of office of grave-digger or attendant at place for disposal of dead without licence. Five rupees. 288 Failure of medical practitioner or owner to give information of existence of dangerous disease in private or public dwelling. Fifty rupees. 290 Failure to obey requisition to cleanse or disinfect buildings or articles. Do. 291 (3) Washing of infected articles at unauthorised places. Fifty rupees. 292 Giving, lending, etc., of infected articles. Do. 293 Using water after prohibition Do. 295 Infected person carrying on occupation. Do. 296 (1) Travelling of infected person in public conveyance without taking proper precautions against spread of disease. Do. (2) Entry of infected person into public conveyance without notifying fact of infection. Do. 296 (3) Carrying infected person in public conveyance. Fifty rupees. 297 Letting or sub-letting of infected building without previous disinfection, etc. Two hundred rupees. 298 Failure to close place of public entertainment. Do. 299 Sending infected child to school. Fifty rupees. 33 [301] Failure to give information of small pox. Do. 302 Person entering Municipality within forty days of inoculation for small pox without certificate. One hundred rupees. 321 (8) Failure to produce licence on request. Five rupees. 34 [325 Failure to obey summons. Fifty rupees. 333 (1) Failure of occupier to obey requisition to permit Fifty rupees for each day. 359 Obstructing or molesting Municipal Council, etc. Fifty rupees. 360 Removing mark set up for indicating level, etc. Do. 361 Removal, etc. of notice exhibited by, or under orders of the Council. Do. 362 Unlawful removal of earth, sand or other material from land vested in the Council or deposit of matter or encroachment in or on river, estuary, Twenty rupees Rule 57 3f Sch.IV Failure to obey requisition by auditors to attend, give evidence or produce document. Fifty rupees. This item was inserted by section 175 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This figure was entered by section 175 (ii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This figure was entered by section 175 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 175 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item relating to section 113 was omitted by Schedule I to the Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1931 (Tamil Nadu Act III of 1931). These figures were substituted for the figures "119" by section 175 (v) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The figure "(2)" was omitted by section 175 (vi), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was substituted for the original item by section 175 (vii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 175 (viii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The entries relating to section 174-A were omitted by section 6 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu Traffic Control Act, 1938 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1938). This item was inserted by section 175 (ix) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Do" by section 3 (1) of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XIV of 1951). These figures were substituted for the figures "183" by section 175 (x) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 5 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1929). This item was inserted by section 175 (xi) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 5 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1929). These entries were substituted for the original entries by section 175 (xii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These entries were substituted for the original entries by section 175 (xii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These entries were substituted for the original entries by section 175 (xii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This word was substituted for the word "dangerous" by section 3 (i) of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XN of 1951). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This item was inserted by section 175 (xiii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 5 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1929 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1929). The words "of food" were omitted by section 175 (xiv) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "Sale of article in public street" by section 175 (xv) (a) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These items were inserted by section 175 (xv) (b), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These items were inserted by section 175 (xv) (b), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). This expression was substituted for the word and figures "section 269" by section 175 (xvi) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 175 (xvii), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the words "Use or allowance of use" by section 3 (1) of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XIV of 1951). These figures were substituted for the figures "300" by section 175 (xviii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 175 (xix), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu PENALTIES FOR CONTINUING BREACHES [See Section 313] Section or rule. Sub-section or clause. Subject. Daily fine which may be imposed. (1) (2) (3) (4) 130 Failure to maintain house-connections in conformity with by-laws and regulations. Five rupees. 131 (2) Failure to obey requisition to make house- connection. Do. 138 Failure to maintain house drains, etc., in conformity with by-laws and regulations Ten rupees 139 (2) and (3 Failure to obey requisition as to house- drainage. Do. 144 Failure to obey requisition to maintain troughs and pipes for catching, etc., water from roof or other part of building. Do. 146 Failure to obey requisition to provide latrine or to remove latrine to another site and failure to keep latrines clean and in proper order. Do. 147 Failure to provide latrines for premises used by large numbers of people or to keep them clean and in proper order. Twenty rupees. 148 Failure to obey requisition to provide latrines market, cattle-stand or cart-stand or to keep clean and in proper order. Do. 1 [167] Building within regular lines of street. 2 [...] One hundred rupees.] 3 [175 Failure to provide roads, etc, on building sites prior to disposal]. Five rupees. 182 Failure to remove permanent encroachment Ten rupees. 183 Failure to remove temporary encroachment Five rupees. 186 Unlawful making of hole or placing of obstruction in street. Ten rupees. 187 Construction, etc., of building without licence where street or footway is likely to be obstructed. Do. 4 [194 (1) Failure to obey requisition to round or splay off buildings at corners of street. Fifty rupees.] 195 Construction of external roofs, etc., with inflammable materials. 5 [Ten rupees.] 214 Failure to keep external walls of premises in proper repair. Do. 220 Failure to obey requisition to repair, etc., tank or other place dangerous to passers-by or persons living in neighbourhood. Ten rupees. 221 Failure to obey requisition to stop dangerous quarrying. Do. 222 Failure to obey notice regarding precautions against fire. Do. 224 Failure to obey requisition to fill up, etc., tank or well or drain off water, etc. Do. 226 Failure to obey requisition to cleanse or close, etc., tank, well, etc., or other source of water used for drinking. Do. 232 Failure to obey requisition to enclose, clear or cleanse untenanted premises. Do. 233 Failure to obey requisition to clear or cleanse, etc., building or land in filthy state or overgrown with noxious vegetation. Do. 234 Failure to obey requisition to fence building or land, or trim, prune or cut hedges and trees or lower an enclosing wall. Do. 235 Failure to obey requisition to lime wash or otherwise cleanse building. Fifty rupees. 236 Failure to obey requisition to execute work or take other action with respect to insanitary buildings. Ten rupees in the case of building and five rupees in the case of hut. 240 Unlawful keeping of animal so as to be a nuisance or 6 [danger]. Five rupees. 245 use of place as stable, cattle-stand, etc., without licence or contrary to licence. Ten rupees. 246 Construction or maintenance of stable, cattle-shed, etc., contrary to Act or subsidiary legislation. Do. 247 Use of place as stable, cattle-shed, etc., contrary to notice issued by 7 [Executive Authority]. Fifty rupees. 3[249 (1) Using a place for any of the purposes specified in Schedule V without licence or contrary to licence. Twenty rupees. 250 Unlawful erection of factory, work- shop, etc. One hundred rupees. 251 Disobedience of order regarding nuisance. Do. 255 Use of place as slaughter-house without licence or contrary to licence. Fifty rupees. 262 Opening or keeping open Private Market without licence or contrary to licence. One hundred rupees. 263 Sale or exposure for sale of animal or article in unlicensed Private Market. Twenty rupees. 269 Carrying on butcher's fishmonger's or poulterer's trade without licence, etc. Ten rupees. 8 [270-C Using a public place or the sides of a public street as a public landing place, etc. Twenty rupees. 270-E Opening or keeping open a new private cart-stand without licence or contrary to licence.. Do. 279 Using without licence a place for the disposal of the dead. One hundred rupees.] 290 Failure to obey requisition to cleanse or disinfect buildings or articles. 9 [Ten rupees.] 10 [298 Failure to close place of public entertainment. One hundred rupees.] Rule 573f Sch IV. Failure to obey requisition by auditors to attend, give evidence or produce document. Twenty-five rupees. These figures were substituted for the figures "168" by section 176 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). The entries relating to section 174-A were omitted by section 6 (iv) of the Tamil Nadu Traffic Control Act, 1938 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1938). This item was inserted by section 29 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Third Amendment) Act, 1942 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXVIII of 1942), re-enacted permanently with specified modifications by section 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Re-enacting (No.III) Act, 1948 (Tamil Nadu Act IX of 1948). This item was inserted by section 176 (iii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Do" by section 176 (iv), of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This word were substituted for the word "dangerous" by section 3 (i) of, and the Second Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu repealing and Amending Act, 1951 (Tamil Nadu Act XIV of 1951). These words were substituted for the word "Chairman" by section 17 (i) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1933 (Tamil Nadu Act XV of 1933). These item were inserted by section 176 (vi) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). These words were substituted for the word "Do" by section 176 (vii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930). This item was inserted by section 176 (viii) of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1930 (Tamil Nadu Act X of 1930).
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 SCHEDULE IX 2 LIST OF MUNICIPALITIES FOR WHICH COMMISSIONERS SHALL BE APPOINTED [See Section 3(8-C) and 12-C] (1) Coimbatore,3 (2) Kumbakonam, (3) Madurai,4 (4) Octacamund, (5) Salem, (6) Tanjore, (7) Tiruchirapalli,5 (8) Tuticorin, (9) Gudiyattam, (10) Tirupattur, (11) Tiruvannamalai, (12) Vaniyambadi, (13) Vellore, (14) Walajapet, (15) Chidambaram, (16) Cuddalore, (17) Villupuram, (18) Chingleput, (19) Kancheepuram, (20) Dharapuram, (21) Erode, (22) Pollachi, (23) Tiruppur, (24) Udumalpet, (25) Bodinayakanur, (26) Dindigul, (27) Kodaikanal, (28) Palani, (29) Periyakulam, (30) Coonoor, (31) Devakottai, (32) Karaikudi, (33) Sivakasi, (34) Srivilliputtur, (35) Virudhunagar, (36) Mannargudi, (37) Mayuram,6 (38) Nagapattinam, (39) Tiruvarur, (40) Palayamkottai, (41) Tirunelveli,7 (42) Srirangam, (43) Karur, (44) Ambur, (45) Aruppukkotai, (46) Tiruvallur, (47) Melapalayam, (48) Mettupalayam, (49) Rasipuram,. (50) Pudukkottai, (51) Tindivanam, (52) Gobichettipalayam, (53) Rajapalayam, (54) Arni.] This Schedule was substituted by clause 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957 for items (1) to (61) of Schedule IX, substituted for the original Schedule by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954 With effect on and from the 1st April 1959, the following Municipalities were deemed to have been included in this Schedule, namely:- (1) Padmanabhapuram. (2) Colachel, (3) Kuzhithurai. (4) Nagercoil. (5) Shencottah. Please see rule 3 in the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Extension to the Transferee Terrority) Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1959) This Schedule was substituted by clause 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957 for items (1) to (61) of Schedule IX, substituted for the original Schedule by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954 This Schedule was substituted by clause 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957 for items (1) to (61) of Schedule IX, substituted for the original Schedule by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954 This Schedule was substituted by clause 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957 for items (1) to (61) of Schedule IX, substituted for the original Schedule by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954 With effect on and from the 1st April 1959, the following Municipalities were deemed to have been included in this Schedule, namely:- (1) Padmanabhapuram. (2) Colachel, (3) Kuzhithurai. (4) Nagercoil. (5) Shencottah. Please see rule 3 in the Schedule to the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Extension to the Transferee Terrority) Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1959). This Schedule was substituted by clause 3 of, and the Schedule to, the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957 for items (1) to (61) of Schedule IX, substituted for the original Schedule by the Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1954
Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920_Section Sch.10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu SCHEDULE X1 [See Section 374] 1. Planning for economic and social development. 2. Roads and bridges. 3. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 4. Public Health, sanitation, conservancy and solid waste management. 5. Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of ecological aspects. 6. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, including the handicaped and mentally retarded. 7. Slum improvement and upgradation. 8. Urban poverty alleviation. 9. Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens play grounds. 10. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. 11. Burials and burial grounds, cremations and cremation grounds and electric crematorium. 12. Cattle ponds, prevention of cruelty to animals. 13. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 14. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public conveniences. 15. Regulations of slaughter houses and tanneries. 2 [16. Urban Planning including town planning. 17. Regulation of land use and construction of buildings. 18. Fire Services.] Inserted by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1994) Inserted by the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities (Amendment) Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1994) 
