Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University Act, 1996. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force at once.
Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 12 of the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University Act, 1996, for sub-section (2) including the proviso thereto, the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the Committee shall consist of (i) a nominee of the Government, who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or any High Court or an eminent educationist; (ii) a nominee of the Academic Senate who shall be an eminent educationist; and (iii) a nominee of the Syndicate who shall be an eminent educationist. Explanation.- For the purpose of this sub-section, "eminent educationist" means a person,- (i) who is or has been a Vice-Chancellor of any Law University or National Law School established by the State Government or Central Government; or (ii) who is a distinguished academician, with a minimum of ten years of experience as Professor in any Law University or National Law School or in both taken together; or (iii) who is or has been a Director or Head of any Law University or National Law School: Provided that the person so nominated shall not be a member of any of the authorities of the University or shall not be connected with the University or any college or any recognized institution of the University. (2-A) A person recommended by the Committee for appointment as Vice-Chancellor shall- (i) be a distinguished academician with highest level of competence, integrity, morals and institutional commitment; (ii) possess such educational qualifications and experience as may be specified by the State Government in consultation with the Chancellor by an order published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette. (2-B) The process of nominating the members to the Committee by the Government, the Academic Senate and the Syndicate shall begin six months before the probable date of occurrence of vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor and shall be completed four months before the probable date of occurrence of vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor. (2-C) The process of preparing the panel of suitable persons for appointment as Vice-Chancellor shall begin at least four months before the probable date of occurrence of vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor. (2-D) The Committee shall submit its recommendation to the Chancellor within four months from the date of its constitution. If the Committee does not submit its recommendation to the Chancellor within the said period, the Chancellor may grant further time to the Committee to submit its recommendation or take steps to constitute another Committee in accordance with sub-section (2).".
Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing contained in sub-sections (2), (2-A), (2-B), (2-C) and (2-D) of section 12 of the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University Act, 1996, as amended or inserted by the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017, shall apply to the Committee constituted under sub-section (2) of section 12 of the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University Act, 1996 immediately before the commencement of the Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University (Amendment) Act, 2017. (By order of the Governor) (S.S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government-in-charge, Law Department. 
