Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax Act, 1939. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax Act, 1939 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), in clause (a), in sub-clause (i), for the expression "thirty per cent", the expression "twenty-five per cent" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Entertainments Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 5-A of the principal Act, for the Table, the following Table shall be substituted, namely :- "THE TABLE Local areas Theatres Rate of tax for Rate of tax for every show of every show of new film. old film. (1) (2) (3) (4) (a) Municipalities, (i) Permanent 19 per cent of 15 per cent of Selection and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- grade. permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 14 per cent of 12 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (b) Municipalities, (i) Permanent 18 per cent of 15 per cent of First Grade and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 14 per cent of 11 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (c) Municipalities, (i) Permanent 17 per cent of 13 per cent of Second Grade and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 13 per cent of 10 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (d) Municipalities, (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 12 per cent of Third Grade and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 12 per cent of 10 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (e) Selection (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 12 per cent of Grade and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- Panchayat permanent tion capacity for ection capacity Towns. theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 12 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (f) Other Pancha- (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 11 per cent of yat Towns. and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- Panchayat permanent tion capacity for ection capacity Towns. theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 11 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (g) Panchayat (i) Permanent 12 per cent of 9 per cent of villages. and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 10 per cent of 8 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (h) Townships (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 12 per cent of (Municipal). and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 12 per cent of 10 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. (h) Townships (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 11 per cent of (Panchayats). and semi- the gross collec- the gross coll- permanent tion capacity for ection capacity theatres. every show. for every show. (ii) Temporary 11 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross collec- the gross coll- and open tion capacity for ection capacity air every show. for every show. theatres. 4. Amendment of section 5-B. - In section 5-B of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (1), for the expression "section 5-A", the expression "section 4 in respect of the areas of Municipal Corporations and Special Grade Municipalities or under section 5-A" shall be substituted; (2) for the Table, the following Table shall be substituted, namely :- "THE TABLE Local areas Theatres Amount of tax Amount of tax for new film for old film (1) (2) (3) (4) (a) Municipal Cor- (i) Permanent 22 per cent of 13 per cent of porations. and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 25. plied by 23. (ii) Open air 12 per cent of 9 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (b) Municipal (i) Permanent 21 per cent of 13 per cent of Special and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Grade. permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 25. plied by 23. (ii) Open air 12 per cent of 9 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (c) Municipa- (i) Permanent 17 per cent of 13 per cent of lities, and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Selection permanent ction capacity ction capacity Grade. theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 23. plied by 23. (ii) Temporary 12 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 12 per cent of 9 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (d) Municipa- (i) Permanent 16 per cent of 13 per cent of lities, and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Selection permanent ction capacity ction capacity Grade. theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 21. plied by 21. (ii) Temporary 11 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 11 per cent of 9 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (e) Municipa- (i) Permanent 14 per cent of 12 per cent of lities, and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Second Grade permanent ction capacity ction capacity Grade. theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 21. plied by 21. (ii) Temporary 11 per cent of 9 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 11 per cent of 9 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (f) Municipa- (i) Permanent 12 per cent of 10 per cent of lities, and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Third Grade permanent ction capacity ction capacity Grade. theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 21. plied by 21. (ii) Temporary 10 per cent of 8 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 10 per cent of 8 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (g) Selection (i) Permanent 12 per cent of 9 per cent of Grade and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- Panchayat permanent ction capacity ction capacity Towns. theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 17. plied by 17. (ii) Temporary 9 per cent of 8 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 9 per cent of 8 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (h) Other Pan- (i) Permanent 10 per cent of 8 per cent of chayat Towns. and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 17. plied by 17. (ii) Temporary 9 per cent of 7 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 9 per cent of 7 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (i) Panchayat (i) Permanent 9 per cent of 8 per cent of villages. and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 16. plied by 16. (ii) Temporary 8 per cent of 7 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 8 per cent of 7 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (j) Townships (i) Permanent 12 per cent of 10 per cent of (Municipal) and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 21. plied by 21. (ii) Temporary 10 per cent of 8 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 10 per cent of 8 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. (j) Townships (i) Permanent 10 per cent of 8 per cent of (Panchayats) and semi- the gross colle- the gross colle- permanent ction capacity ction capacity theatres. a show multi- a show multi- plied by 21. plied by 21. (ii) Temporary 9 per cent of 7 per cent of (touring) the gross colle- the gross colle- theatres. ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 14. iplied by 14 (iii) Open air 9 per cent of 7 per cent of theatres. the gross colle- the gross colle- ction capacity ction capacity for a show mult- for a show mult- iplied by 12. iplied by 12. Explanation. - For the purpose of this section, - (i) "Municipal Corporation" means the Municipal Corporations of Chennai, Madurai, Coimbatore, Tiruchirappalli, Tirunelveli, Salem or any other Municipal Corporation that may be constituted under any law for the time being in force. (ii) "Municipality Special Grade" means Special Grade Municipality constituted under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu V of 1920). 5. Amendment of section 5-E. - In section 5-E of the principal Act, after the expression "section 5-B", the expression "other than the areas of Municipal Corporations and Municipalities, Special Grade" shall be inserted. 
