Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) (a) The provisions of this Act, except sub-clause (m) of clause (3) of section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th day of August, 2001. (b) Sub-clause (m) of clause (3) of section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of August, 2001.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (1) Part-A and all items and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (2) in Part-B, - (a) item 3-A and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (b) for item 7 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "7. Biscuits which are not branded First sale"; (c) items 7-A, 10 and 10-A and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (d) for item 12 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "12 (i) Cattle feed supplements and concentrates. First sale"; (ii) Poultry feed supplements and concentrates. (e) in item 21, for the expression "cycle seat covers, cycle dynamo lights", the expression "cycle seat covers, cycle locks, cycle dynamo lights" shall be substituted; (f) for item 22-C and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "22-C (i) Flour of pulses and grams First sale"; (ii) Flour of grams, rice and ragi mixed with Spices/masala powder sold with or without brand name (g) item 22-D and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (h) for item 22-E and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "22-E (i) Fried groundnut kernal First sale"; (ii) Parched gram or fried gram (i) sub-item (i) of item 30, items 31, 47-B, 50 and 53 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (j) in item 79, for the sub-items (i) and (ii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "(i) Tractors of all kinds (excluding crawler tractors) and articles (excluding batteries) adapted for use, generally as parts and accessories of tractors and tools and implements used therewith. First sale"; (ii) Trailers of tractors of all kinds (k) in item 87, for the expression "items 18, 49", the expression "items 18, 19, 49" shall be substituted; (l) after item 90 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :-(3) in Part-C, - (a) in item 16, after sub-item (xii), the following sub-item and entries relating thereto, shall be added, namely :- "(xiii) All other dyes not specified elsewhere in the Schedule."; (b) in item 17, for the expression "Fluorescent lighting tubes", the expression "compact fluorescent lamps, fluorescent lighting tubes" shall be substituted; (c) for item 21 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(d) in item 22 in the Explanation-I, for the expression "3 in Part-D", the expression" 32 in Part-DD" shall be substituted; (e) items 24 and 27 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (f) in item 30, after sub-item (vi) and before the proviso thereunder, the following sub-item shall be inserted, namely :- "(vii) Printing, writing, teleprinter, typewriting, manifold and bond paper and computer stationery of all kinds."; (g) for item 31 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(h) in item 32, after the expression "parts and accessories thereof and lenses", the expression "Photographic films, plates, paper, prints, instant print films and chemicals used in the photographic development and printing process" shall be added; (i) for item 33 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(j) in item 41, for the expression "all kinds", the expression "all kinds, parts and accessories thereof and needles used therewith" shall be substituted; (k) sub-item (i) of item 43 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (l) for item 46 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(m) in item 52, for sub-items (iv) to (vii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "(iv) all printed materials other than those specified in sub-items (i) to (iii) above, whether made of paper, paper board or other materials like account books, registers, order books, receipt books, memorandum pads, folders, file covers, book covers, greeting cards and invitation cards of all kinds and trade mark labels including those materials manufactured according to specification of customers whether or not with logo or name or matter."; (n) item 64 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (o) for item 65 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(p) after item 68 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :-(4) Part-CC shall be omitted; (5) in Part-D, items 3, 4, 5, 5-A, 6, 7, 7-A, 8, 10, 11, 13, 17, 22, 23, 25, 27, 29-A, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 46, 48, 49, 50, 54, 55, 56, 57, sub-item (i) of item 59 and items 62, 64, 65 and 65-A and the entries relating thereto, shall be omitted; (6) in Part-DD, - (a)(i) in item 13, for sub-item (ii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-items and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(b) for item 15 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(c) for item 29 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :-(d) after item 31 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :-(7) in Part-Z, after item 2, the following item and entries shall be added, namely :- "91. Jari of all kinds including metallic yarn, metallic jari yarn, metallic plastic yarn, polyester film yarn and radiant yarn. First sale 92. Jeera including black jeera (cumin seeds) First sale 93. Maize products First sale 94. Manmade staple fibres, fibre yarn, filament yarn and waste of any of them. First sale 95. Silk cotton seeds. First sale"; "21. Footwear other than those specified in the Third Schedule. First sale"; "31. Paper napkin and paper cups. First sale"; "33. HDPE/PP woven strips, HDPE/PP circular strips and woven fabrics First sale"; "46. (i) Parts and accessories, including fare meters but excluding batteries, tyres, tubes and flaps of two wheelers and three wheelers specified in item 66 of Part-DD of the Schedule. First sale"; (ii) Bulbs and horns fitted to all motor vehicles. "65. Pagers and cellular telephones First sale."; "69. Musical instruments of all kinds other than Indian musical instruments First sale. 70. Bakery products which are not branded. First sale. 71. Butter and ghee First sale. 72. Dumpers, loaders, scrapers, crawler tractors, excavators, bull dozers and wheel dozers. First sale. 73. Toffees, confectionery and chocolates which are not branded. First sale. 74. Tyres (including pneumatic tyres, radial tyres), tubes and flaps ordinarily used for tractors except crawler tractor and trailer of tractors. First sale."; "(ii) Paver finishers, dragnets, dredgers, road rollers and other similar varieties of machinery of which a mechanically propelled vehicle forms an integral part (other than those specified elsewhere in the Schedule). (iii) Crane lorries including floating cranes, break down lorries, road sweeper lorries, spraying lorries, concrete mixer lorries, mobile workshops, mobile radiological units, ambulances, fire-fighting units including fire floats, drilling rigs mounted on motor vehicles and floating vessels platform trucks, fork lift trucks and other similar varieties of machinery of which a mechanically propelled vehicle forms an integral part which is subsidiary to their main function. (iv) Parts and accessories of motor vehicles and trailers falling under sub-items (i) to (iii) above and item 72 of Part-C including faremeters but excluding batteries."; "15. Rubber latex compound and rubber products excluding pharmaceutical and surgical products), namely :- First sale"; (i) Compound rubber, unvulcanised, in primary forms or in plates, sheets or strips. (ii) Other forms (like rods, tubes and profile shapes) and articles (for example discs and rings of rubber). (iii) Rubber thread and cord. (iv) Plates, blocks, sheets, strips, rods and profile shapes of rubber. (v) Tubes, pipes and hoses of rubber with or without their fittings (for example, joints, elbows, flanges). (vi) Conveyor, transmission or elevator belts or belting of rubber whether combined with any textile material or otherwise. (vii) Interchangeable tyre treads (tread rubber). (viii) Articles of apparel and clothing accessories (including gloves) for all purposes of rubber. (ix) Hardened rubber (for example ebonite) in all forms, including waste and scrap and articles of hard rubber. (x) Other articles of rubber."; "29. Ethyl alcohol, absolute alcohol, methyl alcohol, rectified spirit, neutral spirit and denatured spirit, First sale"; "32. Asphalt (bitumen) First sale. 33. Barbed wire, wire mesh, chicken-mesh expanded metal and chain link made of any metal or material. First sale. 34. Toffees, confectionery and chocolates which are sold under a brand name. First sale. 35. Biscuits which are sold under a brand name. First sale. 36. Bolts, nuts and rivets, threaded or tapped and screws of base metal or alloys thereof, including bolt end, screw studs, screw studding, self- tapped screw, screw hooks, screw rings and screw eye and hooks and (i) clamps of all kinds, (ii) cotter pins of all kinds, (iii) valves of all kinds including pressure relief valves and control valves, (iv) washers of all kinds (v) perforated sheet of any metal or material. First sale. 37. Brake fluid. First sale. 38. (i) Branded, processed and packed fresh meat, poultry, fish, sea food and eggs. First sale. (ii) Branded and packed fresh vegetables and fruits. 39. Carbide tips and tools and hand tools. First sale. 40. Carbon black and acetylene black. First sale. 41. Chemicals, the following :- (i) Soda ash, (ii) Bleaching powder, (iii) Sodium bi-carbonate, (iv) Sodium hydrosulphite, (v) Sulphate of alumina, (vi) Sodium nitrate, (vii) Sodium acetate, (viii) Sodium sulphate, (ix) Acid slurry, (x) Trisodium phosphate, (xi) Sodium tripoly phosphate, (xii) Sodium silicate, (xiii) Sodium metasilicate, (xiv) Carboxy methyl cellulose, (xv) Sodium sulphide, (xvi) Acetic acid, (xvii) Sodium bi-sulphate, (xviii) Oxalic acid, (xix) Sodium thio-sulphate,(xx) Sodium sulphite, (xxi) Sodium alginate, (xxii) Benzene, (xxiii) Citric acid, (xxiv) Diethylene glycol, (xxv) Sodium nitrate, (xxvi) Hydrogen peroxide, (xxvii) Acetaldehyde, (xxviii) Pentaerythriotol, (xxix) Sodium alpha olefin sulphonate, (xxx) Sodium formate, (xxxi) All other chemicals not specified elsewhere in the Schedule. First sale. 42. Cuddapah stone slabs and shahabad stone slabs. First sale. 43. Electrical goods of all kinds (other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule) used in the generation, transmission, distribution or in connection with the consumption of electricity including all kinds of wires and cableS, empire cloth and empire sleeves, holders, plugs, switches, casings, cappings, reapers, bends, junction boxes, coupling boxes, meter boxes, switch boxes, fuse switch boxes, distribution boxes, power meters, meter boards, switch boards, wooden plugs (gettis), lightning arrestors, electrical earthenware and porcelain-ware, parts and accessories of all such goods. First sale. 44. Furnaces and boilers of all types including fluidized bed boilers and ignifluid boilers and boilers using agricultural waste as fuel but not including boilers using municipal waste only as fuel. First sale. 45. (i) Granite blocks (rough or raw) First sale. (ii) Polished granite slabs, including tomb stones, monument slab and head stone. 46. Handmade soap of all kinds (both bathing and washing) including soap flakes, powder, liquids and detergents but excluding shampoo and metal polishers in any form. First sale. 47. Ice-creams of all kinds, including ice-candy, ice-cake, ice-jelly, fruti, kulfi and frozen confectionery, frozen dessert sold under a brand name, whether such brands are Registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (Central Act 43 of 1958) or not. First sale. 48. Locks of all kinds and varieties except bicycle locks. First sale. 49. Machineries of all kinds (other than those specifically mentioned in this Schedule) worked by (i) Electricity, (ii) Nuclear power, (iii) Hydro-dynamic and steam power, (iv) Diesel or petrol, (v) Furnace oil, (vi) Kerosene, (vii) Coal including coke and charcoal, (viii) any other form of fuel or power (excluding human or animal labour), (ix) Parts and accessories of machineries and tools used with the machineries mentioned in sub-items (i) and (viii) above. First sale. 50. Mercury. First sale. 51. Nitric, hydrochloric and sulphuric acids. First sale. 52. Oil engines parts and accessories thereof. First sale. 53. Plastic products, including melamine wear and break resistant plastics other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. First sale. 54. Playing cards. First sale. 55. Power factor and shunt capacitors of all kinds. First sale. 56. Pre-recorded video cassette and compact discs. First sale. 57. Rail coaches, wagons, containers for the transport of fluids, other rail coaches specially designed for specific purposes and rail locomotives, parts and accessories thereof. First sale. 58. Readymix concrete. First sale. 59. Rubber of synthetic origin including butadiene acrylonitrile rubber, styrene butadiene rubber and butyl rubber, synthetic rubber latex, including pre-vulcanised synthetic rubber latex. First sale. 60. (i) Ships, steamers, motor and steam boats and launches, trawlers, tugs, submarines, oil tankers and other vessels operated by any form of power, including their hulls, engines, parts and accessories thereof. First sale. (ii) Barges and canoes and similar vessels not coming under sub-item (i) above. 61. Squashes and essences. First sale. 62. Stainless steel articles made wholly or principally of stainless steel other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. First sale. 63. (i) Steel almirahs and furniture of all kinds including household furniture (other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule) made from all kinds of metals, fibre glass, wood, reinforced plastic or made primarily from any kind of plastics, upholstered furniture or furniture in the manufacture of which laminated sheets are used, whether sold in assembled or unassembled form and ready to assemble, parts thereof and all kinds of stands. First sale. (ii) Office equipments of every description, including filing cabinets, card index cabinets, paper, trays, paper rests, pen-trays, office stamp stands and similar office or desk equipments whether sold in assembled or unassembled form and ready to assemble, parts thereof (other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule and stationery. articles) Explanation. - Slotted angles, gussets, plates, panels and Strips which when assembled form furniture or equipments, shall be deemed to be furniture or office equipments, as the case may be, for the purpose of this item. 64. Suit cases, brief cases, attache cases, despatch cases, vanity bags, vanity cases and vanity boxes (other than those specified elsewhere in the Schedule). Explanation. - Vanity bag, vanity case and vanity box mean a bag, a case or a box holding a mirror and cosmetics or toiletries. First sale. 65. Sulphur. First sale. 66. (i) Three wheelers by whatever name known including autorickshaws, chassis of autorickshaws and other three wheelers, bodies or tankers, built or meant for mounting on three wheeler chassis belonging to others (on the turnover relating to bodies). First sale. (ii) Motor cycles, motor cycle combinations, motor scooters, motor scooter combinations, motorettes and mopeds. (iii) Motorised bi-cycles, tri-cycles, cycle rickshaws, tandem cycles, cycle combinations, carriages for invalid persons and perambulators. 67. Tyres including pneumatic tyres, tubes and flaps, ordinarily used with power driven two wheelers, three wheelers, four wheelers and higher number of wheelers (whether or not such tyres are also used for other purposes) other than those specified elsewhere in the Schedule. First sale. 68. Water meters, gas meters, industrial thermometers, parts and accessories thereof. First sale. 69. Welding electrodes, graphite electrodes, welding rods of all kinds, including brazen rods and soldering wires. First sale. 70. Wet grain grinders worked by any form of power, other than human labour (whether or not sold as a composite unit, with or without motors), parts and accessories of such grinders. First sale;" "3. Synthetic gem. First sale.";
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Second Schedule to the principal Act, in sub-item (b) of item 7, for the figure "2" in column (4), the figure "4" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in Part-B, - (1) in item 8, for the expression, "milo and maize", the expression "and milo" shall be substituted; (2) item 47 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (3) for item 73 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and the entries shall be substituted, namely :- "73. Non-pressure kerosene stoves and parts and accessories of kerosene stoves."; (4) in item 81, sub-item (e) and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (5) in item 106, after sub-item (xxvii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-items and entries relating thereto shall be added, namely :- "(xxviii) Iron vadai chatti (xxix) Iron aduppu (xxx) Iron karandi (xxxi) Iron murukku and idiappa ural (xxxii) Oothu kuzhai, thee idukki and parthira kuradu (xxxiii) Zinc milk can (xxxiv) Zinc bucket and andaa (xxxv) Iron muram and koodai (xxxvi) Dosai kal and kinatru urulai (xxxvii) Rat traps (xxxviii) Iron salladi (xxxix) Mathu, bajji kattai, poori palagai and kuzhavi."; (6) after item 113 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries relating thereto shall be added, namely :- "114. Footwear with MRP rate of less than rupees one hundred. 115. Hand pumps used for the supply and distribution of water, parts and accessories thereof.". 
