Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State Tamil Nadu in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(2-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), in the case of goods mentioned in the Fifth Schedule, the tax under this Act shall be payable by a dealer, at the rate and at the point specified therein on the turnover in each year relating to such goods whatever be the quantum of turnover in that year : Provided that in respect of sale by the first dealer to another registered dealer, the dealer selling the goods shall furnish to the assessing authority in the prescribed manner within the prescribed period a declaration duly filled in and signed by the dealer to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in a prescribed form, obtained from the prescribed authority.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the principal Act, item 109 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be added, namely :- "THE FIFTH SCHEDULE (See section 3(2-A)) Serial Description of Point of levy and rate of tax number goods per cent. (1) (2) (3) At the point At the point At the point of first sale of first sale of last sale in the State in the State in the State. to persons to a other than registered registered dealer. dealers. (a) (b) (c) Articles made of 10 6 4". stainless steel other than those specified in the First Schedule. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Bill, 1986 (L.A. Bill No. 56 of 1986) (Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary No. 245, Part IV, Section 1, dated May 14th, 1986, page 381.), runs as follows :- "At the present sales tax is levied at 10 per cent on stainless steel articles at the point of first sales. The Government have decided to split, up this rate into 6 per cent at the point of first sale and 4 per cent at the point of last sale as a measure to plug loopholes in the evasion of tax under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959). The Government have accordingly proposed to add a new sub-section (2-A) to section 3 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959), and also to add a new Schedule to the said Act as Fifth Schedule, specifying the point of levy and rate of tax. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects." 
