Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Forty-eight Year of Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1997. (2)(a) The provisions of this Act, except sub-clause (b) of clause (2), and sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) of clause (4), of section 2, shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of March, 1997; (b) Sub-clause (b) of clause (2), and sub-clause (a) and sub-clause (b) of clause (4), of section 2, shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of February, 1997.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the First Schedule, - (1) in Part A, - (a) for item 1 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "1 Accessories of television set First sale 1-A Bullion, that is to say, gold and First sale silver in mass and uncoined, pure or alloy and specie including palaramarel silver and kora gold. 1-B Modem and speakers, parts and First sale accessories thereof. 1-C Parts and accessories (including First sale"; ribbons) of eletronic goods falling under items 18 and 75 of Part B, items 18 and 49 of Part C and items 18, 19, 20, 21, 26, 52, 58, 61 and 66 of Part D of the First Schedule by any dealer. (b) after item 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "2-A Small transformers used in electronic First sale"; equipments, including - (i) Transformers (power and control) (step down from 230 V to less than 100 V of power rating not exceeding 250 VA), (ii) Buck boost transformers (230 V/less than 100 V), (iii) Inverter transformers, (iv) Isolation transformers, (v) Rectifier transformers, (vi) Ferro resonant transformers, vii) Line driver transformers (less than 50 VA), (viii) Fly back transformers/line output transformers/ extra high tension transformers, (ix) Main filter transformers, (x) Line driver transformers, (xi) Toroidal core transformers and R-Core transformers, (xii) Switch mode power supply transformers. Sub-items (viii) to (xii) above are ferrite transformers. Explanation- All the above transformers shall be deemed to fall under this item only if each of them has not even one of the windings rated above 500 V AC. (2) in Part B, - (a) after item 6 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "6-A Biomass briquettes First sale"; (b) after item 7 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "7-A Biscuits which are sold under a brand First sale"; name not registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (Central Act 43 of 1958) (c) after item 7-A as so inserted and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "7-B Blue metal First sale 7-C Brass and copper domestic utensils First sale"; (d) in item 18, for the entry in column (2), the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "Computers of analog and digital varieties and peripherals"; (e) in item 21, in the entries in column (2), the expression "carriages for invalid persons" shall be omitted; (f) after item 22 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "22-A Fish net First sale 22-B Flavoured milk with or without First sale brand name 22-C Footwear without brand name First sale 22-D Fried groundnut kernel First sale"; (g) after item 24 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "24-A Glass beads and glass marbles First sale"; (goli gundu) (h) item 27 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (i) after item 32 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "32-A Helmets First sale"; (j) item 35 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (k) after item 43 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "43-A Mosquito destroyers and insect First sale"; killer devices including heating devices used with insect repellent mats (l) after item 46 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "46-A Paper bags First sale"; (m) for item 47 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "47 Old brass, copper and stainless Last purchase. steel vessels 47-A Parched gram or fried gram First sale 47-B Parts and accessories of sewing and First sale"; embroidery machines of all kinds and needles used therewith. (n) for item 52 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "52 Plastic scrap Last purchase 52-A Power tiller First sale"; (o) items 65 and 66 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (p) after item 69 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "69-A Sprinkler and drip irrigation equipments First sale 69-B Stainless steel household and domestic First sale utensils including copper or other metal bottomed utensils and non-stick lined utensils 69-C Stationery goods, namely, painting boxes, First sale"; painting water colours, oil colours in cake or in liquid forms, drawing boards, brushes used therein. (q) after item 70 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "70-A Students' note books and copy books First sale"; other than those specified in item 54 of Part B of the Third Schedule (r) after item 72 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "72-A Tamil typewriters First sale"; (s) in item 74, in the entries in column (2), the expression "tapioca kappi and tapioca thippi" shall be omitted; (t) in item 75, for the entries in column (2), the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Television sets and T. V. antenna"; (u) items 77 and 78 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (v) before item 79 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "78-A Toys of all kinds First sale"; (w) after item 82 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "82-A Waste paper First sale"; (3) in Part C, - (a) for item 1 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "1. Adisarakku items, that is to say - First sale"; 1. Adi thanda 2. Angle brackets 3. Arukamanai 4. Bed bolt 5. Clamps used in pump sets 6. Door chains 7. Door jakki 8. Door kundu 9. Door pattas 10. Dosai chatti 11. Ghamellas of santhu chatti 12. Keels 13. Keels used in pump sets 14. Kokki bolt 15. Kolu pattai used in tractor 16. Kolu pattai 17. Kolu aani, kasu aani used in ploughs 18. Kumizh set 19. Kondis 20. L brackets 21. Mookanam kayiru chains 22. Nembu 23. Spoons made of steel 24. T. Thappal 25. Vandi pattai 26. Vandi acchu 27. Vasakkal brackets "1-A Aluminum, pure or alloy in the form of, - First sale"; (i) Ingots, (ii) bars, (iii) blocks, (iv) slabs, (v) billets, (vi) shots, (vii) pellets, (viii) plates, (ix) sheets, (x) circles, (xi) wires, (xii) strips, (xiii) rods, (xiv) wire rods and (xv) any alloy of aluminium with any other metal or metals on the turnover relating to components which have not already suffered tax : Provided that, if any, aluminium, pure or alloy has suffered tax under any one of the sub-items mentioned above, it shall not be again subject to tax under the same or any other sub-items aforesaid. (b) in item 12, in sub-item (ii), in the entries in column (2), the expression "flavoured milk and" shall be omitted; (c) in item 18, for the entries in column (2), the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Electronic instruments including cash registers, tabulating and calculating machines."; (d) in item 21, in the entries in column (2), the expression "or without" shall be omitted; (e) after item 22 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "22-A Handicrafts articles First sale"; (f) in item 41, in the entries in column (2), the expression "parts and accessories thereof and needles used therewith" shall be omitted; (g) in item 42, in the entries in column (2), after the expression "goggles and attachments", the expression "lenses for spectacles including contact lenses and" shall be inserted; (h) in item 43, sub-items (ii) and (iv) and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (i) after item 44 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "44-A Tarpaulin First sale"; (j) in item 49, in the entries in column (2), the expression "and accessories for use therewith" shall be omitted; (k) after item 49 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "49-A Typewriters (excluding electronic First sale typewriters), parts and accessories thereof, typewriter ribbon used therewith, whether or not in spools and correction fluids 49-B Umbrellas of all kinds including First sale"; beach and garden umbrellas and folding umbrellas and parts thereof (i) item 51 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (4) in Part D, - (a) in item 5, in the entries in column (2), for the expression "biscuits, toffees", the expression "toffees" shall be substituted; (b) after item 5 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "5-A Biscuits which are sold under a trade First sale"; mark registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (Central Act 43 of 1958) (c) in item 18, in the entries in column (2), the expression "accessories thereof, ribbons, plates used therewith" shall be omitted; (d) in item 19, in the entries in column (2), the expression "and accessories of all such goods" shall be omitted; (e) in item 20, in the entries in column (2), the expression "accessories thereof and ribbons used therewith" shall be omitted; (f) in item 21, in the entries in column (2), the expression "accessories thereof and electronic typewriter ribbons whether or not in spools" shall be omitted; (g) in item 26, for the entries in column (2), the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Gramaphones of all kinds including record players, radio gramaphones, gramaphone records, matrices for records and record changers"; (h) items 28, 38 and 40 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (i) after item 46 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "46-A. REP licence/exim scrip First sale"; (j) item 51 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (k) in item 52, in the entries in column (2), the expression "parts and accessories thereof and head cleaner in any form" shall be omitted; (l) in item 53, for the entries in column (2), the following entries shall be substituted, namely :- "Sound transmitting equipments of every description including telephones, inter-com devices, loud speakers including stereo or hi-fi amplifiers, speaker systems which are used with stereo or hi-fi musical systems, micro phones and stands therefor, head phsnes, ear phones and combined microphones/speaker sets, parts and accessories thereof and telephone cables and fibre optic cables."; (m) in item 58, in the entries in column (2), the expression "parts and accessories thereof" shall be omitted; (n) item 60 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (o) in item 61, in the entries in column (2), the expression "parts and accessories thereof" shall be omitted; (p) in item 66, in the entries in column (2), the expression "parts and accessories thereof such as" shall be omitted; (5) in Part E, - (a) in item 4, in sub-item (ii), in the entries in column (2), the expression "flavoured milk and" shall be omitted; (b) in item 5, sub-item (xiv) and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (c) in item 11, in the entries in column (2), for sub-item (iv), the following sub-item shall be substituted, namely :- "(iv) Glass jars and glass bottles"; (6) in Part G, - (a) in item 4, for the expression "optical lenses" in column (2), the following shall be substituted, namely :- "Optical lenses other than lenses for spectacles"; (b) after item 12 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "12-A Pan masala by whatever name called First sale"; containing betelnuts, that is to say, nut of areca, catachu broken and perfumed and lime or menthol or sandal oils or cardamom or tobacco or any one or more of these ingredients. (c) item 20 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted;
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the principal Act, in the Third Schedule, in Part B, - (a) in item 21, under the heading "1. List of agricultural implements exclusively used with human power", after sub-item (15), the following sub-item shall be added, namely :- "(16) Sledge hammer"; (b) for item 25 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "25 Products of palm industry other than those listed in First Schedule and of articles such as baskets, mats, brushes, fans manufactured out of palm leaves, coconut leaves and date leaves and thatti, koodai, muram and other products of bamboo"; (c) for item 34 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "34 Pipercubebalinn, Kaempeearia-galang, Tribulus-terrestrusliun, Woodfordia fruiticosa kura, Aconitum-hterrophyllumwall, Quercus infectoria oilv, Magnolia-fuscata andr, Somolocis racemosa roxb, Indigofera tinctoria linn, Boerhaavia diffusa linn, Nellikai, Thippilli, Cassia flower, Galangal roots, Big galangal roots, Karbogarisi, Hemidusmus, Calamus root, Gymnema, Sylvestra, Sarja rasam (damarbatu), Bondu nut, Black cumin, Athimaturam (Clyzorrizha or Liquorice roots), Nillap panai kizhangu, Andrographic paniculat, Mulaippal vidhai, Andropogan muricatus, Osxilium savivum, Satavari, Bishop weed. Dil seeds. Withanai somnifetra, Benjamine, Pomogranite shell, Vilvapazham, Vlampazham, Siruthekku, Pippra moolam, Patakam, Stramonium seeds, Saraswathi leaves, Thulasi leaves, Stone flower, Vempadampattai, Hibiscus and Kasthuri turmeric."; (d) after item 35 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "35-A Drugs used in the treatment of cancer, leprosy and tuberculosis, namely :- Inj. Streptomycin Cap. Rifampicin Tab. INH Tab. Pyrazinamide Tab. Diamino-diphenyl sulphone Tab. Azathioprine Inj. Adriamycin Inj. Cisplatin Inj. 5 Flurouracil Inj. Mitomycin C Inj. Vincristine Inj. Cyclosphosphamide Tab. Cyclophosphamide Inj. Etoposide Inj. Veriblastine Tab. Busulphan Inj. Methotrexate Tab. Methotrexate Cap. Damazol Tab. Tamoziffen litrate"; (e) in item 36, in the entries, the following shall be added at the end, namely :- "and cycle carriage for invalid persons"; (f) for item 54 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "54. Students' note-books and copy books manufactured out of paper purchased from registered dealers liable to pay tax under this Act"; (g) in item 57, after sub-item (iv) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-items and entries shall be added, namely :- "(v) Cattle feed, other than those falling under item 112 of Part B of the First Schedule and wheat bran (vi) Fish feed"; (h) for item 75 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "75. Coconut husk, coconut shell and its chips"; (i) after item 79 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "79-A Old silver metti, anklet and waist cord purchased for the manufacture of new silver metti, anklet and waist cord"; (j) after item 81 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :- "82. Panjamirdham 83. Educational charts and maps including tourist guide maps 84. Groundnut shell 85. Shikakai powder 86. Senna leaves, pods and cassia leaves 87. Tapioca kappi and tapioca thippi 88. Thonnai 89. Gum benzoin (sambirani) 90. Sea shell and articles made thereof 91. Curd 92. Hosiery goods (other than those made wholly or partly of wool) 93. Ladam 94. Ladam aani 95. Vibuthi 96. Namakatty 97. Pulichakeerai rope." The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Bill, 1997 (L.A. Bill No. 48 of 1997 (Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary No. 242, Part IV, Section 1, dated 29th April, 1997, page 267.)) runs as follows :- 
