Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1999. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 7-E of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "7-F. Deduction of tax at source in works contract- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every person responsible for paying any sum to any dealer for execution of works contract shall, at the time of payment of such sum, deduct an amount calculated, at the following rate, namely :- (i) Civil works contract ... Two per cent. of the total amount payable to such dealer; (ii) All other works contract ... Four per cent. of the total amount payable to such dealers; Provided that no deduction under sub-section (1) shall be made where, - (a) no transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) in involved in the execution of such work contract; or (b) the dealer produces a certificate from the assessing authority concerned that he has no liability to pay or has paid the tax under section 3-B or section 7-C; or (c) declared goods are purchased from a registered dealer within the State and used in the execution of works contract in the same form in which such goods were purchased : Provided further that no such deduction shall be made under this section, where the amount or the aggregate of the amount paid or credited or likely to be paid or credited, during the year, by such person to the dealer for execution of the works contract including civil works contract does not or is not likely to, exceed one lakh rupees. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, - (i) the term 'person' shall include - (a) the Central or a State Government, (b) a local authority, (c) a corporation or body established by or under a Central or State Act, (d) a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 (Central Act 1 of 1956), including a Central or State Government undertaking, (e) a society including a co-operative society, (f) an educational institution, or (g) a trust. (ii) the term 'civil works contract' shall have the same meaning as in the Explanation to section 7-C. (2) Any person making such deduction shall deposit the sum so deducted to such authority, in such manner and within such time, as may be prescribed. (3) Any person who makes the deduction and deposit, shall, within fifteen days of such deposit, issued to the said dealer a certificate in the prescribed form for each deduction, separately, and send a copy of the certificate of deduction to the assessing authority, having jurisdiction over the said dealer together with such documents, as may be prescribed. (4) On furnishing a certificate of deduction referred to in sub-section (3), the amount deposited under sub-section (2), shall be adjusted by the assessing authority towards tax liability of the dealer under section 3-B or section 7-C, as the case may be, and shall constitute a good and sufficient discharge of the liability of the person making deduction to the extent of the amount deposited. (5) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall pay, in addition to the amount required to be deducted and deposited, interest at two per cent. per month of such amount for the entire period of default. (6) Where the dealer proves to the satisfaction of the assessing authority that he is not liable to pay tax under section 3-B or section 7-C, the assessing authority shall refund the amount deposited under sub-section (2), after adjusting the arrears of tax, if any, due from the dealer, in such manner as may be prescribed. (7) The tax or interest under this section shall become due without any notice of demand on the date of accrual for the payment by the person as provided under sub-section (1) and (2)." 
