Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000. (2)(a) Section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 2000. (b) Sections 3, 5 and 6 shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, be notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), sub-section (1) shall be renumbered as clause (a) of that sub-section and after clause (a) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a), every dealer (other than a casual trader or agent of a non-resident dealer) whose total turnover for a year exceeds three lakhs of rupees but does not exceed ten lakhs of rupees shall not be liable to pay tax on the first three lakhs of rupees of his total turnover, provided that no amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax has been collected by him under this Act in respect of that first three lakhs of rupees.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For section 7-D of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "7-D. Levy of tax on lottery tickets. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 3, every dealer in lottery tickets in the State shall pay tax at the rates specified in the Tenth Schedule : Provided that where a dealer has paid the tax under this sub-section in respect of a particular name and type of lottery tickets of a particular State and for a particular draw, the tax in respect of the sale of such lottery tickets, by any other dealer or any person in this State liable to pay tax under this Act shall be deemed to have been paid under this Act. (2) The dealer shall pay the tax under sub-section (1), thirty days prior to the draw in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) A dealer liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax on the sale of lottery tickets.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 12 of the principal Act, - (1) in sub-section (1), - (a) in clause (a), for the provisos, the following shall be substituted, namely :- "Provided that subject to the provisions of clause (b) and the provisions of sub-section (1-A), a dealer whose total turnover in a year does not exceed one crore of rupees may make a self-assessment for that year subject to the condition that he gets his accounts audited and certified by a Chartered Accountant and submits to the assessing authority a copy of the audited and certified statement of accounts and such other statements, as may be prescribed, on or before the 30th day of September of the succeeding year, and such return so filed by him shall be accepted without calling for the accounts. (aa) The provisions of clause (a) and sub-section (1-A) shall apply to the assessments for the financial years, commencing on the 1st day of April, 1999."; (b) in clause (b), in item (iv) for the expression "second proviso to clause (a)", the expression "proviso to clause (a)" shall be substituted; (2) for sub-section (1-A), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (1), twenty per cent of the total number of such assessments shall be selected by the Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed for the purpose of detailed scrutiny regarding the correctness of the return submitted by the dealer in this connection and in such cases, final assessment orders shall be passed in accordance with the provisions of this Act."
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the principal Act, in Part-B, item 43 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fifth Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the Ninth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be added, namely :- "THE TENTH SCHEDULE (See section 7-D) Type of draw. Rate per draw. (i) Weekly draw or draw, the period ... Twenty thousand rupees. of which is less than a week. (ii) Fortnightly draw ... Twenty-five thousand rupees. (iii) Monthly draw ... Forty thousand rupees. (iv) Monthly bumper draw ... Sixty thousand rupees. (v) Special bumper draw or ... One lakh rupees.". festival bumper draw. 
