Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State Tamil Nadu in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 3-A of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "3-B. Levy of tax on the transfer of goods involved in works contract. - Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, 4, 5, 7 or 7-A, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, every dealer referred to in item (vi) of clause (g) of section 2 whose total turnover relating to the business of transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of a works contract is not less than fifty thousand rupees and every causal trader or agent of a non-resident dealer in respect of such business whatever be his turnover for the year, shall pay for each year a tax on his turnover of transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract mentioned in column (2) of the Fourth Schedule at the rates specified in the corresponding entries in column (3) of the said Schedule. Explanation. - Where any works contract involves more than one item of work specified in the Fourth Schedule, the rate of tax shall be determined separately for each such item.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be added, namely :- "THE FOURTH SCHEDULE (See section 3-B) Serial Description of works contract Rate of tax Number (per cent.) (1) (2) (3) 1.Fabrication and installation of elevators 15 (lifts) and escalators. 2. Supply and installation of air-conditioners 15 and air-coolers. 3. Supply and installation of air-conditioning 15 equipments including deep freezers, cold storage plants, humidification plants and de-humidification plants. 4. Construction of railway coaches on 15 undercarriages supplied by railways. 5. Construction, repair, improvement and 15 overhauling of aircrafts and helicopters. 6. Supply and fixing, laying all kinds of floor 15 tiles, mosaic tiles, slabs, stones, marbles and glazed wall tiles. 7. Supply and installation of generators, 12 generating sets and transformers. 8. Fabrication and installation of cranes and 10 hoists. 9. Supply and fitting of electrical goods and 10 supply and installation of electrical and electronic equipments. 10. Painting and polishing. 10 11. Fabrication and installation of plant and 8 machinery. 12. Supply and fixing of furniture and fixtures, 8 partitions counters, wall panelling including interior decorations including false ceiling. 13. Supply and erection of weighing machines and 8 weigh bridges. 14. Supply and installation of submersible and 8 centrifugal pumpsets with necessary panel boards, starters, pressure gauges, electrical switches, fuses, etc. 15. Supply and erection of sanitary fittings and 8 article for plumbing, drainage, sewerage, etc. 16. Ship and boat building including 5 construction of barges, ferries, tugs, trawlers and dredgers. 17. Fabrication and installation of rolling 5 shutters and collapsible gate. 18. Fabrication and erection of structural works 5 including fabrication, supply and erection of iron trusses, purlins, etc. 19. Fabrication and installation of doors, door 5 frames, windows and frames, window grills, gates, gate grills. 20. Civil works like construction of buildings, 5 bridges, roads, etc. 21. Other contracts, not falling under serial 10." numbers 1 to 20 above. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Bill, 1986 (L.A. Bill No. 55 of 1986) (Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary No. 245, Part IV, Section 1, dated 14th May, 1986, page 377.), runs as follows :- "Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959), provides for levy of tax on the transfer of property involved in the execution of works contract. With a view to remove certain practical difficulties in the matter of assessment, levy and collection of tax on works contracts it is proposed to have a specific provision prescribing rates of tax for different items of works contract in a separate Schedule. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects." 
