Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Forty-eight Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day April, 1997.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 3-C of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "3-D. Payment of tax by hotels, restaurants and sweet stalls- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 3 every dealer whose total turnover is not less than twenty five lakhs of rupees for the year on the sale of food and drinks in hotels, restaurants, sweet stalls and any other eating houses other than those falling under item 20 of Part-C of the First Schedule, shall pay tax at the rate specified in Part-A of the Ninth Schedule. (2) A dealer liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax on the sale of food and drinks. 3-E. Payment of tax by dealers in jewellery- (1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-section (1) of section 3, every dealer whose total turnover is not more than fifty lakhs of rupees for the year on the sale of gold and silver jewellery including articles thereof shall pay tax at the rate specified in Part-B of the Ninth Schedule. (2) a dealer liable to pay tax under sub-section (1) shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax on the sale."
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 7-D of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), excluding the proviso thereto, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub-section (2) of section 3, every dealer in lottery tickets in the State may, at his option, instead of paying tax in accordance with the provisions of that sub-section, compound the tax liability in respect of sale of lottery tickets and pay the compounded amount at the following rate, namely :- Type of draw Rate per draw Weekly draw or draw, the period Ten thousand rupees of which is less than a week Fort-nightly draw Fifteen thousand rupees Monthly draw Twenty-five thousand rupees Monthly bumper draw Forty thousand rupees Special bumper draw or festival Sixty thousand rupees". bumper draw
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in Part-B, for item 48 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "48. Food and drinks (falling under item 20 of Part-C of the First Schedule) sold by - (i) any hotel other than a star hotel recognised as such by the tourism department of the State Government or the Government of India; (ii) any restaurant other than those attached to such star hotels; (iii) any other eating house; (iv) any sweet stall; whose total turnover does not exceed twenty-five lakhs of rupees per annum.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1997_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After the Eight Schedule, the following Schedule shall be added, namely :- "NINTH SCHEDULE PART-A (See section 3-D) Rate of tax (i) Where the total turnover exceeds Twenty-four thousand twenty-five lakhs of rupees, but rupees per annum. does not exceed thirty lakhs of rupees. (ii) where the total turnover exceeds Thirty-six thousand thirty lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum. exceed forty lakhs of rupees. (iii) where the total turnover exceeds Forty-eight thousand forty lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum. exceed fifty lakhs of rupees. (iv) where the total turnover exceeds Two per cent of the fifty lakhs of rupees. total turnover. Explanation. - For the purposes of computing the total turnover, the purchase turnover liable to tax under section 7-A of the Act shall be added to the sales turnover. PART B (See section 3-E) Rate of tax (i) Where the total turnover exceeds Six thousand rupees three lakhs of rupees but does not per annum exceed five lakhs of rupees. (ii) Where the total turnover exceeds Twelve thousand five lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum exceed ten lakhs of rupees. (iii) Where the total turnover exceeds Twenty-four thousand ten lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum exceed twenty lakhs of rupees. (iv) Where the total turnover exceeds Forty-eight thousand twenty lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum exceed thirty lakhs of rupees. (v) Where the total turnover exceeds Seventy-two thousand thirty lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum exceed forty lakhs of rupees. (vi) Where the total turnover exceeds Eighty-four thousand forty lakhs of rupees but does not rupees per annum exceed fifty lakhs of rupees. Explanation. - For the purpose of computing the total turnover, the turnover of sales of bullion and silver as specified in item 1 of Part A of the First Schedule, the turnover of purchase of worn out or beaten jewellery as specified in item 3 of Part A of the First Schedule, the purchase turnover of bullion and silver liable to tax under section 7-A shall be included." The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Bill, 1997 (L.A. Bill No. 47 of 1997 (Tamil Nadu Government gazette, Extraordinary No. 242, Part IV, Section 1, dated 29th April, 1997, page 257.)) runs as follows :- 
