Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act for further shortening the language used in 1 [Tamil Nadu Acts] and for other purposes Whereas it is expedient to further shorten the language used in 2 [Tamil Nadu Acts] and to make certain further provisions relating to those Acts; It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted for "Madras Acts" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969 which in turn were substituted for the words Acts made by the Governor of 'Fort St. George in Council' by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. Substituted for "Madras Acts" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969 which in turn were substituted for the words Acts made by the Governor of 'Fort St. George in Council' by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] General Clauses Act, 1891; and2 (b) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1892. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on the 3rd April, 1891 and of the Governor-General on the 14th May, 1891
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in the 1 [Tamil Nadu] General Clauses Act, 1867, the provisions of that Act shall not apply to this Act or to any 2 [Tamil Nadu Act] which may be passed subsequent to the commencement of this Act. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for the words "Madras Acts made", by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969 which were in turn substituted for the words 'Acts made by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council' by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act and in every 1 [Tamil Nadu Act made] after the commencement of this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context- "Abet" - (1) "abet", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions' shall have the same meaning as in the Indian Penal Code; "Barrister" - (2) "barrister" shall mean a barrister of England or Ireland or a member of the Faculty of Advocates in Scotland; (3) 2 [...] "Chapter", "part", "section" and "schedule."-(4) "Chapter", "part", "section" and "schedule" shall mean respectively a Chapter, part and section of, and schedule to, the Act in which the word occurs; "City of Madras" - (5) "City of Madras" shall mean such local area as is declared from time to time to be the City of Madras under any Act for the time being in force relating to the municipal affairs of such city; "Collector." - (6) "Collector" shall include every officer who, for the time being, is authorized to exercise the powers of a Collector; "Commencement" - (7) "Commencement", used with reference to an Act, shall mean the time at which the Act comes into force; "District Collector" - (8) "District Collector" shall mean the chief local officer-in-charge of the revenue administration of a district; "Document" - (9) "Document" shall mean any matter expressed or described upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, as evidence of that matter; "Financial year" - (10) "Financial year" shall mean the year commencing on the first day of April; "Good faith" - (11) nothing is said to be done or believed in "good faith" which as done or believed without due care and attention; 3 [(12) * * * * ] 4 [(13) "Immovable property" - (14) "immovable property" shall include land, benefits of arise out of land, and things attached the earth, or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth; "Imprisonment" - (15) "imprisonment" shall mean imprisonment of either description as defined in the Indian penal Code, 5 [(15-A) * * * *] "Judicial proceeding" - (16) "judicial proceeding" shall mean any proceeding in the course of which evidence is, or may be, legally taken; "Local authority" - (17) "local authority" shall mean a Municipal Committee, District Board, body of Port Commissioners or other authority legally entitled to, or entrusted by the Government with, the control or management of a municipal or local fund; 6 [(17-A) 7 [Tamil Nadu] Act" shall mean an Act made by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council under the Indian Councils Acts, 1861 to 1909 or any of those Acts, or the Government of India Act, 1915, or by the Local Legislature or the Governor of the Presidency of 8 [Tamil Nadu] under the Government of India Act 9 [or by the Provincial Legislature of Madras under the Government of India Act, 1935, or by the Legislature of the State of 10 [Tamil Nadu] under the Constitution)]: "Magistrate" - (18) "Magistrate" shall mean any person exercising all or any of the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure; 188211 ; "Movable property" - (19) "movable property" shall mean property of every description except immovable property; 12 [(19-a) "notification" shall mean -a notification published in the Official Gazette]; "Oath", "swear" and "affidavit."-(20) "oath", "swear" and "affidavit" shall] include affirmation and declaration in the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing; "Offence" - (21) "offence" shall mean any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force; "person" - (22) "person" shall include any company or association of individuals, whether incorporated or not; "Place" - (23) "place" includes also a house, building, tent and vessel; 13 [(24) "prescribed" shall mean prescribed by rules, regulations or by laws made under the Act, in which the word occurs]; "Presidency town" - (25) "presidency-town" shall mean the local limits for the time being of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of judicature at Madras: Public - (26) "public" includes any class of the public or any community; "Public nuisance" - (27) "public nuisance" shall have the meaning assigned to that expression in Section 268 of the Indian Penal Code; "Registered" - 14 [(28) "registered" used with reference to a document, shall mean registered in 15 [India] under the law for the item being in force for the registration of documents;] "Sign" - (29) "sign", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall with reference to a person who is unable to write his name, include, "mark" with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions; "Son" and "father" - (30) "in the case of any one whose personal law permits adoption, "son" shall include an adopted son, and "father" an adoptive father; "Sub-section" - (31) "sub-section" shall mean a sub-section, of the section in which the word occurs; "Value" - (32) "value", used with reference to a suit, shall mean the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit, computed according to the law for the time being in force regulating the valuation of suits for purposes of jurisdiction; "Will" - (33) "will" shall include a codicil and every writing making a voluntary posthumous distribution of property; Gender - (34) words importing the masculine gender shall include females; Number - (35) words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; Illegal omissions - (36) words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal omissions; "Writing" - (37) "writing", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall include "printing", "lithography", "photography", with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions, and other modes of representing or reproducing words in a visible form; "Year" and "month" - (38) "year" and "month" shall, respectively, mean a year and month reckoned according to the British calendar. Substituted for "Acts of the Governor of Fort St. George in Council" by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Clause (3) was omitted by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Clause (12) was omitted by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Clause (13) was omitted by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. Clause (15-A) was omitted by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Clause (17-A) was inserted, by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. These words and figures were substituted for the words and figures 'or by the Provincial Legislature or the Governor of Madras under the Government of India Act, 1935' by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act 5 of 1898). This clause was inserted by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955). The original clause (24) was omitted by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the present clause was inserted by Madras (Repealing and Amending) Act. 1951 (Madras Act 36 of 1955). This clause was substituted for the original clause (28) by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1940. This word was substituted for the words and letters 'a Part A State or a Part C State' by Section 4 of, and the Third Schedule to the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1957 (Madras Act 25 of 1957).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Chapter shall apply to all 1 [2 (Tamil Nadu) Acts made] after the commencement of this Act, unless a contrary intention appears in such Acts. These words were substituted for the words 'Acts made by the Governor of Fort St. George in Council' by the Adaptation Order of 1937. Substituted by "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 2 [(1) Where any Act to which this Chapter applies is not expressed to come in to operation on a particular day, then, it shall come into operation on the day on which the assent thereto of the Governor, Governor-General or the President, as the case may require, is first published in the Official Gazette.] (2) In every such Act the date of such publication as aforesaid shall be printed either above or below the title of the Act and shall form part of the Act. This section was substituted for the original section by the Adaptation Order of 1937. This sub-section was substituted for sub-section (1) by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where by an Act to which this Chapter applies and which is not to come into force immediately on the passing thereof, a power is conferred on Government or other authority to make rules, or to issue orders, with respect to the application of the Act, of with respect to appointment of any officer thereunder, such power may be exercised at any time after passing of the Act, but rules or orders so made or issued shall not take effect till the commencement of the Act.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where by an act to which this Chapter applies, a power to make rules is expressed to be given, subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication, the following provisions shall apply, namely:- Publication of draft rules - (a) the authority having the power to make the rules shall, before making them, publish a draft of the proposed rules; Manner of publication - (b) the publication shall be made in such manner as that authority deems to be sufficient, or, if the condition with respect to previous publication so requires, in such manner as the 1 [Central Government, or, as the case may be the 2 (State) Government] prescribes; Notice to accompany draft rules - (c) there shall be published with the draft a notice specifying a date at or after which the draft will be taken into consideration, Consideration of suggestion in regard to draft rules - (d) the authority having power to make the rules, and, where the rules are to be made with the sanction, approval or concurrence of another authority, that authority also, shall consider any objection or suggestion which may be received by the authority having power to make the rules from any person with respect to the draft, before the date so specified; Publication to be proof of due making of rules - (e) the publication in the 3 [Official Gazette] of a rule purporting to have been made in exercise of a power to make rules after previous publication, shall be conclusive proof that the rule has been duly made. These words were substituted for the word 'Government' by the Adaptation Order of 1937. This word was substituted for the word 'Provincial' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the words Fort St. George Gazette, by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any Act, to which this Chapter applies, repeals any other enactment, then the repeal shall not- (a) affect anything done or any offence committed, or any fine or penalty incurred or any proceeding began before the commencement of the repealing Act; or (b) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the repeal takes affect; or (c) affect the previous operation of any enactment so repealed or anything duly 'done or suffered under any enactment so repealed; or (d) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under any enactment so repealed; or (e) affect any fine, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against any enactment so repealed; or (f) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, fine, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such fine, penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as the repealing Act had not been passed.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 8-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where any Act to which this Chapter applies, repeals any enactment by which the text of any previous enactment was amended by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not affect then continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal. Section 8-A was inserted by the Madras General Clauses (Amendment) Act, 1936 (Madras Act 6 of 1937).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any Act to which this Chapter applies- (a) for the purpose of reviving, either wholly or partially, an Act or Regulation wholly or partially repealed, it shall be necessary expressly to state such purpose. Commencement of term - (b) for the purpose of excluding the first in a series of days or any other period of time it shall be sufficient to use the word "from"; Termination of term - (c) for the purpose of including the last in a series of day or any other period of time, it shall be sufficient to use the word; "to". Application to subordinates of law relating to official superiors - (d) for the purpose of expressing that a law relative to the chief or superior of an office shall apply to the deputies or subordinates lawfully executing the duties of such office in the place of their superior, it shall be sufficient to prescribe the duty of the superior; Application of law to successors of functionaries and corporations - (e) for the purpose of indicating the relation of a law to the successors of any functionaries, or of corporations having perpetual succession, it shall be sufficient to express its relation to the functionaries or corporations; and Application of law to persons for time being filling an office - (f) for the purpose of indicating the application of a law to every person or number of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, it shall be sufficient to mention the official title of the officer at present executing such functions, or that of the officer by whom the functions are commonly executed.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an Act, to which this Chapter applies, confers power to make rules or bye-laws or 1 [to issue notifications or orders], expression used in such rules 2 [bye laws, notifications or orders] shall have the same respective meaning as in the Act conferring the power. In Sections 10 and 15, for the words 'to issue orders', the words 'toto issue notifications or orders', and for the words 'by-laws or orders' the words 'by-laws, notifications or orders' were substituted by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955). In Sections 10 and 15, for the words 'to issue orders', the words 'toto issue notifications or orders', and for the words 'by-laws or orders' the words 'by-laws, notifications or orders' were substituted by Section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where, by an Act to which this Chapter applies, any act or proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in a Court or office on a certain-day or within a prescribed period, then, if the Court or office is closed on that day or the last day of the prescribed period, the act or proceeding shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day after wards on which the Court or office is open. This section does not apply to any act or proceeding to which the Indian Limitation Act 1877,1 applies. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (Central Act 9 of 1908).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu This Chapter shall apply to 1 [all 2 (Tamil Nadu) Acts] unless a contrary intention appears in any such Act, but it shall not affect anything done or commenced prior to the commencement of this Act under any enactment now in force. The words 'Madras Acts made' were substituted for the words 'Acts made by Governor of Fort St. George in Council' by the Adaptation Order of 1937. The words 'all Madras Acts' were substituted for the words 'all Madras Acts made' by section 3 of and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955). Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.0.1969.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an Act confer a power or imposes a duty, then the power may be exercised and the duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion requires.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an Act confers a power or imposes a duty on the holder of an office, as such then the power may be exercised and the duty shall be performed by the holder for the time being of the office.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an Act confers a power to make any rules or by-laws, or 1 [to issue notifications or orders,] the powers shall be construed as including a power exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like consent and conditions, if any, to rescind, revoke, amend or vary the rules, 2 [by-laws notifications or orders]. In sections 10 and 15, for the words 'to issue orders', the words 'to issue notifications or orders' and for the words 'by-laws or orders' the words 'by-laws, notifications or orders' were substituted by section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955). In sections 10 and 15, for the words 'to issue orders', the words 'to issue notifications or orders' and for the words 'by-laws or orders' the words 'by-laws, notifications or orders' were substituted by section 3 of, and the Second Schedule to, the Madras Repealing and Amending Act, 1955 (Madras Act 36 of 1955).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever by an Act any duty of customs or excise or in the nature thereof is leviable on any given quantity, by weight, measure or value, of any goods or merchandise, a like duty shall be leviable according to the same rate on any greater or less quantity.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever by an Act authority is given to confer powers or impose duties, such powers may be conferred or duties imposed by name or by office or on classes of officials generally by their official titles.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an Act person is and re-enacts, with or without modification, all or any of the provisions of a former act references in any other Act to the provisions so repealed shall be construed as references to the provisions so re-enacted, and if notifications have been published, proclamations or certificates issued, powers conferred, forms prescribed, local limits defined, offices established, orders, rules and appointments made, engagements entered into licences or permits granted and other things duly done, under the provisions so repealed, the same shall be deemed, so far as the same are consistent with the provisions so re-enacted, to have been respectively published, issued, conferred, prescribed. defined, established, made, entered into, granted or done under the provisions so re-enacted.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of Sections 63, 68, 69 and 70 of the Indian Penal Code shall apply to all fines imposed under the authority of any Act.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more enactments, the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either or any of those enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same act or omission.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where in any Act, or in any rule passed under any Act, it is directed that any order, notification or other matter shall be notified or published, such notification or publication shall, unless the Act otherwise provides, be deemed to be duly made if it is published in the 1 [Official Gazette]. These words were substituted for the word 'Fort .St. George Gazette' by the Adaptation Order of 1937.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When, by an Act 1 [any Government] is empowered to extend or apply an Act or any provision of an Act to any place in, or to any portion of, the 2 [State], the Government may, in any order extending or applying such Act or provision or in a subsequent order, notify the time at which the same shall come into force in the place or portion of the 3 [State] to which it is so extended or applied; and unless it is otherwise provided in the Act, 4 [the Government] may, by notification in the 5 [Official Gazette] from time to time postpone the time at which the Act or provision shall come into force 'in such place or portion of the 6 [State] or cancel the order for extending or applying the same to such place or portion of the 7 [State]. Proviso - Provided that no order postponing the time at which an Act or provision shall come into force, or cancelling an order for extending or applying the same, shall be made after the Act or provision has actually come into force in the place or portion of the 8 [State] to which such order relates. These words were substituted for the word 'Government', by the Adaptation Order of 1937. The word 'Province' was substituted for the words 'Presidency of Madras' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The word 'Province' was substituted for the words 'Presidency of Madras' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the word 'Government', by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. These words were substituted for the word 'Fort .St. George Gazette' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 The word 'Province' was substituted for the words 'Presidency of Madras' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The word 'Province' was substituted for the words 'Presidency of Madras' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950. The word 'Province' was substituted for the words 'Presidency of Madras' by the Adaptation Order of 1937 and the word 'State' was substituted for 'Province' by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 22-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any reference to any Minister (including the Chief Minister) in any Act or in any rule, notification, order regulation, by-law or other instrument made or issued, under such Act, shall, during the period of operation of a Proclamation issued by the President under Article 356 of the Constitution in respect of the State of Tamil Nadu, be construed as a reference to the Governor or to such adviser to the Governor or to such other officer, as the Governor may, by notification, specify in this behalf and different notifications may be issued in respect of different Acts and instruments made or issued thereunder]. Inserted by President's Act (12 of 1976).
Tamil Nadu General Clauses Act, 1891_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The provisions of this Act shall apply- (a) 2 [...] (b) in relation to any Ordinance promulgated by the Governor under Article 213 of the Constitution or any Regulation made by him under paragraph 5 of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution in like manner as they apply in relation to 3 [Tamil Nadu] Acts made by the State Legislature: Provided that sub-Section (1) of Section 5 of this Act shall apply to any Ordinance referred to in clause (b) as if the reference in that sub-section to the day of the first publication of the assent to an Act in the Official Gazette were a reference instead to the day of the first publication of the Ordinance in that Gazette. This section was substituted for the original section 23 by the Adaptation (Amendment) Order of 1950. This clause was omitted by the Madras Adaptation of Laws Order, 1957. Substituted for "Madras" by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. 
