Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1999. 2. (a) The provisions of this Act, except sub-clause (a) of clause (1), sub-clause (q) of clause (2), clause (4), clause (8) and clause (9), of section 2, shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1999. (b) Sub-clause (a) of clause (1), sub-clause (q) of clause (2), clause (4), clause (8) and clause (9) of section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 17th day of March, 1999.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principle Act) - (1) in Part A, - (a) in item 1-C, for the expression "Part C and," the expression "Part C, item I of Part CC and" shall be substituted. (b) after item 2-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "2-B. Vegetable vathal like sunda vathal, First sale."; brinjalvathal, kothavarangai vathal, manathakkali vathal, thamarai vathal and vathal of all kinds sold without the brand name. (2) in Part B, - (a) for item 8 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "8 Bread and rusk whether or not branded. First sale."; (b) for item 22 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "22 Empty gunny bags and condemned gunny bags. First sale."; (c) in item 23, after sub-item (ii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(iii) Napthalene balls"; (d) for item 30 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "30 (i) Handmade soaps of all kinds (both bathing First sale."; and washing) including soap flakes, powders, liquids and detergents but excluding shampoo and metal polisher in any form. (ii) Hair and body cleaning powders containing sikaikai, boonthikkotai, illuppai oil cake, poolankizhangu, usilai leaves, kasthuri manjal and any such ingredients or two or more of such ingredients. (iii) Scouring or cleaning powder other than those specified in item 22 of Part E of this Schedule. (e) after item 34 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "34-A. Hosiery goods made wholly or party of wool. First sale.";(f) for item 39 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "39. Jute twine, jute table mats, jute door First sale."; mats, jute handicrafts and jute wall hangings. (g) for item 43-B and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "43-B. Mosquito destroyers, insect killer devices First sale."; including heating devices used with insect repellent mats and mosquito nets of all kinds. (h) after item 45 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "45-A. Non-ferrous metal scraps, that is to say, First sale."; scraps of copper, copper alloys, brass, lead alloys (other than those specified elsewhere in the Schedule). "45-B. Oats. First sale.";(i) for item 46-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "46-A. Paper bags and paper envelopes whether First sale."; printed or not. (j) after item 47-B and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "47-C Patents, trade marks, import licenses exim First sale."; scrips, export permit or licence or quota and other goods of incorporeal or intangible character. (k) for item 52-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "52-A. Power tiller and trailer of power tiller. First sale.";(l) for item 53 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "53. Printing, writing, teleprinter, typewriting, First sale."; manifold and bond paper and computer stationery of all kinds. (m) for item 63 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "63 Sand, red earth and red gravel. First sale.";(n) after item 67 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "67-A. Sherbet. First sale.";(o) for item 69 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "69 (i) Sports goods including goods for indoor First sale."; or outdoor games, swings, medals, cups, trophies, shields and badges; (ii) Articles and equipments for gymnastics including health fitness equipments; (iii) Children's play ground equipments; (p) after item 71-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "71-B (i) Sweets made of groundnuts, gingelly, First sale."; puffed rice, fried gram and peas dhall; (ii) Murukku sold with or without brand name; (iii) Chips of all kinds sold without brand name. (q) for item 75 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "75. Television antenna. First sale."; (r) after item 81 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "81-A. Vegetable vathal like sunda vathal, brinjal First sale."; vathal, kothavarangai vathal, manathakkali vathal, thamarai vathal and vathal of all kinds sold with brand name. (3) in Part C, - (a) after item 1-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "1-B. Agarbathi.; First sale.";(b) for item 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "2 All kinds of grill made of iron and First sale."; steel. "2-A Aluminiumwares other than domestic utensils. First sale."; (c) after item 15 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "15-A. Duplicating machines, reporgraphic copiers First sale."; including roneo machines other than electronic duplicating machines, reprographic copiers including duplicators and any other apparatus for obtaining duplicate copies, parts and accessories thereof, ribbons, plates used therewith.(d) after item 19 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "19-A Empty gas cylinders. First sale.";(e) after item 22-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "22-B Ice cream sold without brand name. First sale.";(f) after item 25 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "25-A. Key chains and key holders. First sale."; (g) in item 28, - (i) in sub-item (B), after clause (ii) and the entries relating thereto, the following clause and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(iii) Surgical implants, artificial bones, bone cement, abdominal support belt, cervical collars and knee cap"; (ii) in sub-item (F), after clause (iv) and the entries relating thereto, the following clause and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(v) Lactose IP/BP."; (iii) after sub-item (F), and the entries relating thereto the following sub-item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(G) Thermometers,"; (h) after item 28 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "28-A, Medium Density Fibre (MDF) boards and First sale."; prelaminated/veneered medium density fibre boards excluding such goods imported from other countries. "28-B Non-ferrous metals and alloys thereof First sale."; excluding those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. (i) in item 30, in sub-item (ii), for the expression "teleprinter, typewriting, manifold, bank, bond", the expression "bank" shall be substituted; (j) for item 31 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "31 Paper napkins. First sale."; "31-A Photo album, stamp album and such other First sale."; albums. (k) for item 44-A and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "44-A. Tabulating, calculating machines excluding First sale."; electronic tabulating, calculating machines, parts and accessories thereof, ribbons used therewith. "44-B Tarpaulin. First sale."; (1) in item 46, - (i) in sub-item (A), the expression "bulbs" shall be omitted. (ii) in sub-item (B), the expression "including bulbs but" shall be omitted. (iii) after sub-item (E), and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(F) Bulbs and horns fitted to all motor vehicles.". (m) after item 50 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "50-A. Water sold in bottles, sachets, jugs or First sale."; jerry cans and distilled water or mineral water sold in any form of container"; (n) in item 52, after sub-item (iv) and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "(v) Account books, registers, order books, receipt books, memorandum pads, folders, file covers and book covers made of paper or paper board. (vi) Greeting cards and invitation cards of all kinds."; (4) after Part C, the following Part shall be inserted, namely :- PART CCGoods which are taxable at the rate of 10 per cent. 1. Television sets, First sale."; (5) in Part D, - (a) after item 7 and entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "7-A. (i) Branded, processed and packed fresh meat, First sale."; poultry, fish, sea food and eggs. (ii) Branded and packed fresh vegetables and fruits. (b) after item 17 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "17-A (i) Dry fruits and nuts and kernel such as First sale."; almond, pistha, dry grapes, figs, apricots, walnut, other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. (ii) Wet dates. (c) item 29 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (d) in item 35, in sub-item (ii), the expression "bulbs" shall be omitted. (e) item 46-A and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (6) in Part E, - (a) after item 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "3-A. Chips of all kinds such as potato chips, First sale."; sold with brand name. (b) after item 11 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "11-A. Glass bottles, whether old or used. Last purchase."; (c) in item 19, after sub-item (ii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item and entries shall be added, namely :- "(iii) Medium Density Fibre (MDF) boards and prelaminated/veneered medium density fibre boards which are imported from other countries."; (7) in Part G, - (a) item 6 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (b) item 18 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (8) in Part I, - item 3 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (9) in Part J, after item I and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "2. Pan masala by whatever name called containing First sale."; betel nuts, that is to say, nut of area, catachu broken and perfumed and lime or menthol or sandal oils or cardamom or tobacco or anyone or more of these ingredients. 3. Amendment of Third Schedule. - In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in Part B, - (1) in item 46, after sub-item (xviii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item shall be added, namely :- "(xix) Solar photo-voltaic lanterns."; (2) after item 97 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :- "98. Saree falls 99. Straps of footwear 100. Cotton rope 101. Thatti, koodai and muram made of cane 102. Prawn feed and shrimp feed 103. Steam 104. Bagasse.". 
