Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :- Statement of Object In order to give effect to certain recommendations of the Taxation Rationalisation Committee, the Government have issued notifications under sub-section (1) of section 59 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) amending the First and Third Schedules to the said Act. Under sub-section (2) of section 59 of the said Act, a Bill to replace the said notifications has to be introduced in the present session of the Legislative Assembly. 2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of August 2001.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), - (1) in Part-B, - (a) for item 18 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "18. Computers, personal, mini, mainframes and laptops of analog and digital varieties including automatic teller machines, their hardware and peripherals like modem and speakers, key board, monitor, mouse, CPU, floppies of all sizes, cartridge tape drives, CD ROM drives, DAT drives, hard disc like printers, of dot matrix, ink jet and laser, line, line-matrix, scanners, multimedia kits, plotters, computer consumables including DAT tapes, printer ribbons, printer cartridges and cartridge tapes and computer cleaning kits". (b) for item 82-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "82-A. Waste paper and waste paper board. Last purchase."; (c) item 85 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (d) after item 95 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be added, namely :- "96. Agarbathi and camphor First sale"; (2) in Part-C, item i-B and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (3) in Part-D, item 9 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (4) in Part-J, item 2, the expression "or tobacco" shall be omitted;
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in Part-B, - (1) for items 35 and 35-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "35. Life saving drugs namely :- Cyclosporin, Bleomycin, Cytosine, Arabinoside, Asathioprine, Nitroglycerine, Pentoxifylline, Inj. Streptomycin, Rifampicin Cap. and Tab., Tab. INH. Tab. Ethambutal, Tab. Pyrazinamide, Tab. Diamine-Diphonyl, Sulphone (DAPSONE), Tab. Azathioprine, Inj. Adriamycin, Inj. Cisplatin, Inj. 5 Flurouracil, Inj. Mitomycin-C, Inj. Vincristine, Inj. Cyclophosphamide, Tab. Cyclophosphamide, Inj. Etoposide, Vinblastine, Sulphate Inj., Tab. Basulphan, Inj. Methotrexate, Tab. Methotrexate, Danazol Cap. Tamoxifon Citrate Tab. Explanation. - For the purpose of this item, the anti-T.B. drugs mentioned shall include the combination pack of such drugs"; (2) in item 72, for sub-item (iii) and the entries relating thereto, the following sub-item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "(iii) Parts and accessories including wicks and chimneys of sub-items (i) and (ii) above". 
