Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970. (2) (a) Sections 2 and 3 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th November 1969. (b) Section 4 shall, - (i) in so far as it relates to item 68, be deemed to have come into force on the 18th October 1969; (ii) in so far as it relates to item 69, be deemed to have come into force on the 4th November 1969; and (iii) in so far as it relates to item 70, be deemed to have come into force on the 1st December 1969. (c) Section 5 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st December 1969.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 4-A of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the expression "section 4", the expression "section 4 or 7-A" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "7-A. Levy of purchase tax. - (1) Every dealer who in the course of his business purchases from a registered dealer or from any other person, any goods (the sale or purchase of which is liable to tax under this Act) in circumstances in which no tax is payable under section 3, 4 or 5, as the case may be, and either, - (a) consumes such goods in the manufacture of other goods for sale or otherwise; or (b) disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State; or (c) despatches them to a place outside the State except as direct result of sale or purchases in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. shall pay tax on the turnover relating to the purchase aforesaid at the rate mentioned in section 3, 4, or 5, as the case may be, whatever be the quantum of such turnover in a year : Provided that a dealer (other than a casual trader or agent of a non-resident dealer) purchasing goods (the sale of which is liable to tax under sub-section (1) of section 3) shall not be liable to pay tax under this sub-section, if his total turnover for a year is less than fifteen thousand rupees. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the provisions of section 7 shall apply to a dealer referred to in sub-section (1) who purchases goods (the sale of which is liable to tax under sub-section (1) of section 3) and whose total turnover for a year is not less than fifteen thousand rupees but not more than seventy-five thousand rupees; and such a dealer may, at his option, instead of paying the tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), pay tax at the rates mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 7. (3) Every dealer liable to pay purchase tax under sub-section (1), shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a registered dealer.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the principal Act, after item 67, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :- "68 Jaggery and gur (other At the point of first 5 than palm jaggery). purchase in the State. 69 Coconuts. Do. 5 70 All kinds of alcoholic At the point of first 12". liquors for human sale in the State. consumption (other than toddy and arrack).
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, item 3 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1970_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Fourth Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance 5 of 1969) is hereby repealed. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Bill, 1970 (Fort st. George Gazette, Extraordinary, Part IV - Section 3, dated 23rd January, 1970. page 3.), runs as follows :- "As a measure of checking evasion of sales tax, it has been decided to levy a tax on the purchase of goods within the State, in respect of which no tax has already been levied either on the sale point or on the purchase point under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959), by any dealer who consumes such goods in the process of manufacture of other goods or disposes of such goods in any manner other than by way of sale in the State or despatches them to a place outside the State except as direct result of sale or purchase in the curse of inter-State trade or commerce. The rate of tax payable on such purchase is the rate mentioned in sections 3, 4 or 5, as the case may be, of the said Act. The tax on purchase as aforesaid will be payable irrespective of the quantum of the aggregate of such purchase price in a year. The Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Forth Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 (Tamil Nadu Ordinance No. 5 of 1969) was accordingly promulgated by the Governor on the 27th November, 1969, to give effect to the above decision. 2. The Government decided that jaggery and gur (other than palm jaggery) and coconuts should be brought under single point levy of tax at the rate of 5 per cent. at the point of first purchase in the State. The Government have also decided that the exemption provided under item 3 of Third Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) should be withdrawn and that all kinds of alcoholic liquors for human consumption (other than toddy and arrack) should be subjected to a single point levy of tax at the rate of 12 per cent. at the point of first sale in the State. The above decisions have been given effect to by notifications issued under sub-section (1) of section 59 of the said Act. 3. The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance and the notifications referred to above," 
