Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State Tamil Nadu in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1986. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1986_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959), - (1) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely :- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the tax payable by a dealer in respect of sale of any goods, other than consumables, to another for use by the the latter, in the manufacture inside the State of sale by him of any goods - mentioned in the First Schedule other than those falling under items 70(b), 70(c) and 107 of the said Schedule or involved in the execution of works contract shall be at the rate of only four per cent on the turnover relating to such sale : Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to any sale unless dealer selling the goods furnishes to the assessing authority in the prescribed manner within the prescribed period a declaration duly filled in and signed by the dealer to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in a prescribed form obtained from the prescribed authority : Provided further that any dealer who, after purchasing the goods in respect of which he had furnished any declaration, fails to make use of the goods so purchased for the purpose specified in the declaration but disposes of such goods in any other manner, shall pay the difference of tax payable on the turnover relating to sale of such goods at the rate prescribed and four per cent : Provided also that the dealer purchasing the goods maintains a separate stock account for each of the goods purchased by him showing such particulars as may be prescribed. Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section 'consumables' means fuels, welding electrodes, welding rods, abrasives, carbide tip tools and lubricating oils. (4) Where any dealer, after availing the concessional rate of tax under sub-section (3), does not sell the finished goods but despatches them to a place outside the State either by branch transfer or by transfer to an agent, by whatever name called, for sale, or in any other manner, except as a direct result of sale or purchase in the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall pay, in addition to the concessional rate of tax already paid under sub-section (3), tax at two per cent on the value of goods so purchased."; (2) sub-section (5) and (6) shall be omitted; (3) in sub-section (7), for the expression "notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5)", the expression "notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), (2) or (3)" shall be substituted. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment Bill, 1986 (L.A. Bill No. 57 of 1986) (Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary No. 245, Part IV, Section 1, dated May 14th, 1986, page 384.), runs as follows :- "The Government have announced in the Budget speech for 1986-87, that a concessional rate of 4 per cent of sales tax will be extended to all component parts, raw materials and processing materials used in the manufacture of finished articles (except arrack blending unit and IMFL manufacturer) falling under the First Schedule of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959), in order to result in a fall in prices of finished articles and benefit consumers. The Government have accordingly proposed to amend section 3 of the Act. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object." 
