Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act Further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1999. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April 1999.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu For sections 3-D and 3-E of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "3-D. Payment of tax by hotels, restaurants and sweet-stalls. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 3, every dealer whose total turnover is not less than twenty-five lakhs of rupees for the year on the first point of sale of food and drinks in hotels, restaurant, sweet-stalls and any other eating houses other than those falling under item 20 of Part C of the First Schedule shall pay tax at the rate of two per cent of the taxable turnover. Explanation. For the purpose of computing the total turnover under the sub-section, the purchase turnover liable to tax under section 7-A shall be added to the sales turnover. (2) Every dealer referred to in sub-section (1) may, at his option, instead of paying tax in accordance with the provisions of that sub-section, pay tax at the rate specified in Part A of the Ninth Schedule. (3) Every dealer, who opts for payment of tax under sub-section (2), shall apply to the assessing authority in such form as may be prescribed, on or before the 30th day of April of the year or within thirty days of commencement of business, as the case may be, and shall pay tax in advance during the year in monthly instalments and for this purpose, he shall furnish such return, within such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed : Provided that the option under this sub-section for the year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1999 shall be exercised on or before the 30th day of June, 1999. (4) The option so exercised under sub-section (2) shall be final of that year and shall continue for subsequent years until the dealer becomes ineligible or withdraws his option in writing. (5) A dealer liable to pay tax under sub-section (2) shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax on the sale of food and drinks.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3E--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 3, every dealer whose total turnover is not more than fifty lakhs of rupees for the year on the sale of gold and silver jewellery including articles thereof may, at his option, instead of paying tax in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3, pay tax at the rate specified in Part B of the Ninth Schedule. (2) Every dealer, who opts for payment of tax under sub-section (1), shall apply to the assessing authority in such form as may be prescribed, on or before the 30th day of April of the year or within thirty days of commencement of business, as the case may be, and shall pay tax in advance during the year in monthly instalments and for the purpose, he shall furnish such return, within such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed : Provided that the option under this sub-section for the year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1999 shall be exercised on or before the 30th day of June, 1999. (3) The option so exercised under sub-section (2) shall be final for that year and shall continue for subsequent years until the dealer becomes ineligible or withdraws his option in writing. (4) A dealer who has been permitted to pay the tax under sub-section (1) shall not collect any amount by way of tax or purporting to be by way of tax on the sale so long as he opts to pay tax as provided under sub-section (1)." 
