Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Thirtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979. (2) (i) Section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st April, 1979; (ii) Clause (a) of section 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st April, 1959; (iii) Clause (b) of section 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th March, 1979.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for items (i) to (x), the following items shall be substituted, namely :- Rate of tax "(i) Where the total turnover is not ... Eight hundred and less than fifty thousand rupees, forty rupees per but is less than sixty thousand annum. rupees. (ii) Where the total turnover is not ... One thousand and less than sixty thousand rupees, eighty rupees per but is less than seventy thousand annum. rupees. (iii) Where the total turnover is not ... One thousand three less than seventy thousand rupees, hundred and twenty but is less than eighty thousand rupees per annum. rupees. (iv) Where the total turnover is not ... One thousand five less than eighty thousand rupees, hundred and sixty but is less than ninety thousand rupees per annum. rupees. (v) Where the total turnover is not ... One thousand and less than ninety thousand rupees, eight hundred but is not more than one lakh of rupees per annum." rupees.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Section 60 of the Principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the sale or purchase of such of those goods - (i) as were not liable to tax only at the point of first sale or purchase before the inclusion of such goods in the First Schedule; and (ii) as are liable to tax only at the point of first sale or purchase under sub-section (2) of section 3 of this Act; effected within the State after the inclusion of such goods in the First Schedule shall be deemed to be the first sale or purchase for the purposes of this Act, although any sale or purchase of such goods has taken place within the State before such inclusion : Provided that in the case of goods which are held in stock on the date on which such goods are included in the First Schedule and which had already suffered tax prior to that date and which by virtue of this section have become taxable at the point of first sale or purchase on or after the said date, the rate of tax payable by any dealer in respect of those goods under this Act shall be reduced to the difference between the rate of tax payable on the sale or purchase of goods under sub-section (2) of section 3 of this Act and the rate of tax which the goods had already suffered prior to the said date : Provided further that if the rate of tax payable under sub-section (2) of section 3 is less than the rate at which the goods have already suffered tax prior to the said date, no further tax shall become payable on such goods under this Act.".
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the principal Act, - (a) after item 1-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "1-B. Teleprinters, parts and At the point of first 15"; accessories thereof. sale in the State. (b) after item 79 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be inserted, namely :- "79-A. Handmade matches. At the point of first 2". sale in the State.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, all taxes levied or collected or purporting to have been levied or collected under the principal Act on the sale of the goods specified in item 1-B of the First Schedule to the principal Act as amended by this Act for the period commencing on the 1st April, 1959, and ending with the date of the publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette shall for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been validly levied or collected in accordance with law as if clause (a) of section 4 had been in force at all material times when such tax was levied or collected and accordingly - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by any authority, officer or person in connection with the levy or collection of such tax shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of any tax so paid; (c) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any tax so paid. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Amendment) Bill, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, Extraordinary No. 124, Part IV, Section 1, dated 20th April, 1979, page 125.), runs as follows :- "In order to augment the resources of the State, the Government have decided to levy 2 per cent single point tax on the sales of handmade matches with effect from the 4th March, 1979. This decision has been given effect to by a notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 59 of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1959). The notification has come into force on the 4th March, 1979. Under the first proviso to sub-section (2) of the said section 59, a Bill to replace the aforesaid notification has to be introduced in the present session of the legislature. 2. The Government have also decided to accept the recommendations of the Tamil Nadu Sales Tax Committee regarding compounding of tax due. As per the present pattern, compounding is allowed to dealers in multi-point goods whose total turnover is not less than fifty thousand rupees but not more than one lakh of rupees per annum. In order to encourage this category of dealers to opt for composition under section 7 of the said Act, it is proposed to reduce the existing ten slabs to five slabs from the 1st April, 1979. The Government have also decided to reduce the compounding rates of tax under the said section 7. 3. Opportunity has also been availed of to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959, so as to bring teleprinters under a separate item in the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959, in order to remove any doubt about its liability under item 1 of the First Schedule under which it is being taxed at present, and also to have a transitional provision similar to section 60 of the said Act, whenever goods liable to multi-point tax are brought to single point tax, so as to collect only the difference of tax between multi-point and single point rates and also to waive the single point tax if it is less than the rates at which the goods had suffered tax at the multi-point rates. 4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects." 
