Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2000. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of January, 2000.
Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the First Schedule to the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959, - (1) in Part A, items 1-A, 1-B, 1-C, 2-A and 3 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (2) in Part B, - (i) for item 78-A and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "78-A. Toys of all kinds other than those falling under First sale."; item 8 of Part DD of the First Schedule. (ii) for item 80 and the entries relating thereto, the following item and entries shall be substituted, namely :- "80. Vegetable oil of all kinds (including refined First sale."; vegetable oil other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. (iii) after item 84 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added namely :- "85. Modem and speakers, parts and accessories thereof. First sale.; 86. Uninterrupted power supply system. First sale."; (3) in Part C, - (i) in item 19, the expression "uninterrupted power supply", shall be omitted; (ii) for item 47 and the entries relating thereto including the Explanation thereunder, the following shall be substituted, namely :- "47. Timber including sized timber but excluding First sale."; firewood other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. Explanation. - For the purpose of this item in the case of timber purchased by the forest contractors in the auction of forest coupes conducted by the Forest Department of the Government, the sale by such contractors of such timber in any form or size shall be deemed to be the first sale and the sale by the Forest Department in such auction of forest coupes shall not be deemed to be the first sale. (iii) after item 53 and the entries relating thereto, the following items and entries shall be added, namely :- "54. Electronic duplicating machines, reprographic First sale. copiers including duplicators, xerox and photo copying machines and any other electronic apparatus for obtaining duplicate copies, whether reduced, enlarged or the same size as the originals. 55. Electronic systems, apparatus, appliances First sale. and other electronic goods (other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule) but including electronic indexing card punching, franking, addressing machines, one record units and other electronic goods. 56. Electronic teleprinters and fax machines First sale. of all kinds. 57. Electronic typewriters. First sale. 58. Gramophones of all kinds including record First sale. players, radio gramophones, gramophone records, matrices for records and record changers. 59. Sound recording and reproducing equipments First sale. (excluding item 49 in Part-C) including dictaphones, car cassette players, tape-decks, tape players, compact disc players (including a combination of any of them) with or without wireless reception instruments and compact discs, magnetic tapes, micro tapes and micro fische for use therewith. 60. Television cameras, projectors, closed First sale. circuit television sets and cameras, car televisions, video televisions, video cameras, teleprompters, dish antenna and boosters. 61. Video cassette players and recorders with First sale. or without combination of electronic analog digital clocks, blank magnetic video tapes, video cassettes for use therewith and video computers (electronic games). 62. Head cleaners in any form and parts and First sale. accessories (including ribbons) of electronic goods falling under items 18 and 75 of Part-B, items 18, 49, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60 and 61 of Part-C and items 18 and 19 of Part-DD of this First Schedule. 63. Small transformers used in electronic First sale."; equipments, including - (i) Transformers (Power and Control) (step down from 230V to less than 100V of power rating not exceeding 250VA), (ii) Buck boost transformers (230V/less than 100V), (iii) Inverter transformers, (iv) Isolation transformers, (v) Rectifier transformers, (vi) Ferro resonant transformers, (vii) Line driver transformers (less than 50VA) (viii) Fly back transformers/line output transformers/Extra high tension transformers, (ix) Main filter transformers, (x) Line driver transformers, (xi) Toroidal core transformers and R-core transformers, (xii) Switch mode power supply transformers (sub-items (viii) to (xii) above are ferrite transformers.) Explanation. - All the above transformers shall be deemed to fall under this item only if each of them has not even one of the windings rated above 500 VAC. (4) In Part-CC, item 1 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (5) In Part-D, items 1, 2, 14, 15, 16, 17-A, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 26, 30, 31, 35, 45, sub-items (iii), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii) and (ix) of items 48, 52, 53, 58, 61 and 66 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (6) after Part-D, the following part shall be inserted, namely :- "PART-DD Goods which are taxable at the rate of 12 per cent 1. Adhesives of all kinds including gum, glue, resins First sale. sale solutions. 2. Aerated waters, tinned, canned, bottled or packed First sale. soft drinks, whether or not flavoured or sweetened and whether or not containing vegetable or fruit juices or fruit pulp, sold under brand name whether such brands are registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (Central Act 43 of 1958) or not. 3. Aeroplanes, and other aircrafts, including First sale. helicopters and all kinds of parachutes, dirigibles, all kinds of gliders, aircrafts launching gear parts and accessories thereof. 4. Cinematographic equipments, including cameras, First sale. projectors over head projects, sound recording and reproducing equipments, parts and accessories thereof and lenses, exposed films, film-strips, are or cinema carbons, cinema slides, paper, paper boards required for use therewith. 5. Clocks, time-pieces, watches (whether or not First sale. in combination with any other devices), stop watches, time switches, mechanical timers, time records, auto print time punching clocks, time registers, instrument panel clocks of all kinds including all such electronic devices, parts and accessories thereof, watch bands, watch bracelets, watch chins, watch straps. 6. (i) Crockery (other than those specified First sale. elsewhere in this Schedule). (ii) Cutlery (other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule) including, table cutlery, forks. 7. (i) Dry fruits and nuts and kernel such as First sale. almond, pistha, dry grapes, figs, apricots, walnut, other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. (ii) Wet dates. 8. Electronic toys. First sale. 9. Fire works including coloured matches. First sale. 10. Furs and skins with fur (other than those First sale. falling under item 84 in Part-B of this Schedule and under Second Schedule) 11. Leather goods other than foot wear made First sale. wholly or principally of leather (whether or not other materials such as thread, lining, rivets are used). 12. Light roofing sheets (obtained by immersing First sale. paper mat in bitumen). 13. (i) Motor cars, motor taxi cabs, motor omni First sale. bus, motor vans, jeeps and motor lorries, chassis of motor vehicles, bodies built on chassis of motor vehicles belonging to others (on the turnover relating to bodies) all varieties of trailers by whatever name known (other than trailers of tractors) other than those specified elsewhere in this Schedule. (ii) Parts and accessories of motor vehicles and trailers including fare meters but excluding batteries. 14. PVC pipes, tubes and fittings of all varieties First sale. including flexible and rigid pipes, hoses and tubes, whether transparent or not, PVC and plastic 1 water supply items and sanitaryware. 15. Rubber products (excluding pharmaceutical and First sale. surgical products) namely :- (i) Rubber thread and cord; (ii) Tubes, pipes and hoses of rubber, with or without their fittings (for example, joints, elbows flanges); (iii) Conveyor-transmission or elevator belts or belting of rubber whether combined with any textile material or otherwise; (iv) Interchangeable type treads (tread rubber); (v) Articles of apparel and clothing accessories (including gloves) for all purposes of rubber; and (vi) Other articles of rubber. 16. Sandalwood and sandalwood oil. First sale. 17. Sound transmitting equipments, of every First sale. description including telephones, intercom, devices, loud speakers including stereo or hi-fi amplifier, speaker systems which are used with stereo or hi-fi musical systems, microphones and stands therefor, headphones, earphones and combined microphones/speaker sets parts and accessories thereof and telephone cables, fibre optic cables. 18. Television sets. First sale. 19. Wireless reception and transmission First sale."; instruments and apparatus including car radios, walkie talkie, transmission and reception apparatus for radio telephony, radio-telegraphy, radio broadcasting radar apparatus, radio navigational aids apparatus and radio remote control apparatus, electrical valves, transistors, amplifiers, loud speakers and receivers. (7) after Part K, the following part shall be added, namely :- "PART-Z Goods which are taxable at the rate of 1 per cent. 1. Bullion, that is to say gold and silver in First sale. mass and uncoined, pure or alloy and specie including palaramarel silver and kora gold. 2. Wornout or beaten jewellery. Last purchase. 
