Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the punishment of the offence of unlawful possession of gift goods supplied by certain relief organizations Whereas it is expedient to provide for the punishment of the offence of unlawful possession of gift goods supplied by certain relief organizations; Be it enacted in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 19612 . (2) It extends to the whole of the State of 3 [Tamil Nadu]. (3) It shall come into force at once. Substituted for Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on the 8th January, 1961. Published in the Fort St. George Gazette, Part IV, Section 4, dated 17th January, 1962 Substituted for Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969.
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) gift goods means any of the following goods, when supplied by way of gift, by any relief organization to any State Government or to the Central Government or to any other person on behalf of such Government, namely:- (a) cornmeal; (b) milk powder; (c) vegetable oil (soya bean oil or sunflower seed oil); (d) any other goods which the State Government may, by notification, from time to time, specify; (2) relief organization means any organization specified in the Schedule appended to this Act. Amended by Madras Act (1 of 1966).
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person is found, or is proved to have been, in possession of any gift goods reasonably suspected of being stolen or unlawfully obtained, and cannot account satisfactorily how he came by the same, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Central Act 5 of 1898) any offence under this Act shall be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code. (2) No Court below that of a Presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The State Government may, by notification, add any organization to or omit any organization from, the Schedule; and on the publication of such notification, such organization shall be deemed to be included in, or as the case may be, omitted from, the Schedule.
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (a) Every notification issued under this Act shall come into force on the day on which it is published. (b) Every notification issued under this Act shall, as soon as possible after it is issued, be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed, or the next session, both Houses agree in making any modification in any such notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not be issued, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification.
Tamil Nadu Gift Goods (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1961_Section Sch.--> State(s): Tamil Nadu [See Section 2(2)] 1. United Nations International Children Emergency Fund (UNICEF). 2. Co-operative for American Relief everywhere (CARE). 3. Church World Service. 4. Lutheran World Relief. 5. Catholic Relief Service. 
