Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the (Madras Tamil Nadu State Housing Board Act, 1961. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of (Madras) Tamil Nadu. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different areas.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act unless the context otherwise requires; (1) betterment fee means the fee declared to be payable under Section 73 in respect of an increase in the value of land resulting from the execution of a housing or improvement scheme; (2) Board means the (Madras) Tamil Nadu State Housing Board constituted under Section 3; (3) Board Premises means any premises belonging to, or vesting in, the Board or taken on lease by the Board or any premises which is entrusted to, or in the possession or control of, the Board for the purposes of this Act; (4) Chairman means the Chairman of the Board; (5) Committee means any committee appointed under Section 25; (6) Competent authority means any person or authority authorized by the Government, by notification, to perform the functions of the competent authority under Chapter XI for such areas as may be specified in the notification; (7) Government means the State Government; (8) Housing Board Engineer means the Housing Board Engineer appointed under Section 16; (9) Housing or improvement scheme means a scheme framed under this Act and includes any one other types of schemes referred to in Section 40; (10) Land includes benefits to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth; 1 [(10-A) Managing Director means the Managing Director appointed by the Government under Section 4-A;] 2 [(11) Member means the member of the Board; and includes the chairman and the Managing Director;] (12) Premises means any land or building or part of a building and includes; (i) the garden, grounds and out house, if any, appertaining to such building or part of a building; and (ii) any fittings affixed to such buildings or part of a building for the more beneficial enjoyment thereof; (13) regulations means the regulations made under this Act; (14) rules means the rules made under this Act; (15) Secretary means the Secretary appointed under Section 16; (16) Tribunal means the Tribunal constituted under Section 79; (17) Year means the financial year. Clause (10-A) inserted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The duty of carrying out the provisions of this Act shall, subject to the restrictions, conditions and limitations therein contained, be vested in a Board to be called The (Madras) Tamil Nadu State Housing Board; and such Board shall be a body corporate and have perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall by the said name use and be used.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairman, appointed by the Government, who possesses such qualifications as may be prescribed, and of the following members, namely:- (a) for non-official members, appointed by the Government, one who shall be an engineer or architect, who possesses experience in housing and who is not employed by the Government, or a local authority or a corporation owned or controlled by the Government; 1 [(aa) a Managing Director;] (b) the Secretary, Board of Revenue, ex-officio; 2 [(i) Official Member not exceeding six, other than the Managing Director; and] (c) the Chief Engineer, Public Works Department, in charge of Buildings, ex-officio; (d) the Joint Director of Town- Planning, ex-officio; (e) the Inspector of Municipal Councils and Local Boards, ex-officio; (f) the Commissioner of Labour, ex-officio; (g) the Commissioner, Corporation of Madras, ex- officio; (h) the Registrar of Co-Operative Societies, ex-officio; (i) the Director of Harijan Welfare, ex-officio; (j) the Director of Public Health, ex-officio; (k) the Secretary to Government in the Finance Department, ex-officio, (l) the Superintending Engineer, Rural Housing Cell, ex-officio; (m) an officer, nominated by the Development Commissioner, who is in charge of Rural Development and having jurisdiction throughout the State, ex-officio; (2) If for any reason the officer referred to in clause (c), (e) or (k) of sub-section (1) is unable to attend any meeting of the Board, he may depute any officer subordinate to him to attend such meeting. The officer so deputed shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Board, but shall not have the right to vote. Inserted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 4-A--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may appoint an officer of the Government not below the rank of:- (i) Deputy Secretary of Government; or (ii) Collector of a District; The Managing Director for the purposes of this Act: (2) The terms of officer and the terms and conditions of service of Managing Director shall be such as may be prescribed.] S. 4-A inserted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The appointment of the Chairman and the non-official members shall be notified in the Fort St. George Gazette.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Chairman and the non-official members shall hold office for period of three years from the date of their appointment. (2) The Chairman and the non-official members shall be eligible for re-appointment. (3) Any non-official member may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Government but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by the Government.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as, and for being a member of the Board, if he- (a) has been convicted by a criminal court for an offence involving moral turpitude, unless such conviction has set aside; (b) is an undischarged insolvent; (c) is of unsound mind; (d) is an officer of servant under the Board; (e) has directly or indirectly, by himself or by any partner, employer or employee, any share or interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf of, the Board or; (f) is a Director or a Secretary, Manager or other officer of any incorporated company which has any share or interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf of, the Board. (2) A person shall not, however, be disqualified under clause (e) or clause (f) sub-section (1) or be deemed to have any share or interest in any contract or employment within the meaning of those clauses, by reason only of his, or the incorporated company of which he is a Director, Secretary, Manager or other officer, having a share or interest in- (i) any sale, purchase, lease or exchange of immovable property or any agreement for the same; (ii) any agreement for the loan of money or any security for the payment of money only; (iii) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Board is inserted; (iv) the occasional sale of the Board, to a value not exceeding two thousand rupees in any one year, of any article in which he or the incorporated company regularly trades. (3) A person shall not also be disqualified under clause (e) or clause (f) of sub- section (1) or be deemed to have share or interest in any incorporated company which has any share or interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf of the Board, by reason only of his being a shareholder of such company. Provided that such person discloses to the Government the nature and extent of the shares held by him. Explanation - For the purposes of clause (d) of sub-section (1) the Chairman or 1 [the Managing Director] shall not be deemed to be an officer or servant under the Board. Inserted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Chairman shall be a whole time-officer of the Board, and shall not, undertake any work unconnected with his office without the sanction of the Government. (2) He shall be paid such salary and allowances as may be fixed by the Government.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may, from time to time grant to the Chairman such leave as may be admissible under the rules. (2) Whenever there is temporary vacancy in the office of the Chairman, the Government may appoint a person to act as Chairman during the period of such vacancy and shall pay to such person such salary and allowances as may be fixed by them. The person so appointed shall be deemed for all purposes of this Act to be the Chairman.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If at any time it appears to the Government that the Chairman has shown himself to be unsuitable for his office, or has been guilty of any misconduct or neglect which renders his removal expedient, that may, by notification, remove the Chairman from office. (2) The Government may, by notification, remove any non-official members. (a) If he has, without the permission of the Board, been absent from the meetings of the Board for any period exceeding three consecutive months; (b) If he has been absent from the meetings of the Board for any period exceeding that permitted under sub-section (1) II; or (c) If he, being a legal practitioner, acts or appears on behalf of any person other than the Board in any civil, criminal or other legal proceedings in which the Board is interested, either as a party or otherwise; or (d) If he has, in the opinion of the Government, contravened, the provisions of Section 26; or (e) If he, in the opinion of the Government, is unsuitable or has become incapable of acting as a member or has abused his position as a member as to render his continuance as such detrimental to the public interest. (3) A non official member removed under any of the provisions of clauses (a) to (c) of sub- section (2) shall be disqualified for appointment as a member for a period of three years from the date of his removal unless otherwise ordered by the Government. (4) A non-official member removed under clause (e) of sub- section (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment until he is declared by an order of the Government to be no longer ineligible.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 11--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may permit any non-official member to absent himself from its meetings for a period not exceeding six months. (2) The casual vacancy in the office of a member who is permitted to be absent under sub-section (1) may be filled by the Government and any person appointed to fill such vacancy shall enter upon office forth with but shall hold office only so long as the vacancy lasts; Provided that the person so appointed is eligible for being appointed as a member to the office of the absent member in accordance with the provisions of Section 4 and is not disqualified under Section 7.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 12--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) On the appointed day the Board of Trustees for the Improvement of the City of Madras (hereinafter referred to as the City Improvement Trust) shall stand dissolved and all its assets and liabilities shall stand transferred to and vested in the Board. (2) The assets of the City Improvement Trust shall be deemed to include all rights and powers and all property, whether movable or immovable, belonging to or vested in the City Improvement Trust including in particular cash balances, reserve funds, investments, deposits and all other interests and rights in or arising out of such property as may be in the possession of the City Improvement Trust and all books of account or documents kept or maintained by the City Improvement Trust; and the liabilities of the City Improvement Trust shall be deemed to include all debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then existing and pertaining to the City Improvement Trust. Explanations - In this section and in Section 13, 14 and 15 appointed day means the date on which this Act comes into force in the City of Madras.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 13--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Where the City Improvement Trust has established a provident fund or superannuation fund or any other like fund for the benefit of its employees and constituted a trust in respect thereof (hereinafter referred to as the existing trust), the moneys standing to the credit of any such fund on the appointed day, together with any other assets belonging to such fund, shall subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) stand transferred to and vested in the Board on the appointed day free from any such trust; (2) the Board shall as soon as may be after the appointed day constitute in Respect of the moneys and other assets which are transferred to and vested in it under sub-section (1) one or more trusts having objects as similar to the objects of the existing trusts as may be practicable. (3) Where all the moneys and other assets belonging to the existing trust are transferred to and vested in the Board under sub-section (1), the trustees of such trust, shall, as from the appointed day be discharged from the trust, except in respect of things done or omitted to be done before the appointed day.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 14--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, all contracts agreements and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the appointed day and to which the City Improvement Trust is a part or which are in favour of the City Improvement Trust shall be of as full force and effect against or in favour of the Board, as the case may be, and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if, instead of the City Improvement Trust, the Board had been a party thereto or as if they had been entered into or issued in favour of the Board. (2) If on the appointed day any suit, appeal or other legal proceedings of whatever nature by or against the City Improvement Trust is pending then, it shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer to the Board of the assets and liabilities of the City Improvement Trust or of anything done under the Act, but the suit, appeal or other legal proceeding may be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the Board. Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section legal proceedings, includes any proceeding under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1984).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 15--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) every whole time employee of the City Improvement Trust shall, on and from the appointed day, become an employee of the Board and shall hold his office therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to gratuity, if any, and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his remuneration, terms and condition are duly altered by the Board. 2. If any question as to whether any person was a whole time employee of City Improvement Trust immediately before, the appointed day, the question shall be referred to the Government, whose decision shall be final. 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (Central Act 14 of 1947) or in any other laws, for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee of the City Improvement Trust to the Board shall not entitle any such employee to any compensation under that Act or other laws, and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 16--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may appoint a Secretary, a Housing Board Engineer and such other officers and servants as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions; Provided that the appointment of the Secretary and the Housing Board Engineer shall be subject to the previous approval of the Government. (2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1): (i) the Board may, with the previous approval of the Government, sanction the creation of or appoint any person to any post, the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds one thousand rupees;- (ii) the Board shall have power to create posts in the establishment, the maximum monthly salary of which does not exceed one thousand rupees and to appoint persons to such posts; (iii) 1 [the Managing Director] may appoint any, officer or servant whose maximum monthly salary does not exceed three hundred rupees; Provided that in cases of emergency: (a) 2 [the Managing Director] may appoint temporarily for a period not exceeding three months, such officers or servants as may, in his opinion, be required for the purposes of this Act and the employment of whom for any particular work had not been prohibited by any resolution of the Board; and (b) every appointment made under clause (a) shall be reported by 3 [the Managing Director] to the Board at its next meeting. Substituted for the word Chairman by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted for the word Chairman by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted for the word Chairman by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 17--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Secretary, Housing Board Engineer and other officers and servants of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed by regulations.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 18--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to any regulations made under Section 19, the power of making promotions to posts in the service of the Board, of granting leave to officers and servants holding such posts, of censuring, fining, withholding, promotions from, reducing, suspending, removing or dismissing such officers and servant for any breach of department rules or discipline or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or misconduct, and of discharging such officers and servants from the service of the Board for any other sufficient reason, shall be exercised by the following authorities namely:- (a) by the 1 [Managing Director] in the case of posts, the maximum monthly salary of which does not exceed three hundred rupees and the servants holding such posts; (b) by the Board, in the case of posts, the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds three hundred rupees but does not exceed one thousand rupees and officers and servants holding such posts; (c) by the Board, subject to the previous approval of the Government, in the case of posts, the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds one thousand rupees and officers and servants holding such posts; Provided that a servant of the Central or State Government or of a local authority whose services have been lent to the Board, shall not be so punished except by an authority which would have been competent to do so if his services had not been so lent, but the 2 [Managing Director] or the Board, as the case may be, shall be entitled to make an inquiry and to report against such servant to such authority. (2) Any officer or servant of the Board who is aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (1) may, within two months from the date of receipt by him of such order, appeal- (a) to the Board, if the order was passed by the [Chairman] ; 3 [Managing Director] and (b) to the Government, if the order was passed by the Board. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 19--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall, with the previous approval of the Government, make regulations. (a) fixing the salary and allowances of the Secretary, Housing Board Engineer and other officers and servants of the Board; (b) fixing the amount and nature of security to be furnished by any other or servant from whom it may be deemed expedient to require security; (c) for regulating the grant of leave of absence, leave allowances and acting allowances to the officers and servants of the Board; Provided that a servant of the Central or State Government employed as an officer or servant of the Board shall not be entitled to leave or leave allowances, otherwise than as laid down in the conditions of his service under the Central or State Government relating to transfer to foreign service; (d) for establishing and maintaining a provident fund, for compelling all or any of the officers or servants other than servants of the Central or State Government in respect of whom a contribution is paid under Section 150 to subscribe to the fund at such rates and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, and for supplementing such subscriptions are of the funds of the Board; (e) for determining the conditions under which the officers and servants or any of them shall on retirement receive gratuities or compassionate allowances and the amount of such gratuities and compassionate allowances.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 20--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board shall prepare and maintain a schedule of establishment before the 1st May of every year, showing the number, designations and grades of the officers and servants (other than the employees who are paid by the day or whose pay is charged to temporary work), whom it considers necessary and proper to employ for the purposes of this Act, and also the amount and the nature of the salary, fees and allowances to be paid to each such officer or servant, contributions payable Section 150 in respect of each officer and servant, as on the 1st of April of the same year.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 21--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board shall establish a Housing Unit for the area comprising (i) the City of Madras and (ii) Places situated within twenty five miles of the limits of the city of Madras by the name the Madras Housing Unit and the Board may, with the approval of the Government, establish by resolution a Housing Unit for any other area for the efficient performance of its functions in that area; (2) Every housing unit shall form part of the establishment of the Board and shall consist of such officers and servants as may be considered necessary by the Board; (3) Every housing unit shall be in charge of an officer who shall be under the administrative control of the 1 [Managing Director] and shall also exercise such powers, and perform such duties and functions, as may be delegated to him by the (Chairman) 2 [Managing Director] under Section 22. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 22--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 2 [Managing Director] shall exercise supervision and control over the acts and proceedings of all officers and servants of the Board, and subject to the foregoing sections and subject also to such control and revision as may be prescribed, shall decide all questions relating to the service of the said officers and servants and their salaries allowances, benefits and privileges. (2) The Chairman may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any officer of the Board, any of his powers, duties or functions under this Act or any rules or regulations made there under, except those under section: 93, 104, 136, and 139. Provided that (a) the 3 [Managing Director] shall not delegate his powers under Sections 28 and 29 to incur expenditure and to approve estimates for any single work or scheme, the value of which exceeds twenty thousand rupees; (b) the chairman shall not delegate his powers under Section 16 to make appointment to posts the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds one hundred rupees; and (c) the 4 [Managing Director] shall not delegate any of his powers under Section 18 to any officer in respect of any employee of the Board unless such employee was appointed by such officer or any subordinate of such officer, by virtue of a delegation of 5 [Managing Directors] power of appointment under Section 16. (3) The exercise or discharge by any officer of any powers duties, or functions delegated to him under sub-section (2) shall be subject to such restrictions and limitations as may be imposed by the Chairman, and shall also be subject to his control and revision. (4) Against any order of the nature referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 18 passed by an officer to whom the Managing Director power in that behalf has been delegated, an appeal shall lie to the Board, and if the 6 [Managing Director] has himself revised the order of such officer, an appeal shall lie to the Board against the order of the (Chairman) 7 [Managing Director]. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 23--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be prescribed by regulations: Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in every month. 1 [(2) The Chairman or in his absence, the Managing Director shall provide at a meeting of the Board]. (3) All questions at any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting and in the case of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in his absence 2 [Managing Director] shall have a second or casting vote. (4) The proceedings of the meeting of the Board shall be forwarded to the Government in the department in charge of housing within seven days of every meeting. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 24--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purpose as may be prescribed by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the provisions of this Act. Provided that the number of persons to be associated shall not be more than five. (2) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1) or any purpose shall have the right to take part in the discussion of the Board relevant to that purpose, but shall not have the right to vote and shall not be named as a member for any other purpose. (3) The Government may, by order, depute one or more officers of the Government to attend any meeting of the Board and to take part in the discussions of the Board, but such officer or officers shall not have the right to vote.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 25--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may, from time to time appoint committees consisting of such number of persons as it may think fit for the purpose of discharging such duties or performing such functions, and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by regulations. (2) The chairman or in his absence, the Managing Director shall provide at a meeting of the Board. (3) All proceedings of the Committee shall be subject to confirmation by the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 26--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) A member or a person associated with the Board or a member of any Committee who:- (a) has directly or indirectly, by himself or by any partner, employer or employee, any such share or interest as it described in sub-section (1) of Section 7 in respect of any matter, or (b) has acted professionally, in relation to any matter, on behalf of any person having therein any such share or interest as aforesaid, shall not vote or take part in any proceeding of the Board or any Committee relating to such matter. (2) If any member or any person associated with the Board under Section 24 or any member of a Committee appointed under Section 25, has directly or indirectly, any beneficial interest in any land situated in an area comprised in any housing or improvement scheme framed under this Act, or in an area in which it is proposed to acquire land for any of the purposes of this Act:- (i) he shall at a meeting relating to such area of the Board or any Committee inform the Managing Director of the nature of such interest, and (ii) he shall not take part in any proceeding relating to such area at a meeting of the Board or any Committee. (3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall prevent any member or any person associated with the Board under Section 24 or any member of a Committee appointed under Section 25, from voting on, or taking part in the discussion of any resolution or question relating to any subject other than a subject referred to in that sub-sections.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 27--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No act done or proceeding taken under this Act by the Board or any Committee shall be invalidated merely on the ground:- (a) of any vacancy or defect in the Constitution of the Board or the Committee; or (b) of any defect or irregularity in the appointment of a person acting as a member thereof, or (c) of any defect or irregularity in such act or proceeding not affecting the merits of the case.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 28--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Subject to budget provision and availability of funds, expenditure may be incurred on any single work or scheme for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act:- (1) by the 2 [Managing Director] in case such expenditure does not exceed fifty thousand rupees; and (2) by the Board, in other cases; Provided that the Board shall not, without the previous approval of the Government, incur any such expenditure exceeding ten lakhs of rupees; Provided further that the 3 [Managing Director] shall report the expenditure incurred by him under this section to the Board at its next meeting for ratification. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 29--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board or the 2 [Managing Director] may accord approval to estimates for incurring expenditure on any work or scheme for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act subject to the like restrictions and conditions imposed on the Board or the 3 [Managing Director] as the case may be, under Section 28. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 30--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 2 [Managing Director] may, in cases of emergency direct the execution of any work or the doing of any act which requires the sanction of the Board and the immediate execution or doing of which is, in his opinion, necessary for the service or safety of the public and may also direct that the expenses of executing the work or of doing the act shall be paid from the funds of the Board; Provided that- (a) he shall not act under this section in contravention of any direction of the Board or the Government prohibiting the execution of any particular work or the doing of any particular act; (b) he shall report the action taken by him under this section and the reasons there for to the Board at its next meeting and shall also submit a copy of his report to the Government and the Board or the Government may issue such directions as it or they may deem fit on such report. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 31--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board may enter into and perform all such contracts as it may consider necessary or expedient for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 32--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every contract shall be made on behalf of the Board by the 1 [Managing Director]. (2) The 2 [Managing Director] shall take sufficient security deposit for the due performance of the contract. (3) Written agreements shall be executed for all contracts, the value of which exceeds five hundred rupees. (4) Every contract made by the 3 [Managing Director] the value of which exceeds ten thousand rupees, shall be reported to the Board at its next meeting. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 33--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of Sections 31 and 32, the contracts or agreements shall be made or executed in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed. (2) A contract or agreement made or executed in contravention of the provision of this Act or the rules or regulations made there under shall not be binding on the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 34--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [Managing Director] or any officer of the Board authorized in writing, by the Board in this behalf, may sign on behalf of the Board any agreement or other instrument to be executed on behalf of the Board. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (Central Act 14 of J908), it shall not be necessary for the 2 [Managing Director] or an officer of the Board referred to sub-section (1) to appear in person or by agent at any registration office in any proceeding connected with the registration of any instrument executed by him in his official capacity or to sign as provided in Section 58 of that Act. (3) Where any instrument is so executed, the registering officer to whom such instrument is presented for registration may, if he thinks fit, refer to the 3 [Managing Director], or an officer of the Board referred to in sub- section (1) for information respecting the same and shall, on being satisfied of the execution thereof, register the instrument. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 35--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Board may, from time to time, incur expenditure and undertake works for the training and execution of such housing or improvement schemes as it may consider necessary. (2) The Government may, on such terms and conditions as they may think fit to impose, transfer to the Board the execution of any housing or improvement scheme not provided for by this Act, and the Board shall thereupon undertake the execution of such scheme as if it has been provided for by this Act. (3) The Board may, on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon, take over for execution any housing or improvement scheme undertaken by a local authority and the Board shall execute such scheme as if it has been provided for by this Act.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 36--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever the Government consider it expedient or necessary, for the purpose of clearance or improvement of any slum area, to transfer any land in such area belonging to or vested in them or acquired under the provision of the Madras Slum Improvement Acquisition of Land Act 1954 (Madras Act 11 of 1954) they may do so on such terms and conditions as they may think fit to impose; and direct the Board to undertake the clearance or improvement of that area and to frame and execute such housing or improvement scheme under this Act as the Government may specify and the Board shall thereupon undertake the same for execution as if it had been provided for by this Act.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 37--> State(s): Tamil Nadu A housing or improvement scheme may be framed by the Board on its own motion or at the instance of the Government or a local authority.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 38--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may agree to frame and execute a housing or improvement scheme at the instance of a Local authority if the Board is satisfied that such scheme is necessary and the funds at its disposal permit the framing and the execution of such scheme or may refuse to frame and execute such scheme if it is satisfied that it is either unnecessary or not feasible or that it is otherwise unexcitable. (2) Any Local authority deeming itself aggrieved by the refusal of the Board under subsection (1) may, within two months from the date of receipt of the order of such refusal appeal to the Government who may pass such orders there on as they think fit and it shall be the duty of the Board to give effects to such orders accordingly.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 39--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Not withstanding contained in any other law for the time being in force, a housing or improvement scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters namely:- (a) the acquisition by purchase, exchange, or otherwise of any property necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme; (b) the laying or relaying out of any land comprised in the scheme; (c) the distribution or redistribution of sites belonging to owners of the property comprised in the scheme; (d) the closure of demolition of dwellings or portions of dwellings unfit for human habitation; (e) the demolition of obstructive buildings or portions or buildings; (f) the construction and reconstruction of buildings; (g) the sale, lease or exchange of any property comprised in the scheme; (h) the construction and alteration of road, streets, back lanes, bridges, culvert and causeways; (i) the draining, water supply and lighting of the streets included in the scheme; (j) the provision of open parks, playing fields and open spaces for the benefit of any area comprised in the scheme or any adjoining area, and the enlargement of existing parks, playing fields, open spaces and approaches; (k) the provision of sanitary arrangements required for area comprised in the scheme, including the conservation and prevention of injury or contamination to rivers or other sources and means of water supply; (1) the provision of recommendation for any class of inhabitants; (m) the advance of money for the purposes of the scheme; (n) the provision of facilities for communication and transport; (o) the collection of such information and statistics as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act; (p) the reclamation or reservation of lands for markets, gardens, playing fields and aforestation; (q) the provision of schools, parks, swimming pools, restaurants, shops markets, fuel depots, laundries, hair dressing saloons and other amenities in the scheme; and (r) any other matter for, which, in the opinion of the Government, it is expedient to make provision with a view to provide house accommodation and to the improvement of any area comprised in the scheme, or of any adjoining area or the general efficiency of the scheme. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the Government may, by notification, specify such area surrounding or adjoining the area included in a housing or improvement scheme to be the adjoining area.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 40--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any housing or improvement scheme shall be of one of the following types, or combination of any two or more such types or of any special features thereof, that is to say- (a) a house accommodation scheme; (b) a rebuilding scheme; (c) a rehousing or rehabilitation scheme; (d) a city or town or village expansion scheme; (e) a street scheme; (f) a deferred street scheme; (g) a land development scheme; and (h) a general improvement scheme;
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 41--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board is of opinion that it is expedient or necessary to meet the need for house accommodation in any area, the Board may frame a house accommodations scheme. (2) Such scheme shall specify the layout of the area where the houses are to be constructed. (3) Such scheme may provide for the construction of house and for the sale, leasing out or sale on hire purchase basis of any house so constructed. (4) The Board may provide in the area roads, streets, drainage, water supply, street lighting and other amenities.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 42--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)Whenever it appears to the Board that any area is an in sanitary area, within the meaning of section and that having regard to the comparative value of the buildings in such area and of the sites on which they are erected the most satisfactory method of dealing with the area or any part thereof is a rebuilding scheme, the Board may frame a rebuilding scheme for the whole area or any part of it in accordance with the provisions of this section. (2) A rebuilding scheme may provide for:- (a) the reservation of roads, street, lanes and open spaces and the enlargement of the existing roads, streets, lanes and open spaces to such extent as may be necessary for the purposes of the scheme; (b) the relaying out of the sites of the area upon roads, streets, lanes and open spaces so reserved or enlarged; (c) the payment of compensation in respect of any such reservation or enlargement, and the formation of road, street, lanes and open spaces so reserved or enlarged; (d) the reconstruction, alteration or demolition of the existing buildings and their appurtenances by the owners or by the Board on default of the owners, and the erection of buildings in accordance with the scheme said by the owners, or by the Board in default of the owners, upon the sites as defined under the scheme; (e) the advance to the owners, upon such terms and conditions as to interest, sinking fund, and other matters as may be provided under the scheme of such sums as may be necessary to assist them to reconstruct or alter existing buildings or to erect new buildings in accordance with schemes; and (f) the acquisition by the Board of any site or building comprised on the area included in the scheme.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 43--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever the Board is of opinion that it is necessary for persons who:- (a) are displaced by the execution of any housing or improvements scheme sanctioned under this Act, or (b) are likely to he displaced by the execution of any housing or improvement scheme which it is intended to frame under this Act, or (c) are surplus in any scheme area, the Board may frame a re-housing scheme for the construction maintenance and management of such number of dwelling house, and shops as may be required, or may frame a rehabilitation scheme for providing such number of open plots with roads, streets and open spaces as may be necessary.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 44--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board is of opinion that it is expedient to control and provide for the future expansion or development of a city, town or village, the Board may frame an expansion scheme and specify the time-limit for the execution of such scheme. (2) The expansion scheme may be framed in respect of an area which has wholly within or wholly outside the limits of the city, town or village or in respect, of an area which lies partly within and partly outside the city, town or village. (3) Such scheme shall specify the proposed layout of the area to be developed and the purposes for which particular portions thereof are to be utilized. (4) After any such scheme has come into force, no person shall, without the previous permission of the Board, erect, re-erect, add to, or alter any building or wall within the area comprised in the scheme. (5) If the Board refuses to grant permission to any person to erect, re-erect, add to, or alter any building or wall on his land in the area aforesaid, and does not proceed to acquire such land within one year from the date of such refusal, the Board shall pay reasonable compensation to such person, for any damage sustained by him in consequence of such refusal.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 45--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board is of opinion that for the purpose of- (a) providing building sites, or (b) remedying defective ventilation, or (c) creating new or improving existing means of communication and facilities for traffic, or (d) affording better facilities for conservancy, it is expedient to layout new street or alter existing streets (including bridges, causeways and culverts) in any area, the Board may frame a street scheme for such area. (e) a street scheme may within the limit of the area comprised in the scheme. (2) A street scheme may within the limits of area comprised in the scheme, provide for the following matters, namely: - (a) the acquisition of any land which in the opinion of the Board, is necessary for the street scheme. (b) the relaying out of all or any of the lands so acquired including the construction and reconstruction of buildings by the Board or by persons authorized by the Board in that behalf and the laying out construction and alterations of streets thoroughfare. (c) the draining water supply and lighting of streets and thoroughfare so laid out, constructed or altered. (d) the raising lowering or reclamation of any land vested in or to be acquired by the Board for purposes of the scheme. (e) the provision of open spaces for the better ventilation of the area comprised in the scheme; and (f) the acquisition of any land adjoining any street, thoroughfare, or open space to be formed under the scheme.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 46--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board is of opinion that it is necessary to provide for the ultimate widening of any street by altering the existing alignments of such street to improved alignments to be prescribed by the Board but that it is not necessary immediately to acquire all or any or the properties lying within the proposed improved alignments, the Board may frame a deferred street scheme prescribing an alignment on each side of the street and specify the time limit for the execution of such scheme. (2) A deferred street scheme shall provide for the following matter:- (a) the acquisition of the whole or any part of any property lying within the prescribed street alignments within the time-limit specified in the scheme which may be extended by the Board from time to time; Provided that such time-limit including the extensions granted by the Board shall in no case exceed twenty years from the date of sanction of the scheme; (b) the re-laying out of all or any such property including the construction of buildings by the Board or by any other person, and the formation and alignment of the street; (c) the draining, water- supply and lighting of the streets so formed or altered. (3) After a deferred street scheme has been sanctioned by the Board:- (a) no person shall, except with the written permission of the Board erect, add to or alter any building or wall so as to make the same project into the prescribed alignment of the street; (b) if the Board fails to acquire or to institute proceedings for the acquisition of any property within the prescribed alignment of any street within the time-limit specified in the scheme or extended by it, the owner of such property may, at any time thereafter, after, give the Board notice requiring it to acquire or to institute proceedings for the acquisition of such property before the expiry of six months from the date of such notice, and thereupon the Board shall acquire or institute such proceedings and acquire the property accordingly, and if the Board fails to do so, it shall pay reasonable compensation to the owner for any damage sustained by him in consequence of such failure; (c) before proceeding to acquire any property lying within the prescribed alignment of the street other than property regarding which it has received a notice under clause (b) the Board shall give six months notice to the owner of its intention to acquire such property; (d) notwithstanding anything contained in the Madras City Municipal Act, 1919 (Madras Act 4 of 1919) or the Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Madras Act 5 of 1920) or in any notification issued under Section 206 of the Madras District Boards Act, 1920 (Madras Act 16 of 1920) or under Section 125 of the Madras Village Panchayat Act 1950 (Madras Act 10 of 1950) or under Section 6 of the Madras Panchayat Act 1958 (Madras Act 35 of 1958), the council of the Corporation, the Municipal Council, the District Board, the Village Panchayat, the Panchayat or the Panchayat Union Council shall not have power to prescribe any alignment of the street within the limits of the scheme and any such alignment previously prescribed within such limits shall cease to be alignment of the street.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 47--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board is of opinion that it is expedient to provide building sites in any area, the Board may frame a land development scheme. (2) Such scheme shall specify the proposed layout of the area to be developed and the purposes for which particular portions thereof are to be utilized. (3) The Board may provide for roads, streets, open spaces drainage, water supply and street-lighting and other amenities for the scheme area.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 48--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever it appears to the Board:- (a) that in any area, any buildings used or intended or likely to be used as dwelling houses are unfit for human habitation, or (b) that danger to the health of the inhabitants of buildings in any area, or to buildings in the neighborhood of such area is likely to be caused by (i) the narrowness, closeness, or bad arrangement or condition of streets or building or groups of buildings in such area, or (ii) the want of light, air, ventilation or proper convenience in such area, or (iii) any other sanitary defects in such area, the Board may frame a General Improvement Scheme in respect of such area.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 49--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any housing or improvements scheme has been framed, the Board shall prepare a notice to that effect and specify:- (a) the boundaries of the area comprised in the scheme; and (b) the place or places at which particulars of the scheme, a map of the area, and details of the land which it is proposed to acquire and of the land in regard to which it is proposed to recover a betterment fee, may be seen at reasonable hours (2) The Board Shall:- (a) cause the said notice to be published weekly for three consecutive weeks in the Fort. St. George Gazette, and in two leading daily newspapers in the State, specifying the period upto which the objections will be received and (b) send a copy of the notice to the local authority concerned. (3) The 1 [Managing Director] shall cause copies of all documents referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) to be delivered to any applicant on payment of the fee fixed by the Board. Substituted by Act (22 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 50--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The local authority to whom a copy of a notice has been sent under clause (b) of Section (2) of Section 49 shall, within a period of sixty days from the receipt of the said copy, forward to the Board any representation which the local authority may wish to make regarding the scheme.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 51--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Within three weeks following the day on which any notice is first published under Section 49 in respect of any housing or improvement scheme, the Board shall serve a notice in such form as may be prescribed on every person whose name appears in the assessment list of the local authority concerned as being primarily liable to pay property tax on any building or land in regard to which the Board proposes to recover betterment fee. (2) A copy of notice shall also be affixed in every such premises. (3) Every such notice shall be signed by the 1 [Managing Director] or by a person duly authorized by him in that behalf. (4) Any person on whom a notice under sub-section (1) has been served may, within thirty days from the service of the any notice, make a representation in writing to the Board stating his objections to the scheme. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 52--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The executive officer of any local authority shall, at the request of the 1 [Managing Director] furnish him with a copy of, or an extract for, the assessment list of the local authority. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 53--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) After considering the objection and representation, if any, received in pursuance of sub-section (2) of Section 49, Section 50 and sub-section (4) of Section 51 and after hearing the persons who having raised any such objections or made any such representations, desire to be heard, the Board may either abandon or modify or sanction the scheme, or apply to the Government for sanction with such modification, if any, as the Board may consider necessary if the cost of the scheme exceeds ten lakhs rupees. (2) The Government may sanction with or without modification, or may refuse to sanction or may return for reconsideration any housing or improvement scheme, costing over ten lakhs of rupees submitted to them under sub-section (1). (3) If a scheme returned for consideration under sub-section (2) is modified by the Board, it shall be re-published in accordance with Section 49. (a) in every case in which the modification affects the boundaries of the area comprised in the scheme, or involves the acquisition of any land not previously proposed to be acquired; and (b) in every other case, where the modification is, in the opinion of the Board, of sufficient importance to require re-publication.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 54--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever the Board or the Government sanction a housing or improvement scheme, it shall be announced by notification; Provided that whenever the Board sanctions a scheme with modifications, if any, it shall cause notice to that effect to be published weekly in the Fort St. George Gazette and in two leading daily newspapers in the State. (2) The publication of the notification or notice or notice under sub-section (1) in respect of any scheme shall be conclusive evidence that the scheme has been duly framed and sanctioned. (3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board sanctioning a housing or improvement scheme may, within thirty days from the date of last publication in the Fort St, George Gazette of the said scheme, appeal to the Government and the decision of the Government to such appeal shall be final and shall not be liable to be questioned in any Court of law. (4) The scheme shall come into force and shall have effect- (a) Where no appeal is preferred under sub-section (3) on and from the expiry of the thirty days referred to in that sub-section; and (b) Where such appeal is preferred, on and from the date of the decision of the Government on such appeal.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 55--> State(s): Tamil Nadu As soon as may be after a housing or improvement scheme other than a deferred street scheme or expansion scheme has come into force, the Board shall proceed to execute the same.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 56--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any time after a housing or improvement scheme has been sanctioned by the Board or the Government, as the case may be, and before it has been carried into execution, the Board may alter or cancel it; Provided that- (a) if any alteration is likely to increase the estimated net cost of executing a scheme by more than ten percent of the total cost, or if any altered scheme is likely to cost more than ten lakhs of rupees, the alteration shall not be made without the previous sanction of the Government. (b) if any alteration involves the acquisition, otherwise than by agreement of any land not previously proposed to be acquired in the original scheme, the procedure prescribed in the foregoing sections of this Chapter shall, so for as it may be applicable, be followed as if the alteration were a separate scheme; (c) if, owing to any alteration, and land not previously liable under the scheme to the payment of a betterment fee, becomes liable to such payment, the procedure prescribed in Sections 49, 50 and 51 shall so far as it may be applicable, be followed in regard to such land; Provided further that no scheme, costing over ten lakhs of rupees, shall be cancelled under this section without the previous sanction of the Government. Explanation - For the purpose of this section, the word alteration shall be deemed to include a combination of two or more schemes framed or proposed to be framed and the expression altered shall be deemed to include any scheme so combined.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 57--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever any building or land or any street or any part thereof, which is situated within the jurisdiction of a local authority, and is vested in such local authority, is within the area of any housing or improvement scheme, the Board shall give notice accordingly to that local authority and such building, land or street or any part thereof shall thereupon vest in the Board. (2) Where any land situated within the jurisdiction of a local authority vests in the Board under the provisions of sub-section (1) and the Board makes a declaration that such land will be retained by the Board only until it revests in the local authority as part of a street or an open space under Section 61, no compensation shall be payable by the Board to the local authority in respect of that land. (3) Where any land or building vests in the Board under the provisions of sub-section (1) and no declaration is made under sub-section (2) in respect of the land, the Board shall pay to the local authority as compensation, a sum equal to the market value of such land or building as on the date on which the scheme come into force under Section 54 and where any building situated on the land in respect of which a declaration has been made by the Board under sub-section 2 is vested in Board under sub-section (1) like compensation shall payable in respect of such buildings by the Board. (4) If in any case where the the Board has made a declaration in respect of any land under sub-section (2) the Board retain or disposes the land contrary to the terms of declaration so that the land does not request in the local authority, the Board shall pay, to the local authority, compensation in respect of such land in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3). (5) If any question or dispute arises to whether compensation is payable under sub-section (4) or as to the amount of such compensation or as to whether any building, land or street, or any part thereof, is required for the purposes of the scheme, the matter shall be final.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 58--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever any private street or square or part thereof which is not vested in the Board or in many local authority is required for executing any housing or improvement scheme, the Board shall cause to be affixed in a conspicuous place in or near such street or square or part, a notice signed by the 1 [Managing Director] and (a) stating the purpose for which the street or square or part thereof, is required and (b) declaration that the Board will, on after a date to be specified in the notice, take over charge of such street of square, or part from the owner thereof, and shall simultaneously send a copy of such notice to the owner of such street or square part. (2) After considering the objections (if any), received in writing before the date specified under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the Board may take over charge of such street or square or part, and the same shall thereupon vest in the Board. (3) When the Board alters or closes any private street or square or part thereof which has vested in it under sub-section (2) it shall pay reasonable compensation to the previous owner for the loss of his rights therein. (4) If the alteration or closing of any such street or square or part causes damage or substantial inconvenience to owners of property adjacent thereto, or to residents in the neighbourhood, the Board shall forth with provide some other reasonable means of access for the use of persons who were entitled to use such street or square or part as a means of access to any property, or place and if the provision of such means of access does not sufficiently compensate any such owner or resident for such damage or inconvenience, the Board shall also pay him reasonable compensation. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 59--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Such the provision of the Madras city Municipal Act 1919 (Madras Act 4 of 1919), the Madras District Municipalities Act 1920 (Madras Act 5 of 1920), the Madras District Board Act 1920 (Madras Act 16 of 1920). The Madras Village Panchayats Act, 1950 (Madras Act 10 of 1950) and the Madras Panchayat Act, 1958 (Madras Act 35 of 1958) as relate to maintenance or repairs of public street closure of Public Street or parts thereof diverting or turning public street or parts thereof and to disposal of the land which is no longer required when any public street is permanently closed, shall not apply to any street which is vested in the Board. (2) Such of the provisions of the enactments specified in sub-section (1) as relate to temporary closure of streets, precautions during repairs of streets and prosecution against removal of bars and lights shall not apply to the Board when any drain or premises vested in the local authority is opened or broken up by the Board or any public street is under construction by the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 60--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever the Board allows any street vested in it to be used for public traffic, it shall keep the street in good repair and do all things necessary for the safety convenience of persons using it.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 61--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may hand over any road or street to the local authority concerned after giving a months notice, when; (a) any such road or street laid out or altered by the Board has been duly leveled metalled, flagged, channeled, severed and drained in the manner provided in the scheme sanctioned by the Board or the Government under Section 53; (b) lamp posts necessary for the lighting of such streets have been provided by the Board; and (c) Water and other sanitary convenience have been duly provided in such streets. (2) The local authority concerned may, after receiving the notice from the Board under sub-section (1) declare the street to be a public street; and the street shall thereupon vest in the local authority; and shall thenceforth be maintained, kept in repair, lighted and cleaned by the local authority. (3) When any open space for the purposes of ventilation or recreation has been provided by the Board in executing any housing or improvement scheme, it shall, on completion, be transferred to the local authority concerned by a resolution of the Board and it shall thereupon vest in the local authority as its expenses; The Madras Village Panchayats Act, 1950 (Madras Act 10 of 1950) and the Madras Panchayats Act, 1958 (Madras Act 35 of 1958). As relate to maintenance or repairs of public streets closure of Public street or parts thereof, diverting or turning public street or parts thereof and to disposal of the land which is no longer required when any public street is permanently closed, shall not apply to any street which is vested in the Board. Provided that the local authority may require the Board before any such open space if so transferred to enclose, level, turf, drain and layout such space and provide foot path therein, and if necessary to provide lamps and other apparatus for lighting it. (4) If any difference of opinion arises between the Board and the local authority in respect of any matter referred to in the foregoing provisions of this section, the matter shall be referred to the Government whose decision shall be final.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 62--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any work which may lawfully be done, is being executed by the Board in any street vested in it, Board may direct that such work be either wholly or partially closed to traffic generally or to traffic of any specified description. (2) When any such direction has been given, the Board shall set up in a conspicuous position on or near the street an order prohibiting bars, chains or posts across or in the street as it may think proper for preventing or restricting traffic therein.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 63--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any work is being executed by the Board in any public street vested in it, the Board shall, so far as may reasonably be practicable, make adequate provision for- (a) the passage or diversion of traffic; (b) securing access to all premises approached from such street and (c) any drainage, water-supply, or means of lighting which is interrupted by reason of the execution of the work. (2) The Board shall pay reasonable compensation to any person who sustains special damage by reason of the execution of any such work.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 64--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may- (a) turn, divert discontinue the public use of, or permanently close any public street vested in it or any part thereof; or (b) discontinue the public use of, or permanently close any public square vested in it or any part thereof. (2) Whenever the Board discontinues the public use of or permanently close any public street vested in it or any part thereof, it shall pay reasonable compensation to every person who was entitled, otherwise than as a member of the public, to use such street or part as means of access, and has suffered damage from such discontinuance or closing. (3) Whenever the Board discontinues the public use of or permanently closes, any public square vested in it or any part thereof it shall pay reasonable compensation to every person who was entitled, otherwise than as a member of the public, to use such square or part as a means of access. (4) When any public street or square vested in the Board, or any part thereof, is permanently closed under sub-section (1), the Board may sell or lease so much of the same as it is no longer required.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 65--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 63, the Board may retain any lane (not meant for vehicular traffic) and may enter into agreement with local authority concerned or any other person for supervision, repair, lighting and general management of any lane so retained.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 66--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) to plan and co-ordinate all housing activities in the state, and to ensure expeditious and efficient implementation of housing or improvement schemes in the state; (2) to provide technical advice and scrutinise all projects under housing and improvement schemes sponsored or assisted by the Central or State Government; (3) to maintain, allot, lease and otherwise use plots, buildings and other properties of the Board or the Government and to collect rents from the properties under the control and management of the Board, and repay loans to the State and Central Governments; (4) to set up a research section for the purpose of expediting the construction, of and cheapening the cost of buildings; and (5) to organise and run workshops and stores for manufacture, sale, stockpiling and supply of building materials, required for housing or improvements schemes.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 67--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board may include in the cost of any housing or improvement scheme framed by it or any other work undertaken by it, supervision and centage charges at such rates as may be fixed by it; Provided that the rate so fixed shall not be more than twelve and a half per cent of the scheme of work.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 68--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter the Government may, at any time in the case of any housing or improvement scheme, which is proposed to be framed or which has been framed by the Board or which is being executed by it, call for and examine the records of the Board relating to such scheme and if, after making the examination and after considering the representations, if any, of the Board and the local authority concerned, it appears to the Government that such scheme should be modified, annulled or remitted for reconsideration to the Board or that such scheme should be executed with modifications, they may pass orders accordingly. (2) The Government may stay the execution of any such scheme pending the exercise of their powers under sub-section (1) in respect thereof. (3) Any housing or improvement scheme which has already come into force but has been modified by the Government under sub-section (1) shall have effect as if it had been duly sanctioned by the Board under Section 53. The scheme as modified shall be published in accordance with the provisions of Section 54 and on such publication the scheme so modified shall come into force and shall have effect.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 69--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may by notification, exempt, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in such modification, any housing or improvement scheme, or class of housing or improvement scheme from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 70--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Any land or any interest therein required by the Board for any of the purposes of this Act may be acquired under the provisions of the land Acquisition Act 1894 (Central Act of 1894).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 71--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board may enter into agreement with any person for the acquisition from him by purchase, lease or exchange, of any land or any interest therein which may be acquired under Section 70. Provided that if the value of such land or interest exceeds fifty thousand rupees; the Board shall not enter into such agreement without the previous approval of the Government.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 72--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may retain or may lease, sell exchange or otherwise dispose of any land vested in or acquired by it under this Act. (2) Whenever the Board decides to lease or sell any land acquired by it under this Act from any person, it- (a) shall give notice advertisement in one of the leading local newspaper in the State, and (b) shall offer to the said person, or his heirs, executors or administrators, a prior right to take on lease or to purchase such land for an amount or at a rate to be fixed by the Board, if the Board considers that such an offer can be made without detriment to the carrying out of the purposes of this Act. (3) If in any case two or more persons claim to have the prior right referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) preference shall be given to the person, who agrees to pay the highest amount or rate for the land, not being less than the amount or rate fixed by the Board under that clause.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 73--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When by the execution of a housing or improvement scheme, any land in the area comprised in the scheme which is not required for the execution thereof will, in the opinion of the Board, be increased in value, the Board, in framing the scheme, may declare that betterment fee shall be payable by the owner of the land or any person having an interest therein respect of the increase in value of the land resulting from the execution of the scheme. (2) Such increase in value shall be the amount by which the value (the land on the completion of the execution of the scheme estimated as if the land were clear or buildings) exceeds the value of the land prior to the execution of the scheme estimated in the like manner, and the betterment fee shall be one-third of such increase in value. (3) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Government declare that such betterment fee shall also be payable in respect of any land not comprised in the scheme but is adjacent to the area comprised in the scheme if such land will be increased in value consequent on the execution of a housing or improvement scheme in the area comprised in the scheme. Provided that the Board shall, before declaring that any betterment fee shall be payable under this sub-section, serve a notice in such form as may be prescribed on every person whose name appears in the assessment list of the local authority concerned as being primarily liable to pay property tax on any building or land in regard to which the Board proposes to declare that such betterment fee shall be payable and there upon the provisions of subsections (2), (3) and (4) of Section 51 shall apply to every notice served under this provision.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 74--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When it appears to the Board that a housing or improvement scheme is sufficiently advanced to enable the amount of the betterment fee to be determined, the Board shall by a resolution passed in this behalf declare that for the purpose of determining such fee the execution of the scheme shall be deemed to have been completed and shall thereupon give notice in writing to every person on whom a notice in respect of land to be assessed has been served under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 51, or to the successor, in interest of such person, as the case may be that the Board proposes to assess the amount of the betterment fee payable in respect of such land under Section 73. (2) The Board shall then assess the amount of betterment fee payable by each person concerned, after giving such person an opportunity to be heard and such person shall, within one month from the date of receipt of notice in writing of such assessment from the Board, inform the Board in writing whether or not he aspects the assessments. (3) When the assessment proposed by the Board is accepted by the person concerned within the period specified in sub-section 21, such assessment shall be final. (4) If the person concerned does not accept the assessment made by the Board or fails to inform the Board as required under sub-section (2) within the period specified herein, the matter shall be referred to the Tribunal. (5) The Tribunal shall, after holding an inquiry, and after hearing the person concerned, assess amount of betterment fee payable by the person.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 75--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When the amount of all betterment fees payable in respect of land in the area comprised in the scheme and in respect of land not comprised in the scheme area but is adjacent to the area comprised in scheme referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 73 has been determined under Section 74, the Board shall, by a notice in writing to be served on all persons liable to such payment fix a date by which such payments shall be made, and interest at the rate of four and a half percent per annum upon any amount outstanding shall be payable from that date. Provided that any person liable as aforesaid may make payment, if he so choose, in such number of annual installments not exceeding ten as the Board may determine.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 76--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person liable to pay a betterment fee in respect of any land may, at his option, instead of paying the same to the Board execute an agreement with the Board to leave the payment outstanding as a charge on his interest in the land, subject to the annual payment in perpetuity of interest at the rate of six per cent per annual, the first annual payment of such interest to be made one year from the date referred to in Section 75. (2) Every payment due from any person in respect of a betterment fee and every charge referred to in sub-section (1) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other enactment and notwithstanding the extension of any mortgage, or other charge, whether legal or equitable, created either before or after the commencement of this Act, be the first charge upon the interest of such person in each land subject to the prior payment of land revenue, if any, due to the Government, on such land. (3) If any installment of interest due under an agreement executed in pursuance of subsection (1) be not paid on the date on which it is due, the betterment fee shall become payable on that date in addition to the said installment. (4) At any time an agreement has been executed in pursuance of subsection(1) any person may pay off the charge created thereby, with the interest due up to the date of such payment. (5) When an agreement in respect of any land has been executed by any person in pursuance of sub-section (1) no suit with respect to such agreement shall be brought against the Board by any other person except a heir, executor or administrator of the person first aforesaid claiming to have an interest in the land.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 77--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All moneys payable in respect of any land any person in respect of a betterment fee under Section 73 or Section 75 or by any person under an agreement executed in pursuance of sub-section (1) of Section 76 shall, together with interest due up to the date of realization, be recoverable by the Board from the said person or his successor in interest in such land, as an arrear of land revenue.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 78--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any land in respect of which the payment of a betterment fee has been accepted in pursuance of sub-section (3) of Section 74 or in respect of which an agreement regarding the betterment fee has been executed under Section 76 be subsequently required for any of the purposes of this Act, the payment or agreement shall not be deemed to prevent the acquisition of land under the Land Acquisition Act. 1894 (Central Act of 1894).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 79--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Land Acquisition Act 1894 (Central Act of 1894) the Government may constitute a Tribunal for the purpose of performing the functions of the Court with reference to the acquisition of land for the Board under the said Act, for deciding disputes relating to levy or assessment of betterment fee and for deciding such other matters as may be prescribed. (2) The Tribunal shall consist of one person only who shall be a judicial officer not below the rank of Subordinate Judge. (3) The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 80--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Tribunal may, with the previous sanction of the Government, appoint such officers and servants as it considers necessary for carrying on its business, and the remuneration and other conditions of service of such officers and servants shall be such as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 81--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The amount necessary for the payment of remuneration, salaries allowances and other contributions payable to the judicial officer appointed at the Tribunal and of the officers and servants of the Tribunal shall be paid out of the funds of the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 82--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the land Acquisition Act 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894), the award of the Tribunal in relation to the acquisition of land shall be deemed to be the award of the Court under the said Act. (2) Any person who does not agree to the amount of the compensation awarded by the Tribunal for the land acquired for the Board under the Land Acquisition Act 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894) or to the persons to whom it is payable or to the apportionment of the compensation along those persons may, within sixty days from the date of award of the Tribunal, prefer an appeal to the High Court. Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. (3) Any award of the Tribunal referred to in sub- section (1), subject to sub-section (2), and any decision of the Tribunal on any matter referred to it under this Act shall be final and shall not be liable to be questioned in any of Court of law.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 83--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every award of the Tribunal and every order made by the Tribunal for the payment of money, or the delivery of possession or removal of any structure shall be enforced in the Presidency Town, by the Madras City Civil Court, and elsewhere by the Subordinate Judges Court having jurisdiction over the area in which the land concerned in the proceeding of the Tribunal is situated as if it were the decree of the said Court.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 84--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) if the competent authority is satisfied- (a) that the person authorized to occupy any Board premises has- (i) not paid rent lawfully due from him in respect of such premises for a period of more than two months; or (ii) sublet without the permission of the Board, the whole or any Part of such premises; or (iii) otherwise acted in contravention of any of the terms, express or implied, under which he is authorised to occupy such premises; or (b) that any person is in unauthorized occupation of any Board premises, the competent authority may, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, by notice served- (i) by registered post or (ii) by affixing a copy of it on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of such premises or (iii) in such other manner as may be prescribed, order that the person authorised to occupy as well as any other person who may be in occupation of the whole or any part of the premises shall vacate them within one month of the date of service of the notice. (2) Before an order under sub-section (1) is made against any person, the competent authority shall inform the person, by notice in writing and served in the manner provided for service of notice under sub-section (1) of the grounds for which the proposed order is to be made and give him a reasonable opportunity for tendering an explanation and producing evidence, if any, and to show cause why such order should not be made within a period to be specified in such notice. (3) The competent authority may, on application, grant extension of the period specified in such notice on such terms as to payment and recovery of the amount claimed in the notice as he deems fit. (4) Any written statement put in by such person and document produced in pursuance of such notice shall be filed with the records of the case, and such person shall be entitled to appear in the proceedings either in person or by pleader. (5) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order made under sub section (1), the competent authority may evict that person from and take possession of the premises and may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary. (6) If a person, who has been ordered to vacate any premises under sub-section (1) or (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) within one month of the date of service of the notice or such longer time as the competent authority may allow, pays to the Board the rent in arrears or carries out or otherwise complies with the terms contravened by him to the satisfaction of the competent authority, as the case may be, the competent authority, shall, in lieu of evicting such person under sub-section (1), cancel its order made under sub-section (1) and thereupon such person shall hold the premises on the same terms and on which he held them immediately before such notice was served on him. Explanation - For the purpose of this section and Section 85, the expression unauthorized occupation in relation to any person authorised to occupy any Board premises includes the continuance in occupation on by him or by any other person claiming through or under him of the premises after the authority under which he was allowed to occupy the premises has been duly determined.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 85--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to any rules made by the Government in this behalf and without prejudice to the provisions of Section 84, where any person is in arrears of rent payable in respect of any Board premises, the competent authority may by notice served (i) by registered post or (ii) by affixing a copy of it on the outer door or some other conspicuous of such premises, or (iii) in such other manner as may be prescribed; order that person to pay the same within such time not being less than ten days as may be specified in the notice. If such person refuses or fails to pay the arrears of rent within the time specified in the notice, such arrears may be recovered as arrears of land revenue. (2) Where any person is in unauthorised occupation of any Board premises, the competent authority may, in the prescribed manner, assess such damages on account of the use and occupation of the premises as it may deem fit, and may by notice served in the manner provided for service of notice under sub-section (1) order that person to pay the damages within such time as may be specified in the notice. If any person refuses or fails to pay the damages within the time specified in the notice, the damages may be recovered from him as arrears of land revenue. (3) No order shall be made under sub-section (2) until after the issue of a notice in writing to the person calling on him to show cause, within such period as may be specified such notice, why such order should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the same have been considered by the competent authority.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 86--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent authority under Section 84 or 85 may, within one month from the date of service of the notice of such order, prefer an appeal to the Government; Provided that the Government may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of one month, if they are satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. (2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1) the Government may, after calling for a report from the competent authority and after making such further inquiry, if any, as may be necessary, pass such orders as they think fit and the order of the Government shall be final. (3) On such appeal being preferred the Government may stay the execution of the order of the competent authority for such period and on such conditions as they think fit.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 87--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of Section 84, any person who is an employee of the Government or a local authority and who has been allotted any Board premises may execute an agreement in favour the Board providing that the Government or the local authority, as the case may be under or by whom he is employed shall be competent to deduct from the salary or Wages payable to him such amount as may specified in the agreement and to pay the amount so deducted to the Board in satisfaction of the rent due by him in respect of the Board premises allotted to him. (2) On the execution of such agreement, the Government or local authority, as the case may be shall, if so required by the Board requisition in writing, make the deduction of the amount specified in the requisition from the salary or wages of the employees specified in the requisition in accordance with the agreement and pay the amount so deducted to the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 88--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No order made by the Government or the competent authority in exercise of any power conferred or under this Chapter shall be called in question in any Court and no injunction shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Chapter.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 89--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board shall have its own fund. (2) The Board may accept grants, subventions, donations and gifts from the Central or State Government or a local authority, or a individual or body, whether incorporated or not, for all or any of the purposes of this Act. (3) All moneys received by or on behalf of the Board by virtue this Act, all proceeds of land or any other kind of property sold by the Board, all rents and all interest, profits, and other moneys accruing to the Board shall constitute the fund of the Board. (4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) all moneys a receipts specified in the foregoing provisions and forming part of the fund of the Board shall be deposited into the public account of the Government under such detailed head of account as may be prescribed and the said account shall be operated upon by such officers of the Boards may be authorized by the Board and in such manner as may be prescribed. Provided that the Board may invest any sums not required for immediate use in such securities or debentures as may be approved by the Government. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4), the Board may deposit in the Reserve Bank of India in any scheduled bank any amount not exceeding such sum as may be prescribed for the operation of an account with such bank and such amount shall be operated upon by such officers of the Board as may be authorized by the Board and in such manner as may be prescribed. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the Reserve Bank of India shall mean the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (Central Act 2 of 1954) and a scheduled bank shall mean a bank included in the Second Schedule to the said Act.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 90--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may, from time to time make subvention or advance as to the Board for the purposes of this Act on such terms and conditions as the Government may determine.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 91--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board may, from time to time, advance any sum standing at the credit of the money required for the purposes of this Act from the public or from any corporation owned or controlled by the Central or State Government. (2) Whenever the borrowing of any sum of money has been approved by the Government, the Board may, instead of borrowing such sum or any part thereof from the public, take credit from any bank or any corporation owned or controlled by the Central or State Government on a cash account to be kept in the name of the Board to the extent of such sum or part thereof, and may, with the previous sanction of the Government grant mortgages, of all or any of the properties vested in the Board by way of security for such credit. (3) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed and with the previous approval of the Government, the Board may for the promotion and execution of and housing or improvement scheme under this Act, enter, into financial arrangements with any bank or other financial institutions approved by the Government or with the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under Section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (Central Act 31 of 1956). (4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Board may out of its funds grant loans and advances on such terms and conditions as it may determine, to any cooperative society registered or deemed to be registered under the law relating to cooperative societies for the time being in force in the State of Madras or to any other person for the construction of houses.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 92--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may guarantee in such manner as they think fit, the payment of the principal and interest of any loan proposed to be raised by the Board on debentures or of either the principal or the interest; Provided that the Government shall, so long as any such guarantees are in force, lay before both houses of the legislature in every year during the budget session, a statement of the guarantee, if any given during the current year and an up to date account of the total sums, if any, which have been paid out of the Consolidated Fund of the State by reason of any such guarantees or paid into the said Fund towards repayment of any money so paid out.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 93--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever money is borrowed by the Board on debentures, the debentures shall be in such form as the board may with the previous sanction of the Government specify. (2) All debentures shall be signed by the 1 [Managing Director] and either by the Secretary or by any one of the ex-officio members of the Board. (3) The holder of any debenture in any form specified under sub-section (1) may obtain in exchange there for a debenture in any other form specified in the matter provided in sub-section (1) and upon such terms as the Board may determine. (4) Every debenture issued by the Board shall be transferable by endorsement, unless some other mode of transfer is specified therein. (5) All coupons attached to debentures issued under this Act shall bear the signature of the Managing Director and such signature may be engraved, lithographed, or impressed by any mechanical Process. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 94--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When any debenture or security issued or granted under this Act is payable to two or more persons jointly, and either or any of them dies, then notwithstanding contained in Section 45 of the Indian Contract Act 1872 (Central Act 9 of 1872), the debentures or Security shall be payable to the survivor or survivors of such persons; Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any claim by the representative of the deceased person against such survivor or survivors.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 95--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Where two or more persons are joint holders of any debenture or security issued or granted under this Act, any payment made to the first mentioned person therein of any dividend or interest payable in respect of such debenture or security shall be a full discharge of the liability of the Board in respect of such dividend or interest.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 96--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All payments due from the Board for interest on, or the repayment of loans, shall be made in priority to all any other payments due from the Board.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 97--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every loan taken by the Board shall be repaid by the Board within the period agreed upon by the Board and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 114 by such of the following methods as may be approved by the Government, namely:- (a) from a sinking fund established under Section 98 in respect of the loan; or (b) by paying in equal yearly or half-yearly installments of principal or of principal and interest, throughout the said period; or (c) if the Board has, before borrowing money on debentures, reserved by public notice, a power to pay off the loan by periodical installments and to select by lot the particular debentures to be discharged at particular periods then, by paying such installments at such period; or (d) from money borrowed for the purpose; or (e) partly from the sinking fund established under Section 98 in respect of the loan, and partly from money borrowed for the purpose.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 98--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Whenever a loan has to be repaid from a sinking fund, the Board shall establish such a fund and shall pay, into it every year until the loan is repaid, a sum so calculated that if regularly paid, throughout the period agreed upon by the Board, it would, with accumulations in the way of compound interest, be sufficient, after payment of all expenses, to pay off the loan at the end of that period. (2) The rate of interest on the basis of which the sum referred to in sub-section (1) shall be calculated shall be as may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 99--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Notwithstanding anything, contained in Section 98, if at any time the sum standing at credit of the sinking fund established for repayment of any loan is of such amount that if allowed to accumulate at the rate of interest prescribed under sub-section (2) of the section, it will be sufficient to repay the loan at the end of the period agreed upon by the Board, then the Board may discontinue further annual payment into such fund.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 100--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) All moneys paid into any fund shall, as soon as possible, be invested by the Board in- (a) The Government securities; or (b) Securities guaranteed by the Central or State Government; (c) debentures issued by any local authority; or (d) debentures issued by the trustees of the port of Madras; or (e) debentures issued by the Board in the joint names of the Examiner of Local Fund Accountant General, Madras to be held by them in trust for the repayment of the loan for which the sinking fund was established. (2) All dividends and other sums received in respect of any such investment shall, as soon as possible after receipt, be paid into the sinking fund and invested in the manner laid down in sub-section (1). (3) Any investment made in this section may, from time to time, subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) be varied or transposed.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 101--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The two trustees referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 100 in whose names any sinking fund is invested may, from time to time, apply the same, or any part thereof, in or towards the discharge of the loan or any part of the loan for which such sinking fund was established; and until such loan is wholly discharged, shall not all the same for any other purpose.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 102--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The two trustees referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 100 shall, at the end of every year, transmit to the 1 [Managing Director] a statement showing: (a) the amount which has been invested during the year under Section 100; (b) the date of the last investment made previous to the transmission of the statement; (c) The aggregate amount of the securities held by them; (d) the aggregate amount which has upto the date of the statement, been applied under Section 101 in or toward repaying loss; and (e) the aggregate amount already paid into each sinking fund. (2) Every such statement shall be laid before the Board and published in the Fort. St. George Gazette. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 103--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Accountant General, Madras, shall examine the said sinking funds every year and ascertain whether the cash and current value of the securities at credit of such funds are actually equal to the amount which would have accumulated, had investments been regularly made and had the rate of interest as originally estimated been obtained there from. (2) The Board shall forthwith pay into any sinking fund any amount which the Accountant General may certify to be the deficiency therein after examination as aforesaid, unless the Government by special sanction a gradual readjustment.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 104--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [Managing Director] shall, at a special meeting to be held in the month of February in each year, lay before the Board an estimate of the income and expenditure of the Board for the next ensuing year. (2) Every such estimate shall make provision for the due fulfillment of all the liabilities of the Board, and for the efficient administration of this Act. (3) Every such estimate shall differentiate capital and revenue funds, and shall be prepared in such form, and shall contain such details, as the Government may, from time to time prescribe. (4) Every such estimate shall be completed and printed and a copy thereof sent, by post or otherwise, to each member at least ten clear days before the date of the meeting at which the estimate is to be laid before the Board. (5) A revised budget, if any, including all the expenditure not covered in the original budget estimate, shall be laid before the Board at the special meeting to be held in the month of December in each year. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 105--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board shall consider every estimate so laid before it and shall sanction the same either without modification or with such modification as it may think fit.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 106--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Every such estimate, as sanctioned by the Board, shall be submitted to the Government who may, at any time within three months after receipt of the same. (a) approve the estimate, or (b) disallow the estimate or any portion thereof, and return the estimate to the Board for amendment. (2) If any estimate is so returned to the Board, it shall forthwith proceed to amend it and shall resubmit the estimate as amended to the Government who may then approve it.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 107--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may, anytime during the year for which any estimate has been sanctioned, cause a supplementary estimate to be prepared and laid before it at a special meeting. (2) The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of Section 104 and of Sections 105 and 106 shall apply to every supplementary estimate.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 108--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No sum shall be expended by or on behalf of the Board unless the expenditure of the same is covered by a current budget grant or can be met by a re-appropriation or by drawing on the closing balance. (2) The closing balance shall not be reduced below such limit as may be fixed in this behalf by the Government, from time to time. (3) The following items shall be exempted from the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) namely, (a) refund of moneys belonging to contractors or persons held in deposit, and of moneys collected by, or credited to, the Board by mistake; (b) payments due under a decree or order of a Court or under an award of the Tribunal; (c) sums payable under a compromise of any suit or other legal proceeding or claim effected under this Act; (d) sums payable under this Act by way of compensation; and (e) payments required to meet any pressing emergency. (4) Whenever any sum exceeding ten thousand rupees is expended under clause (e) of sub-section (3) the 1 [Managing Director] shall forthwith report the circumstances to the Board explaining how it is proposed to cover the expenditure- Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 109--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The expression Cost Management as used in the following sections in this Chapter means (a) the salary and house rent and conveyance allowance, if any, of the Chairman, the 1 [Managing Director] Secretary, the Housing Board Engineer, and any other allowances and any contributions payable to or in respect of them; (b) the salaries, fees and allowances and contributions paid in respect of officers and servants of the Board referred to in Sections 8, 9, 16, 18 and 21; (c) the remunerations of other employees of the Board except employees who are paid by the day or whose pay is charged to temporary work; (d) all payments made under Section 81 on account of the Tribunal; and (e) all office expenses incurred by the Board of the Tribunal. (2) The expression office expenses in clause (e) of sub-section (1) means expenses incurred for carrying on office work, and includes the rent of office buildings, the provision of furniture thereof, charges for printing and stationery, catering charges incurred in connection with meetings and conferences held by or on behalf of the Board and contributions towards welfare and recreation of the Boards staff. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 110--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board shall keep a capital account and a revenue account. (2) The capital account shall show separately all expenditure incurred by the Board on each housing or improvement scheme.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 111--> State(s): Tamil Nadu These shall be credited to the capital account:- (a) all sums (except interest) received by way of betterment fees under this Act; (b) all moneys received on account of loans taken by the Board in pursuance of this Act; (c) all moneys received as grants by the Board for purposes of this Act from the Central or State Government. (d) all moneys received by the Board on account of repayment of loans and advances granted under Section 91; (e) the proceeds of the sale of any and belonging to the Board which was purchased out of any such loans of grants; (f) where any land was purchased out of an advance from the revenue account, the portion of the proceeds of the sale of such land which remains after crediting to the revenue account the amount of such advance; (g) the proceeds of the sale of any movable property (including securities) for money invested from the capital account belonging to the Board; (h) all lump sums received from any Government in aid of the capital account; (i) all moneys received by the Board in connection with houses for any term exceeding forty years; (j) all sums, if any, which the Government direct, under sub-section (2) of Section 114, to be credited to the capital account; and (k) all moneys realised from the sale of securities by direction of the Government under Section 115.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 112--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The moneys credited to the account shall be held by the Board in trust and shall be applied to- (a) meeting all costs of framing and executing housing or improvement schemes; (b) meeting the cost of acquiring lands for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act; (c) meeting the cost of constructing buildings required for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act; (d) the repayment of loans from money borrowed in pursuance of this Act; (e) granting of loans and advances under Section 91; (f) making Payments in pursuance of Section 148 otherwise than for interests for expenses of maintenance of working; (g) making or contributing towards the cost of surveys in pursuance of Section 146; (h) meeting such proportion of the cost of management as may be prescribed by the board; and (i) temporarily making good the deficit, if any, in the revenue account at the end of any year.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 113--> State(s): Tamil Nadu These shall be credited to the revenue account:- (a) all interest received in pursuance of Section 76 or Section 77; (b) all annually recurring sums received from the Central or State Government in aid of the funds of the Board; (c) all compensations received by the Board under Section 131; (d) all moneys received by the Board in connection with leases of any term not exceeding forty years; (e) all rents of lands vested in the Board; (f) all rents of buildings vested in the Board; (g) the supervision and centrage charges obtained by the Board under Section 67; (h) all interest on loan and advances granted by the Board under Section 91; and (i) all other receipts by the Board which are not required by Section 111 to be credited to the capital account.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 114--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The moneys credited to the revenue account shall be held by the Board in trust, and shall be applied to- (a) payment of all charges or payments towards interest or sinking fund due on account of any loan taken in pursuance of this Act and all other charges incurred in connection with such loans; (b) payment of all sums due from the Board in respect of rates and taxes imposed by the local authority concerned, upon the land vested in the Board; (c) payment of cost, if any, of maintaining a separate establishment for the collection of rents and other proceeds of land vested in the Board; (d) payment of all sums towards the cost of establishment of the Tribunal under Section 81; (e) payment of all sums which the Government may direct to be paid to any auditor under Section 121; (f) payment to the cost of the management excluding such proportion thereof as may be debited to the capital account under clause of Section 112.; and (g) payment of all other sums due from the Board, other than those which are required by Section 112 to be disbursed from the capital account. (2) The surplus, if any, remaining after making the payments referred to in sub-section (1) shall, subject to the maintenance of a closing balance as required by sub-section (2) of Section 108, be invested in the manner laid down in Section 109 towards the service of any loans outstanding after the expiry of sixty years from the commencement of this Act, unless the Government otherwise direct.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 115--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If at any time after any surplus referred to in sub-section (2) of Section 114 has been invested, the Board is satisfied that the investment is not needed for the service of any loan referred to in that sub-section the Board may, with the approval of the Government, sell the securities held under the investment.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 116--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 114, the Board may advance any sum standing at the credit of the revenue account for the purpose of meeting capital. (2) Every such advance shall be refunded to the revenue accounts as soon as may be practicable.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 117--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any deficit in the revenue accounts at the end of any year may be made good by an advance from the Capital account after obtaining the approval of the Government. (2) Every such advance shall be refunded to the capital account in the following year.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 118--> State(s): Tamil Nadu At the end of every year, the Board shall submit to the government an abstract of the accounts of its receipts and expenditure for such year.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 119--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The accounts of the Board shall be examined and audited once in every year by such auditor as the Government may appoint in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 120--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The said auditor may: (a) by summons in writing require production of any document, the perusal or examination of which he believes necessary for the elucidation of the accounts; (b) by summons in writing require any person who has the custody or control of any such document or who is accountable to appear in person before him; and (c) require any person so appearing to make and sign a declaration with respect to such document or to answer any question or to prepare and furnish any statement relating thereto.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 121--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board shall pay to the said auditor such remunerations as the Government may direct.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 122--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The said auditor shall:- (a) report to the Board and to the Government any material impropriety or irregularity which he may observe in the expenditure, or in the recovery of moneys due to the Board, or in the accounts; (b) furnish to the Board such information as it may from time to time, require concerning the progress of his audit; (c) report to the 1 [Managing Director] any loss or waste of money or other property owned by or vested in the Board caused by neglect or misconduct, with the names of persons directly or indirectly responsible for such loss or waste; and (c) submit to the 2 [Managing Director] a final statement of audited accounts, together with a report on the result of the audit, and duplicate copies thereof to the Government, within a period of three months from the end of the year or within such other period as the Government may allow in that behalf. (2)(a) The said auditor may disallow every item contrary to law and surcharge the same on the person making or the authorising the making of the illegal payment, and may charge against any person responsible therefore the amount of any deficiency or loss incurred by the negligence or misconduct of that person or of any sum which ought to have been, but is not brought into account by that person shall, in every such case, certify, the amount due from such person. Explanation - It shall not be open to any person whose negligence or misconduct has caused or contributed to any such deficiency or loss to contend that notwithstanding his negligence or misconduct the deficiency or loss would not have occurred but for the negligence or misconduct or some other person. (b) The said auditor shall state in writing the reasons for his decision in respect of every disallowance, surcharge or charge and furnish a copy thereof by registered post to the person against whom it is made. (c) If the person to whom a copy of the decision is so furnished refuses to receive it, he shall nevertheless be deemed to have been duly furnished with the copy, within the meaning of clause (b); and the period of fourteen days fixed in sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be calculated from the date of such refusal. (3) Any person aggrieved by a disallowance, surcharge or charge made under subsection (2) may, within fourteen days after he has been furnished with a copy of the decision of the auditor either (a) apply, in the Presidency town, to the Madras City Civil Court and elsewhere, to the Court of the subordinate judge to set aside such disallowance, surcharge or charge, in which case the Court may, after taking such evidence as it thinks necessary, confirm, modify, or remit such disallowance, surcharge or charge, with such orders as to costs as it may think proper in the circumstances; or (b) in lieu of such application appeal to the government who shall pass such orders as they think fit. (4) Every sum certified to be due from any person by the auditor under this Act shall be paid by such person to the Board within fourteen days after he has been furnished with a copy of the decision of the auditor unless within that time such person has applied to the Court or appealed to the Government against the decision under sub-section (3); and such sum if not paid, or such sum as the Court or the Government shall declare to be due, shall be recoverable on an application made by the Board to the Court in the same way as an amount decreed by it. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Government may at any time direct that the recovery of the whole or any part of the amount certified to be due from any person by the auditor under this Act shall be waived if in their opinion, such a course is necessary, considering all the circumstances of the case. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988). Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 123--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Managing Director shall cause the report mentioned in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 122 to be printed and shall forward a printed copy thereof to each member and shall bring such report before the Board for consideration at its next meeting.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 124--> State(s): Tamil Nadu It shall be the duty of the Board to remedy forthwith any defects or irregularities that may be pointed out by the auditor and to submit a report thereon to the Government.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 125--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The accounts of the Board as certified by the auditor together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Government and the Government may issue such instructions to the Board in respect thereof as they deem fit and the Board shall comply with such instructions. (2) The Government shall:- (a) cause the accounts of the Board together with the audit report thereon forward to them under sub-section (1) to be laid annually before the State Legislature; and (b) cause the accounts of the Board to be published in the prescribed manner and make available copies thereof on sale at a reasonable price. (b) cause the accounts of the Board to be published in the prescribed manner and make available copies thereof on sale at a reasonable price.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 126--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person, without lawful authority infringes any order given, or removes any bar, chain or post fixed under sub-section (2) of Section 62, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 127--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person, without the permission of the Board erects, reerects, adds to or alters any wall or building so as to make the same project into the street alignment or beyond the building line prescribed by any deferred street scheme, development scheme or town expansion scheme, he shall be punishable: (a) with fine which may extend, in the case of a wall or masonry building to five hundred rupees and in any other case, to fifty rupees; and (b) with further fine which may extend, in the case of wall or masonry building, to one hundred rupees and in any other case, to ten rupees for each day after the first during which the projection continues.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 128--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person fails to comply with any requisition made by the auditor under Section 120, he shall be punishable:- (a) with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees; and (b) in case of a continuing failure, with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for each day after the first during which the failure continues.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 129--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any person:- (a) obstructs or molests any person with whom the 1 [Managing Director] has entered into a contract on behalf of the Board, in the performance or execution by such person of his duty or of anything which he is empowered or required to do by virtue or in consequence of this Act or any rule or regulation made hereunder: or (b) removes any mark set up for the purpose of indicating any level or direction necessary to the execution of works authorized by this Act or any rule or regulation made or scheme sanctioned thereunder, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. Substituted by Act (2 of 1988).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 130--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Who ever contravenes any of the provision of this Act or of any rule or regulation made or scheme sanctioned thereunder shall, if no other penalty is provided for such contravention, be punishable:- (a) with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees; and (b) in case of continuing contravention, with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for each day after the first during which the contravention continue.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 131--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) When any person is convicted of any offence under this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder, the magistrate convicting such person may, on application made in this behalf by the Board or by its officer or servant authorised by it in this behalf, call upon such person forthwith to show cause as to why he should not pay compensation to the Board for the damage caused by his act or omission in respect of which he is convicted. (2) The magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such person may show and if the magistrate after making such inquiry as he may think fit, satisfied that such person is liable to pay compensation, may direct the compensation to such amount not exceeding one thousand rupees as he may determine, be paid by such person to the Board. (3) The amount of compensation directed to be paid under sub-section (2), shall if it be not paid forth with, be recovered as if it were a fine imposed by the magistrate on such person.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 132--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any member, or any officer or servant of the Board acquires directly or indirectly by himself or by any partner, employer or employee, otherwise than such member, officer or servant, any share of interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf of, the Board (not being a share) or interest which, under Section 7, it is permissible for a member to have without being thereby disqualified for being appointed a member he shall be deemed to have committed the offence made punishable by Section 168 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 14 of 1860).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 133--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) No Court shall take congnizance of any offence punishable under, this Act or any rule or regulation made there under unless complaint of such offence is made within six months next after the commission thereof. (2) No Court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 134--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If shall be the duty of every police officer:- (a) to co-operate with the Chairman 1 [and Managing Director] for carrying into effect in enforcing the provisions of this Act or any rule made there under; (b) to communicate without delay to the proper officer or servant of the Board any information which he receives of a design to commit or of the commission of any offence against this Act or any rule made there under; and (c) to assist the Chairman 2 [or the Managing Director] or any officer or servant of the Board reasonably demanding his aid for the lawful exercise of any power vesting in the Chairman 3 [or the Managing Director] or such officer or servant under this Act or any rule made there under. Inserted by Act 2 of 1988. Inserted by Act 2 of 1988. Inserted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 135--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) Any police officer not below rank of a head constable, may arrest any person who commits in his presence, any offence against this Act or any rule or regulation made there under, if the name or address of such person be unknown to him, and if such person on demand declines to give his name or address, or gives a name or address which such officer has reason to believe to be false. (2) No-person so arrested shall be detained in custody after his true name and address are ascertained, or for any longer time than is necessary for bringing him before a Magistrate. In no case shall such detention exceed twenty four hours from the time of arrest without the orders of a Magistrate.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 136--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 2 [Managing Director] may, subject to the control of the Board:- (a) institute, defend or withdraw from legal proceedings under this Act of any rules or regulations made there under; (b) compound any offence against this Act or any rules or regulations made there under which, under any law for the time being in force or the rule prescribed by the Government, may lawfully be compounded; (c) admit, compromise or withdraw any claim made under this Act or any rules or regulations made there under; and (d) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he may, to time, think it necessary or expedient to obtain or as may be from time to time be desired by the Board to obtain, for any of the purposes, referred to in the foregoing clauses of this section, or for securing the lawful exercise or discharge of any power or duty vested in or imposed upon the Board or any officer or servant of the Board. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 137--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government or the Board or any committee thereof any officer or servant of the Government or the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or regulation made there under.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 138--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No suit shall be instituted against the Board, or any member, or any officer of servant of the Board, or any person acting under the direction of the Board, or of the Chairman or 1 [Managing Director] of any officer or servant of the Board, in respect of any act done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or regulation made there under until the expiration of sixty days next after written notice has been delivered or left at the Boards office or the place of abode of such officer, servant or person, stating the causes of action, the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff, and the relief which he claims, and the plaint must contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left. 139.Proof of Consent, etc., of Board or Chairman, 2 [Managing Director] or Officer or Servant of the Board:-Whenever, under this Act or any rule or regulation made there under, the doing or the omission to do anything or the validity of anything depends upon the approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion, or satisfaction of:- (a) the Board or the Managing Director or; (b) The Chairman or; (c) any officer or servant of the Board, a written document signed in case (a) by the 3 [Managing Director,] in case (b) by the Chairman and in case, (c) by the said officer or servant, conveying or setting forth such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion. or satisfaction, shall be sufficient evidence of such approval sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction. 140.Power of 4 [Managing Director] to Direct Removal of Unauthorized Erections, etc., within Street, Alignment, etc.,-(1) The 5 [Managing Director] may, by a written notice, require the owner for the time being of the wall or building referred to in section 127 to stop further work on such wall or building and to alter or demolish the same in such manner and within such time as may be specified in the notice. (2) Where the alteration or demolition directed by any such notice is not carried out as directed therein, the 6 [Managing Director] may cause the wall or building or portion thereof to be altered or demolished as the case may be, and he may recover the expense incurred in so doing from the owner for the time being in such manner as may be prescribed. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 141--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any case not otherwise expressly provided for in this Act, the Board may pay reasonable compensation to any person who sustains damage by reason of the exercise of any of the powers vested by or under this Act in the Board, Chairman or the 1 [Managing Director] or any officer or servant of the Board. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 142--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every public notice given under this Act or any rule or regulation made there under shall be in writing over the signature of the 1 [Managing Director] and shall be widely made known in the locality to be affected thereby, by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said locality, or by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in leading daily newspapers, or by any two or more of these means, and by any other means that the 2 [Managing Director] may think fit. Every such notice shall also be published by affixture in the notice board of the Boards office or sub-office. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 143--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever it is provided by this Act or any rule or regulation made there under that notice shall be given by advertisement in leading daily newspapers, or that a notification or any information shall be published in leading daily newspapers, such notice, notification or information shall be inserted, if practicable, in at least one English daily newspaper and two daily newspapers published in Tamil.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 144--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Every notice or bill, which is required by this Act or by any rule or regulation made there under to bear the signature of the Chairman or 1 [Managing Director] any other member or of any officer or servant of the Board, shall be deemed to properly signed if it bears a facsimile of the signature of the Chairman or the 2 [Managing Director] or of such other member or of such officer or servant, as the case may be, stamped thereupon. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 145--> State(s): Tamil Nadu When any notice, bill or other documents is required by this Act or any rule of regulation made there under to be served upon or issued or presented to any person, such service, issue or presentation shall be effected:- (a) by giving or tendering such document to such person; or (b) if such person is not found, by leaving such document at his Last known place of abode, or by giving or tendering the same to some adult member or servant of his family, or (c) if his address elsewhere is known, by forwarding such document to him by registered post under cover bearing the said address; or (d) if none of the means aforesaid be available, by causing a copy of such document to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the building or land, if any, to which the document relates.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 146--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board may:- (a) cause the Survey of any land to be made, whenever it considers that a survey is necessary or expedient for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act, or (b) contribute towards the cost of any such survey made by any other local authority,
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 147--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [Managing Director] or any person either generally or specially authorised by 2 [Managing Director] in this behalf may, with or without assistants or workman, enter into or upon any land, in order (a) to make any inspection, survey, measurement, or inquiry; (b) to take levels; (c) to dig or bore into the sub-soil; (d) to set out boundaries and intended lines of work; (e) to mark such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and cutting trenches; or (f) to do any other thing, whenever it is necessary to do so for any of the purposes of this Act or any rule or regulation made or scheme sanctioned there under or any scheme which the Board intends to frame there under. Provided as follows:- (a) no such entry shall be made between sunset and sunrise, (b) no dwelling house, and no public building or but which is used as a dwelling place, shall be so entered except with the consent of the occupant thereof, without giving the said occupant at least twenty-four hours previous written notice of the intention to make such entry; (c) sufficient notice shall, in every instance, be given, even when any premises may otherwise be entered without notice, to enable the inmates of any apartment appropriate to women remove themselves to some part of the premises where their privacy will not be disturbed; (d) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be compatible with the exigencies of the purpose for which the entry is made to the social and religious usages of the premises entered. (2) Whenever the Managing Director or a person authorized under subsection (1) enters into or upon any land in pursuance of that sub-section, he shall, at the time of such entry, pay or tender payment for all necessary damage to be done, as aforesaid, and, in case of dispute as to the sufficiency of the amount so paid or tendered, he shall at once refer the dispute to the Board, whose decision shall be final. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 148--> State(s): Tamil Nadu With a view to facilitating the movement of the population in and around any city, town or village the Board may from time to time. (1) subject to any condition it may think fit to impose:- (a) guarantee the payment, from the funds at it of such sums as it may think fit, by way of interest on expenditure on the construction, maintenance or working of locomotion: or (b) make such payments as it may think fit from the, by way of subsidy to persons undertaking to provide, and work means of locomotion; or (c) either single or in combination with any other person. maintain and work and means of locomotion, under provisions of any law applicable thereto; or (3) construct or widen, strengthen or otherwise improve Provided that no guarantee or subsidy shall be made in clause (1), and no means of locomotion shall be connected, maintained or worked under clause (2), without the sanction of the Government.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 149--> State(s): Tamil Nadu All officers and servants of the Board, the members of the Tribunal and all other persons entrusted with function of any functions under this Act, shall be deemed or purporting the act in pursuance of any of the Sections of this act, to be public servants within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (Central Act 45).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 150--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board shall be liable to pay contributions for the leave salary, pension or provident Fund any officer or servant of the Central or State Government employed as chairman or 1 [Managing Director] as an officer or servant, or as the Tribunal or as an officer or the servant of tribunal, as the case may be, as may be required by the rules of his service under the Central or State Government by him or on his behalf. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 151--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any area in respect of which a housing or improvement scheme is in force, the Government may, by notification, declare that from such date as may be specified therein, the powers and functions exercisable by a local authority or its executive authority under the Madras Town Planning Act, 1920 (Madras Act 7 of 1920), shall not be exercised by it and that subject to such restrictions and modifications, if any, as may be specified in the notification, such powers and functions shall be exercised by the Board or the 2 [Managing Director], as the case may be. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 152--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In any area in respect of which a housing or improvement scheme is in force, the Government may, by notification, declare that for the period during which such scheme remains in force and subject to such restrictions, and modifications, if any, as may be specified in the notification, the powers and functions exercisable by a local authority or its executive authority under the enactment constituting such local authority shall be exercised by the Board or the 2 [Managing Director] as the case may be. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 153--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [Managing Director] shall, if so directed by the Government, forward to them a copy of all the papers which were laid before the Board for consideration at any meeting and furnish any return, statement, estimate, statistics, or other information regarding any matter under the control of the Board, a report of any such matter and a copy of any documents in charge of the 2 [Managing Director]. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 154--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) As soon as may be after the first day of April in every year and not later than such date as may be fixed by the Government, the Board shall submit to the Government a detailed report of the administration during the proceeding year in such form as the Government may direct. (2) The 1 [Managing Director] shall prepare such report and the Board shall consider the report and forward the same to the Government with its resolution thereon, if any, Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 155--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) After giving an opportunity to the Board to state its objections; if any, to such directions and after considering the said objections; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the Board to comply with such directions. (2) The Government may give any local authority such directions as in their opinion are necessary or expedient for enabling the Board to carry out the purpose of this Act, after giving an opportunity to the local authority concerned to state its objections, if any, to such directions and after considering the said objections; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the local authority to comply with such directions.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 156--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the Government are of opinion that the Board is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, they may by notification, supersede the Board for such period as may be specified in the notification; Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section, the Government shall by notice require the Board to show cause within such period as may be specified in the notice why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board. (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Board:- 1 [(a) all members of the Board including the chairman and Managing Director] shall, as from the date of suppression, vacate their offices as such; (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed by such authority or person as the Government may direct; (c) all funds and other property vested in the Board shall. during the period of suppression vest in the authority or person referred to in clause (b); and (d) all liabilities, legally subsisting and enforceable against the Board shall be enforceable against the authority or person referred to in clause (b) to the extent the funds and properties vested in it for him. (3) On the expiration of the period of super session specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), the Government may,- (a) extend the period of super session for such further period as they may consider necessary; or (b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in the section 4. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 157--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If the Government of opinion that the Board has failed to carry out its functions under this Act for any other reason it is not necessary to continue the Board, they may, by notification, dissolve the Board from such date as maybe specified in the notification. (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) dissolving the Board:- 1 [(a) all members of the Board including the Chairman and Managing Director] shall, as from the date of dissolution, vacate their offices as such; (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised and performed by or on behalf of the Board, Chairman and the Managing Director shall, as from the date of dissolution, be exercised and performed by the Government or such authority or person as they may appoint in this behalf; (c) all funds and other property vested in the Board shall vest in the Government; and (d) all liabilities, legally subsisting and enforceable against the Board shall be enforceable against the Government to the extent of the funds and properties vested in them. (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the liability of the Government in respect of debentures guaranteed under section 92 Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 158--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Board shall be deemed to be a local authority of the purposes of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (Central Act 1 of 1894), and the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (Central Act 9 of 1914).
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 159--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect of this Act, the Government may, as occasion may require, by order, do anything which appears to them necessary or proper for the purpose of removing the difficulty. (2) Every order issued under sub-section (1) shall as soon as possible after it is issued, be placed on the table of both Houses of the Legislature, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, both Houses agree that the order should not be issued, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 160--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Government may make rules 1 [whether prospectively or retrospectively] for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for- (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed; (b) the accounts to be maintained by the Board; (c) the allowances of non-official members of the Board or of any Committee; (d) the returns, statements, reports and accounts to be submitted to the Government by the Board; (e) the mutual relationship of the Board and other local authorities in any matter in which they are jointly interested; (f) the fees payable for copies of, or extracts from, the assessment books of the local authorities concerned furnished to the 2 [Managing Director]. (g) the guidance of the Board and public officers in carrying out the purposes of this Act. (3) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Fort St. George Gazette and, unless they are expressed to come into force on a particular day, shall come into force on the day on which they are so published. 3 [(4) Every rule made under this Act shall, as soon as possible after it is made, be placed on the table of Legislative Assembly, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so placed or the next session, the assembly make any modification in any such rule of the Assembly decides that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without rejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] Inserted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 161--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there under, for the purpose of giving effect to the provision of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for- (a) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be prescribed by regulations; (b) the association of persons with the Board under the Section 24; (c) the appointment of persons to be members of committees under section 25; (d) the delegation of powers or duties of the Board to committees or to the 1 [Managing Director;] (e) the duties and conduct of officers and servants of the Board and of other persons employed by the Board under this Act for carrying out of the purposes of this Act; (f) the welfare and recreation of the staff of the Board and the contributions to be made thereof; (g) the fees payable for the copies of documents, estimates under this Act; (h) the management, use and regulation of dwellings constructed under any housing or improvement scheme; (i) the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Board. (3) No regulation or its cancellation or modification shall have effect until the same shall have been approved confirmed by the Government. Substituted by Act 2 of 1988.
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act, 1961_Section 162--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Madras City Improvement Trust Act, 1950 (Madras Act 37 of 1950) hereinafter referred to as the said Act is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal:- (a) anything done or any action taken including any appointment or delegation made, notification, order, Instruction or direction issued, rule, regulation or scheme framed, certificate, permit or licence granted or registration effected, under the said Act, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act and shall continue in force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act; and (b) the betterment fee in respect of any land which the City Improvement Trust was, immediately before the commencement of this Act, entitled to levy, assess and recover under the said Act, may be levied, assessed and recovered by the Board under the said Act if this Act had not been passed. 1 Power to Remove Difficulties - (i) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, the Government may make such order not inconsistent with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, as may appear to them to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty; Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two year from the date of commencement of this act. (ii) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as after it is made, be placed on the table of the Legislative Assembly.] Inserted by Act 2 of 1988. 
