Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object The non-hereditary trustees appointed under the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959) for a term of one year, have taken sincere steps to develop various activities including renovation works in temples and also to provide amenities to the devotees. It is widely felt that the term of one year is quite insufficient to function effectively and to initiate action in respect of all the developmental activities of the religious institutions and to carry out a programme for the proper administration of the religious institution, their term of office may be increased. The Government have examined the matter carefully and decided to increase the term of office of the non-hereditary trustees from one year to two years by suitably amending sub-section (3) of section 47 of the said Act. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. KR. PERIAKARUPPAN, Minister for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments. M. SELVARAJ, Secretary.
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1)This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the State Government may, by notification, appoint. Notification No. II(2)/TDREI/123(b)/2010:- Published in the [G.O.Ms. No. 69, Tamil Development, Religious Endowments and Information (RE4-2), 1st March 2010, Maasi 17, Thiruvalluvar Aandu-2041.]
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 47 of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959), in sub-section (3),- (1) for the expression "one year", the expression "two years" shall be substituted; (2) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that every trustee who has not completed a term of office of one year on the date of commencement of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2010 shall continue to be the trustee for the period of two years from the date of his appointment.". (By order of the Governor) S. DHEENADHAYALAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
