Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu 1 2 An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959. BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Statement of Object As par clause (18) of section 6 of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959), religious institution means a math, temple or specific endowment The places of samadhi and brindhavan art not covered under the provisions of the said Act, The places of samadhi and brindhavan established in Tamil Nadu in memory of famous guru, sadhu or saint are being worshipped as a place of public religious worship, These institutions have acquired the status of religious institution and owning vast properties besides attracting large number of worshippers, Barring a few, most of the samadhi and brindhavan are not covered under any law, Though, a few such samadhi and brindhavan are registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1975), they are not effectively controlled under the said Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1975. Therefore for' effective supervision to bring those institutions under the control of Hindu Religious and Charitbale Endowments Department, the Government have decided to include the places of samadhi and brindhavan and other institutions established or maintained for a religious purpose, where there is public religious worship, under the definition of the term "religious institution" in clause (18) of section 6 of the said Act and to bring out suitable amendment to clause (15) of section 6 of the said Act to define "person having interest" in such religious institution. 2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision. M.S.M. ANANDAN, Minister for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department A.M.P. JAMALUDEEN, Secretary. L. A. Bill No. 32 of 2012, published in T. N. Government Gazette. Extra., dated , Issue No. pp. 195-196. The following Act of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly received the assent of the Governor on the 31st May 2012 and is hereby published for general information: -
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2012. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (Amendment) Act, 2012_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 6 of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 (Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959),- (1) in clause (15), after sub-clause (c), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely:- "(d) in the case of a samadhi, brindhavan or any other institution established or maintained for a religious purpose, a person who is entitled to attend at or is in the habit of attending the performance of worship or service in such religious institution, or who is entitled to partake or is in the habit of partaking in the benefit of the distribution of gifts thereat;"; (2) for clause (18), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(18) "religious institution" means a math, temple or specific endowment and includes,- (i) a samadhi or brindhavan; or (ii) any other institution established or maintained for a religious purpose. Explanation.- For the purpose of this clause- (1) "samadhi" means a place where the mortal remains of a guru, sadhu or saint is interned and used as a place of public religious worship; (2) "brindhavan" means a place established or maintained in memory of a guru, sadhu or saint and used as a place of public religious worship, but does not include Samadhi;". (By order of the Governor) G. JAYACHANDRAN, Secretary to Government, Law Department 
