Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Act, 1958. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification, appoint.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the long title to the Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the expression "National and festival holidays", the expression "National, festival and special holidays" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In the preamble to the principal Act, for the expression "National and festival holidays", the expression "National, festival and special holidays" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the expression "(National and Festival Holidays)", the expression "(National, Festival and Special Holidays)" shall be substituted.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Amendment Act, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In section 3 of the principal Act,- (1) in the marginal heading, for the expression "National and festival holidays", the expression "National, festival and special holidays" shall be substituted. (2) section 3, shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section; (3) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Government may, having due regard to any emergency or special circumstances prevailing in the State or any part thereof, by notification, declare any other day as a special holiday, to the employees of the industrial establishments, as it may deem fit.". (By order of the Governor) (S.S. Poovalingam) Secretary to Government, Law Department. 
