Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the constitution of the Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority and matters connected therewith. WHEREAS clause (1) of Article 243 Q of the Constitution provides for the constitution of an Industrial Township in an urban or transitional area in the manner provide:; therein; AND WHEREAS In an Industrial Township so constituted there will be no municipality for providing the municipal services; AND WHEREAS it is necessary to provide such municipal service in the area composed in an Industrial Township ; AND WHEREAS it is necessary to make special provision to promote and assent the rapid and orderly establishment, growth and development of industries in industrial areas and industrial estates situated in an industrial township. AND WHEREAS for the purpose of administering the affairs or an Industrial Township and to promote the industrial growth, it is necessary to constitute an Industrial Area development Authority; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for all these and other matters connected therewith; BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tamil Nadu in the Forty-eighth. Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Tamil Nadu. (3) It shall come into force on the such date as the Government may, by notification, appoint. (4) The provisions of the Act shall apply to any Industrial Township declared by the Governor under Article 243 Q (2) of the Constitution (on and from the date to be notified by the Government) (and different dates may be appointed for different Industrial Townships).
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires- (a) "Authority" means the Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority constituted under section 3; (b) "Government" means the State Government; (c) "Industrial Township Area" means such urban area or part thereof declared by notification as "industrial township area" by the Government of Tamil Nadu under Article 243 Q of the Constitution ; (d) "local authority" means,- (i) any Municipal Corporation established under any law (or the time development force) or (ii) a Municipal Council constituted under the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act V of 1920). or (iii) a District Panchayat or a Panchayat Union Council or a Village Panchayat Constituted under the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1994). (e) "promoting agency" means the Tamil Nadu Corporation for Industrial Infrastructure Development Limited (TACID) or Tamil Nadu Small Industries Development Corporation (SIDCO) or State Industries Promotion Corporation of Tamil Nadu (STPCOT) or such other institution as may be notified by the Government in this behalf.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Government may for the purposes of administering the affairs of an Industrial Township Area and for carrying out the provisions of this Act, by notification, constitute an Authority for each Industrial Township Area. (2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue or sued.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely :- (a) one member representing the promoting agency to be nominated by the Government ; (b) one member each representing the Factories, Public Health and Town and Country Planning Departments at such love! and rank as may be determined and nominated by the Government in this behalf; (c) (i) one member nominated by the Government from among the owners of industrial undertaking situated in the Industrial Township Area; (ii) one member nominated by the Government having special knowledge of matters relating to technical for other aspects of industrial undertaking situated in the Industrial Township Area; (iii) one member nominated by the Government to represent the interests of persons employed in the industrial undertakings situated in the industrial Township Area; (iv) A Chief Executive Officer appointed by the Authority ; and (v) The officer of the promoting agency nominated by the Government shall be the Chairman of the Authority.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Chief Executive Officer shall be a whole time Officer of the Authority. (2) The Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such power and perform such duties as may be specified in the regulations or delegated to him by the Authority.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The Chairman and other members of the Authority appointed by the Government by virtue of their office shall be the ex-officio Chairman and members. The non-official members shall hold office for such time aS may be prescribed.
Tamil Nadu Industrial Township Area Development Authority Act, 1997_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transactions of its business including quorum as may be provided by regulations made under this Act. (2) The Authority may appoint such number of officers and employees as may be necessary for the performance of its functions and may determine then grades and designations subject to such control and restrictions as may be determined by general or special orders of the Government. 
