Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section Preamble--> State(s): Tamil Nadu An Act to provide for the levy of a voluntary cess for the maintenance of certain irrigation and drainage works serving ryotwari tracts in the 1 [State of Tamil Nadu]. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the levy of a cess for the maintenance of certain irrigation and drainage works serving ryotwari tracts in the 2 [State of Tamil Nadu] where the registered holders of not less than two-thirds of the lands served by such works so desire. It is hereby enacted as follows:- Substituted for Province of Madras by Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970. Substituted for Province of Madras by Tamil Nadu Adaptation of Laws Order, 1970.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 1--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) This Act may be called The 1 [Tamil Nadu] Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 19422 . (2) It extends to the whole of the 3 [State] of 4 [Tamil Nadu]. (3) This section shall come into force at once, and the rest of this Act shall come into force on such 5 date as the 6 [State] Government may, by notification in the Fort St. George Gazette appoint. Substituted for Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Received the assent of the Governor on the 8th June, 1942; First published in the Fort St. George Gazette, on the 23rd June, 1942. This word was substituted for the word Province by the Adaptation Order of 1950. Substituted for Madras by Tamil Nadu A.O. 1969. Came into force on 16th May, 1944. This word was substituted for the word Province by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 2--> State(s): Tamil Nadu In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (1) drainage work includes- (a) channels, either natural or artificial, for the discharge of water or surplus water and all works connected with or auxiliary to such channels, and (b) escape channels from an irrigation work, dams, weirs, embankments sluices, groins and all works for the protection of lands from flood or from erosion, which are owned or controlled by the State Government, or which are maintained by the otherwise than by an assignment of land or land revenue, or which, having been constructed by the Government or being maintained by an assignment of land or land revenue made by them, have not been made over to any person, but does not include works for the removal of sewage; (2) estate shall have the same meaning as in the Tamil Nadu Estates Land Act, 1908; (3) irrigation work includes- (a) all canals, channels, tanks, wells and reservoirs used for the supply or storage of water and all works, embankments and structures (other than escape channels) connected therewith, which are owned or controlled by the State Government, or which are maintained by them otherwise than by an assignment of land or land revenue, or which, having been constructed by the Government or being maintained by an assignment of land or land revenue made by them, have not been made over to any person; (b) all such lakes and other natural collections of water or part thereof as are not situate in an estate or estates or on lands held by registered holders; (c) all lands used for the purposes of the irrigation works referred to in sub-clauses (a) and (b) and all buildings, machinery, fences, gates and other erections occupied by, or belonging to, the State Government on such lands; and (d) all such rivers and natural streams or parts thereof as are not situate in an estate or estates or on lands held by registered holders, and all rivers in so far as they are navigable; (4) registered holder means any person in whose name land not included in an estate is for the time being registered in the revenue accounts of Government.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 3--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Whenever the registered holders of not less than two- thirds of the land served by any irrigation or drainage work so desire, the State Government may levy an annual cess from all the registered holders of lands served by such work, at such rate per acre as the 1 [State] Government may from time to time determine, but not exceeding the maximum rate agreed to by the registered holders of not less than two-thirds of the lands served by such work: Provided that no cess shall be levied under this section unless the maximum rate aforesaid has been published in the village or village concerned. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 4--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The cess shall be determined and administered in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 5--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The cess shall, on demand, be payable by the registered holder or any of the joint registered holders, as the case may be, and if not paid, may be recovered from such holder or any of such holders, as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 6--> State(s): Tamil Nadu The 1 [State] Government may at any time cancel the levy of the cess or reduce the rate at which it is being levied, and shall do so, whenever the registered holders of not less than two-thirds of the lands served by such work so desire. In the latter case, the cancellation or reduction shall take effect on such date as the State Government may direct not being later than the commencement of the revenue year next succeeding. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 7--> State(s): Tamil Nadu If any question arises as to whether any land is or is not served by an irrigation or drainage work it shall be referred to the District Collector whose decision shall be final.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 8--> State(s): Tamil Nadu Nothing in this Act shall affect the rights and obligations of the registered holders oflands served by any work to which the Tamil Nadu Compulsory Labour Act, 1858, applied, provided that no customary aid shall be requisitioned under section 6 of the said Act during any period in respect of which access is levied under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 9--> State(s): Tamil Nadu No Civil Court shall have authority to take into consideration or decide any question as to the validity or rate of any cess levied under this Act.
Tamil Nadu Irrigation (Voluntary Cess) Act, 1942_Section 10--> State(s): Tamil Nadu (1) The 1 [State] Government may, make rules to carry out all or any of the purposes of this Act and not inconsistent therewith. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, they may make rules as to- (a) the manner in which, and the authority or authorities through whom, applications from registered holders under section 3 or section 6 shall be submitted to the 2 [State] Government; (b) the method of ascertaining the desire of the registered holders of any land where there are two or more registered holders of such land, for all or any of the purposes specified in this Actor in the rules made thereunder; (c) the determination and the administration of any cess levied under this Act. (3) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Fort. St. George Gazette, and upon such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this Act. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. This word was substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation Order of 1950. 
