1.  The respondent Ramji Singh was in the service of the appellant, the management of Digwadih Colliery, for over ten years. On 17 May 1960, he was dismissed from service. Thereupon he made an application to the industrial tribunal under S.33A of the Industrial Disputes Act. He alleged that the order of dismissal passed against him by the appellant contravened the provisions of S.33(2) of the Act and was otherwise improper and illegal. The tribunal in substance has upheld both these contentions. In the result, the tribunal has ordered the appellant to reinstate the respondent in its service within one month and to pay him half the wages during the period of his forced unemployment. It is against this award that the appellant has come to this Court by special leave.
2.  It appears that the respondent was served with a chargesheet that he had committed misconduct under standing order 19(13) of the appellant, and the respondent was told that an enquiry would be hold into the alleged mieconduct. An enquiry was accordingly held where evidence was led and a report was made by the enquiring officer that the charge under Cl. 19(13) had been proved against the respondent. Acting on that report the respondent had been dismissed.
3.  The case against the respondent was that he had given a loan to another employee of the appellant, Jay Narain by name, and the appellant held that lending money to a sub-ordinate employee constituted misconduct under Cl. 19(13) of the standing orders. The tribunal has taken the view that even if this loan is held to be proved, a single transaction of lending money to a subordinate employee cannot be said to constitute money-lending business, for he has observed that "one swallow does not make a summer." In coming to this conclusion the tribunal has unfortunately based itself solely on the charge which uses the word "money-lending business." In deciding the question as to whether the facts proved constituted the contravention of Cl. 19(13) it was clearly necessary to consider the provisions of Cl. 19(13) itself, and if the tribunal had considered the said provision, it would have immediately found that what is prohibited by the said clause is lending money to, or borrowing money from, subordinate employees. Now the words used in the relevant clause do not permit the introduction of consideration as to what would be money-lending business. A single transaction of lending money or borrowing money would fall within the terms of Cl. 19(13).  Therefore, the view taken by the tribunal that even if the facts held to be proved are assumed to be correctly found, that would not contravene Cl. 19(13), is wrong. The tribunal has then held that the appellant had contravened the provisions of S.33(2) of the Act in dismissing the respondent. In coming to this conclusion the tribunal has purported to follow a decision of this Court in the case of New India Motors (P.), Ltd., New Delhi v. K. T. Morris , and it has observed that the broader view of the requirements of S. 33(2) enunciated by this Court in the said decision supported the respondent's case. In our opinion, this conclusion is also not justified.
4.  Even if the broader construction of S. 33(2) is adopted, it is necessary to enquire what was the subject-matter of Reference No. 60 of 1959. The respondent's case set out in this application appears to be that, because there was Reference No. 60 of 1959 pending between the appellant and some of its employees, S. 33(2) applied, but, unless it is known as to what was the nature of the dispute pending in the said reference, it would plainly be impossible to decide whether the respondent is a workman concerned within the meaning of S. 33(2). In his application the respondent has made no averment about the nature of the said dispute; and so the tribunal was clearly in error in holding that the broad construction of S. 33(2) automatically led to, the conclusion that the respondent was the workman concerned and could, therefore, claim the protection of S. 33(2).
5. On the other hand, the appellant denied before the tribunal that the respondent was concerned in the said dispute and in its statement of case the appellant has clarified the position by stating that the dispute in Reference No. 60 of 1959 was on behalf of the chaprasis and watchmen of Jamadoba and Digwadih Collieries for withdrawal of their overtime wages, and the respondent is a clerk, grade III, and it is urged he could not be said to be a workman concerned with this dispute. As we have just indicated, even without this clarification, it was necessary that the respondent should have satisfied the tribunal by proving the nature of the dispute ending in Reference No. 60 of 1959, before asking the tribunal to make a finding in his favour under S. 33(2) and in the absence of any such evidence, the tribunal was not justified in holding that S. 33(2) applied and had been contravened.
6.  That being our view, we do not think it neessary to consider whether the alleged contravention to proved.That takes us to the merits of the case. The tribunal has held that the enquiry was not fair inasmuch as the respondent was not allowed to cross-examine the witness who deposed in the said enquiry. This finding is plainly inconsistent with the statement by the enquiring officer on the record of the proceedings. That statement shows that the respondent declined to cross-examine the said witnesses. It is true that Sri Choudhri contends that the respondent does not accept the accuracy of the said record but from the mere fact that the respondent challenged the accuracy of the said record, it does not follow that the record is proved to be inaccurate. Under these circumstances, therefore, we do not think that the tribunal was justified in holding that the enquiry was unfair.
7. We have gone through the proceedings of the enquiry which have been filed before the tribunal and we have looked at the report made by the enquiring officer. The dispute ultimately centred on a very narrow point. Jay Narain; to whom the respondent is alleged to have advanced a loan, has made inconsistent statements. In one statement he supported the charge, while in another he denied. The enquiring officer took the view that Jay Narain had not the courage to stick to his statement that he had borrowed money from the respondent because he was under pressure. Whether that is correct or not is not a matter which the tribunal was entitled to consider. If a domestic enquiry is held and is conducted properly, the conclusion reached in the enquiry on questions of fact cannot be interfered with unless they can be properly characterized as perverse. In the circumstances of this case, we see no justification for holding that the said conclusion is perverse.
8.  Therefore, the finding of the tribunal in the domestic enquiry that the appellant herein had contravened Cl. 19(13) must be taken to be correct, and if that is so, the order of dismissal is plainly consistent with the standing order. That being the position, we see no reason for upholding the order passed by the tribunal, directing the appellant to reinstate the respondent.
The result is the appeal is allowed, the order passed by the tribunal is set aside and the respondent's application under S.33A of the Act is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
