1.  This is an appeal by special leave on behalf of the Sirmur chemical and General Industries Ltd. though Harcharan Dass, managing director and agent. A preliminary objection has been taken on behalf of the respondent, the Union of India , that the appellant company having been ordered to be wound up by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction and the official liquidator being in charge of the same, the appeal by the managing director and agent was not properly filed and is not maintainable, the managing director or agent not being competent to file or continue the appeal after the liquidator in a winding up by the court had taken charge of the company.
2.  After hearing parties on this preliminary objection we have come to the conclusion that the preliminary objections should succeed. We would, therefore, state the facts so far as they relate to the preliminary objection, and give reasons for the conclusion at which we have arrived. On June 30, 1945, the erstwhile Darbar of Sirmur State in Himachal Pradesh granted a monopoly in favour of Harcharan Dass in respect of the cultivation and collection of medicinal herbs within Sirmur State to enable him to manufacture drugs therefrom and dispose of the same either within the State or by export outside the State. The monopoly right was to hold good for a period of twenty years subject to the conditions that Harcharan Dass was required to float a private limited company with a capital of Rs. 10 lakhs after obtaining the necessary permission from the Examiner of Capital Issue of the then Government of India. On September 18, 1945, a formal agreement was entered into by the Sirmur Darbar on one side ad Harcharan Dass on the other. Paragraph 8 of the agreement reserved to the Darbar the right to revoke the monopoly rights on breach f certain terms and conditions and paragraph 17 provided for a reference to arbitration in case of a dispute. On November 23, 1945, a company styled the Sirmur Chemical and General Industries Ltd. came into existence and was registered as such by the Registrar the under Indian companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913) (hereinafter referred to as the 1913 Act) at Nahan, Harcharan Dass transferred all his rights and interests to the said company .
3. The company started its work in April , 1946. On April 15, 19468, the Sirmur State merged in the Indian Union and on April 2, 1948, the Secretary, Sirmur Government, wrote to the managing agent of the company that the license granted on June 30, 1945, had been revoked under paragraph 8 of the agreement on account of various defaults alleged to have been committed by the company. Some correspondence between the company and the representatives of government then ensued which proved abortive. The company then sought to refer its dispute with the Government to arbitration under paragraph 17 of the agreement and notice to that effect was served on the Deputy Chief Commissioner, Himachal Pradesh. The Deputy chief commissioner refused to take part of in the arbitration. The company then appointed one Lala Hari Chand Bhatia or Amritsar as the sole arbitrator. This gentlemen proceeded ex parte and on april 26, 1949, made an award which in effect gave the company, Rs. 92, 000 plus Rs 800 as damages. On October 25, 1949, the arbitrator presented a petition u/s. 14 of the Indian Arbitration Act, 1940 (X of 1940), to the Court of the District Judge, Sirmur .
4.  The original award was filed along with the petition . Upon notice issued to the Dominion of India and the Chief Commissioner, Himachal Pradesh , made an application u/s. 162 of the 1913 Act, praying that the company be would up and that a liquidator be appointed to take charge off the company. This application was made in the Court of the Judicial Commissioner, Himachal Pradesh, and was presented on July 12, 1951. This application was finally head by the Judicial Commissioner after the taking of evidence and by his judgment and order dated December 31, 1957, the learned Judicial Commissioner directed that the company be wound up and the official liquidator be put in charge. On the same day the learned Judicial Commissioner also dismissed the appeal which had been filed from the decision of the District Judge, Sirmur, dated July 19, 1951, to which we have made a reference earlierThe company through Harcharan Dass, managing director and agent, then made an application to t he Judicial Commissioner for leave to appeal to this court. This was refused by the learned Judicial Commissioner who held that after the wading up order had been made and the official liquidator was put in charge of the winding up proceedings, leave to appeal could have been sought only by the directors or by the majority of the contributories of the company and Harcharan Dass was not competent to ask for leave to appeal to this court. The company through Harcharan Dass then moved this court and obtained special leave on December 8, 1958
5.  The legal position seem to us to be quite clear. Under let provisions of section 334, cl. l(e), of Companies Act, 1956 We, therefore, hold that the preliminary objection must succeed and the appeal must be held to be incompetent. l The appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
