1.  This is an appeal on a certificate of the High Court of Calcutta against the judgment and the order of that Court confirming the order passed by G. K. Mitter, J., by which he allowed the present respondent's petition u/art. 226 of the Constitution and set aside the order of the Customs Authorities. The appellant is the Additional Collector of Customs and the respondent was the petitioner in the petition u/art. 226.
2.  The appeal arises out of an order made by the Additional Collector of Customs, Calcutta, dated June 15, 1959, by which he held the respondent Sitaram Agarwala to be guilty of an offence u/s. 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act, hereinafter termed 'the Act', and imposed a personal penalty on him of Rs. 60, 000/-. The facts of the case are these. On August 25, 1958, the respondent Sitaram Agarwala carrying a sum of Rs. 49, 320/- and accompanied by Bholanath Gupta went by an autobus from Harrison Road to Central Avenue. From there they boarded another autobus and alighted at Jatindra Mohan Park. They were seen waiting on Jatindra Mohan Avenue near Kali Temple. A little later a taxi came that way in which there was a Chinese named Wong Chit Khaw. On a signal by Sitaram Agarwala the taxi stopped. Wong Chit Khaw came out and Sitaram Agarwala and his companion shook hand with him and all three of them got into the taxi but a constable stopped them and with the assistance of the public Sitaram Agarwala and Bholanath Gupta were arrested and taken to the police station for interrogation. Khaw tried to escape but he was chased by the members of the public and was apprehended by a police officer Sergeant Mukherjee. While the running Khaw was seen throwing away some packets on the road which were picked up and brought to the police station where they were found to contain contraband gold. This gold was worth Rs. 40, 441.22 np. On search Sitaram Agarwala was found to have in his possession a sum of Rs. 49, 320/- which were seized from him. Khaw when arrested was found wearing a specially made jacket with many pockets in which small packets could be concealed. Respondent Sitaram Agarwala made a statement as to where he got the money from but on his statement being checked it was found to be false. Wong Chit Khaw also made a statement explaining how he came into possession of the gold. It may be pointed out that the respondent Sitaram Agarwala is the son of a bullion merchant in whose shop he works.
3.  On October 9, 1958, a notice was issued against Sitaram Agarwala to show cause why the currency notes found on him be not confiscated and personal penalty imposed u/s. 167(8) of the Act read with Sections 23A and 23B of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act. He showed cause and on June 26, 1959, the Additional Collector imposed a personal penalty of Rs. 60, 000/- on Sitaram Agarwala to be deposited within three days and also held that on offence in respect of the currency notes seized from him had been established but that amount was retained until payment of the penalty. The gold found was also ordered to be confiscated in proceedings against Wong Chit Khaw but no offence was held proved against Bholanath Gupta. Sitaram Agarwala then filed a petition u/art. 226 of the Constitution impeaching the legality of the order passed by the Additional Collector. G. K. Mitter, J., allowed the petition holding that Sitaram Agarwala is not a person who can be brought within the words
"concerned in mentioned in the 3rd column of S. 167(8) of the Act. The Additional Collector took an appeal to the Appeal Court and the judgment of G. K. Mitter, J., was confirmed. The Appeal Court, like Mitter, J., declined to draw the inference from the facts proved that Sitaram Agarwala was in any way concerned in the importation of the gold which was subsequently confiscated. Defining the words "concerned in" the Appeal Court said that a person would be guilty if he is interested in or consciously takes any step to promote the illegal bringing into the country of foreign gold even if no physical connection is established between him and the thing brought. It is against that order that the Additional Collector has come in appeal to this Court.
The relevant part of S. 167(8) of the Act is as follows :"
4. If any attempt be made so to import or export any such goods, or if any such goods be found in any package produced to any office of Customs as containing no such goods;
5. Such goods shall be liable to confiscation; and any such person concerned in any such offence shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding three time the value of the goods, or not exceeding one thousand rupees."
6. The fact found are that Sitaram Agarwala was carrying a large sum of money, that he gave a signal to the taxi in which smuggled gold was being brought, shook hands with the person in whose prossession that gold was and who was then arrested. The inference may be legitimately drawn that Sitaram Agarwala had arranged to buy the sumggled gold and further that arrangement would have been fruitful and he would have brought it if he had not been arrested. But the question still remains whether on the facts proved he could be held to be "concerned in" the importation of gold into this country.
7. S. 167(8) of the Act is a penal section the object of which is not only to prevent the evasion of the payment of duties but also to prevent smuggling of goods resulting in the depletion of foreign exchange and jeopardising the economic stability of the country. For that purpose it has to be given an interpretation to cover all those who aid and abet in these nefarious activities whether they are principals or accessories who assist the smugglers or supplement their efforts. The use of the words "concerned in" in S. 167(8) shows that a person may be concerned in the importation of smuggled gold, without being a smuggler himself countravening any of the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Act. Therefore the High Court was right when it observed that if any one is interested or consciously takes any step whatever to promote the object illegally bringing bullion into the country, then even if no physical connection is established between him and the thing brought he will be guilty.
8.  The words of sub-s. (8) of S. 167 are fairly wide but on the facts proved, can a justifiable inference be drawn that Sitaram Agarwala was in any way concerned in the act or acts leading to the importation of the smuggled gold ? The Courts below have rightly drawn the inference that there is no evidence to support Sitaram Agarwala being concerned in the importation of gold.
9.  On behalf of the respondent Sitaram Agarwala it was argued that S. 167(8) is a general provision and the special provision dealing with the case of the type which Sitaram Agarwala is accused of falls under Item 81 of S. 167. It is not necessary for us to go into that question because no charge under that provision was brought in this case and in our opinion, the High Court was right in its judgment in regard to the facts of the case and their being insufficient to bring the respondent Sitaram Agarwala within the words "concerned in".
10.  We therefore dismiss this appeal. In the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
