Life Insurance Corporation of India v K.R. Krishnamurthi
Supreme Court of India

11 December 1962
C.A. No. 769 of 1962
The Judgment was delivered by: SARKAR J.
1.  The respondent is an employee of the appellant, the Life Insurance Corporation of India, being an Assistant in its Bangalore Divisional Office
2.  The appellant was going to hold certain examinations from March 18, 1961, for promotion of some of its employees to higher grades in its organization. The respondent claimed to be entitled to appear in some of these examinations but was not allowed to do so by the appellant on the ground that he was not eligible under the rules framed for the purpose of deciding who shall appear at the examinations. The respondent thereupon moved the High Court of Mysore on March 14, 1961, u/art. 226 of the Constitution for a writ to stop the examinations for promotion to two of the higher posts, namely, the higher grade assistants and superintendents' posts or, in the alternative, for a writ of mandamus directing the appellant to hold a special examination for him for promotion to the higher grade assistants and superintendents' cadres and not to publish the results of the examinations to be held from March 18, 1961, except along with the result of that special examination. The petition was decided by a judgment dated December 7, 1961, and was allowed. By that time however the examinations had all been concluded and presumably their results declared. The High Court, therefore, only directed the appellant to permit the respondent to sit for the examinations for promotion to the cadres of superintendents and higher grade assistants as and when they were held. Hence the present appeal
3.  In this appeal no question as to the validity of any rules or statutes has been raised. Nor was any such question raised in the High Court. The only question argued in this appeal is really one of interpretation of certain rules to which, and to certain statutory provisions, we now proceed to referThe Government of Mysore had been carrying on the business of life insurance and this was managed by its insurance department. On June 18, 1956, the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (XXXI of 1956), came to be passed. S. 7 of this Act provides that on the appointed day, which, it may be stated, is September 1, 1956, all the assets and liabilities of the controlled business, which means the life insurance business, of all insurers would stand transferred to and vested in the appellant Corporation which was created by this Act. Now, the Government of Mysore which as already stated had been carrying on life insurance business was admittedly an "insurer" within the meaning of the Act. The assets and the liabilities of the life insurance business of the mysore Government, therefore, became vested in the appellant on September 1, 1956
4.  Sub-s. (1) of s. 11 of this Act provides that every whole time employee of an insurer whose life insurance business has been transferred to the Life Insurance Corporation
"and who was employed by the insurer wholly or mainly in connection with his controlled business immediately before the appointed day shall, on or from the appointed day become an employee of the Corporation, and shall hold his office therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and gratuity and other matters as he would have held the same on the appointed day if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Corporation is terminated or until his remuneration, terms and conditions are duly altered by the Corporation."
"the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-s. (1) or in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force......alter......the terms and conditions of service"
"the chairman may from time to time issue such instructions or directions as may be necessary to give effect to and carry out, the provisions of these regulations and in order to secure effective control over the staff employed in the Corporation."
5. Under the powers contained in regulation 4, the chairman issued certain administrative orders concerning promotion, two paragraphs of which may now be referred to
"6. Selections for promotions to the higher grade assistants' cadre shall be made from employees who pass the prescribed qualifying test.... Only employees who have put in at least 7 years' service (5 years in the case of graduates) would qualify to appear at the test
Promotions to the superintendents' cadre will be made from employees in the whole zonal area who have passed the prescribed qualifying test..... Employees who have put in at least 10 years service shall be eligible for appearing at the qualifying test."
6.  At the end of these administrative orders appears the following note by way of explanation of them
7. Note 1. The term 'service' where it occurs shall, unless otherwise explicitly stated, include service in the corporation, service with the previous insurer........and also service with any other insurer carrying on life insurance business provided there is no break of more than six months between successive appointments.
"The respondent wanted promotion to the cadres of superintendents and higher grade assistants. The question in dispute is whether the respondent had put in the requisite number of years of service under paragraphs 6 and 8 of the administrative orders
It appears that the respondent first joined the Mysore Government of February 22, 1950. He was then employed in the food section as a purchase depot clerk at Malur. From November 16, 1953, he was appointed as a third division clerk in the taluka office at Malur. It was only on January 2, 1956, that the respondent joined the insurance department of the Mysore Government. From September 1, 1956, he has been in the employment of the appellant Corporation u/s. 11(1) of the Act. It is not in dispute that there was no break in his service of more than six months since he first joined the Mysore Government service on February 22, 1950
Now, the dispute in this case has arisen over the interpretation of the words "service with the previous insurer" occurring in Note 1 in the administrative orders which we have earlier set out. If these words refer to any service under the previous insurer, that is, whether in his life insurance business or not, then the entire service of the respondent from February 22, 1950, up to date has to be taken into consideration for the purposes of paragraphs 6 and 8 of the administrative orders. in that case, it must be held that the respondent had put in the requisite number of years of service prescribed in these paragraphs and that is precisely his contention
The appellant contends that the proper interpretation of the words "service with the previous insurer" is service in the insurance business of the insurer in a case where, as in the present, the insurer had other activities also. In other words, the appellant contends that the employment of the respondent by the Mysore Government in the taluka office or in the food section was not "service with the previous insurer" within the meaning of the noteIt seems to us that the appellant's reading of the note is the correct one. The Act and the Regulations, and the orders are concerned with the previous insurer and its employees only so far as the life insurance business of that insurer is concerned. With the other activities of the insurer or his other employees the Act has nothing to do. It may be pointed out that under s. 11 of the Act only those employees of the insurer who are employed"
", that automatically pass into the service of the Corporation. No doubt, s. 11 deals with persons employed immediately before the appointed day and is concerned with the transfer of the services of these people to the Corporation, but it certainly indicates what kind of employees of the previous insurer is contemplated by the Act. That kind consists of persons who had been wholly and mainly employed in the life insurance business of the insurer. With other employees of the insurer the Act is not concerned. When, therefore, orders are issued under powers conferred by the Act concerning the services of employees of previous insurers and the words "service with the previous insurer" are used, it is plain that they can only refer to service in the insurance business of the previous insurer
Learned counsel for the respondent drew our attention to Regulation 13 of the Regulations made u/s. 49(2)(b) and (bb) of the Act, earlier mentioned. That regulation provides that"
8.  In our view, it raises the same question which has arisen in the present case and is of no assistance in answering that questionThe High Court thought that as under sub-s. (1) of s. 11 an employee whose services were transferred was entitled to the same rights and privileges in all matters relating to his service as prevailed before his services were transferred and the respondent was entitled under the Mysore Government Service Regulations to contend that his service had commenced on February 22, 1950, that right cannot be taken away by Administrative Orders or Regulations. The learned judge of the High Court, however, did not consider sub-s. (2) of s. 11 which gives the Central Government the power to alter the conditions of service notwithstanding anything contained in sub-s. (1). It is under that power that paragraphs 6 and 8 of the administrative orders and the notes appended to them had been made. However, as we have said earlier, no question as to the validity of any of these orders and regulations was raised on behalf of the respondent at the hearing before us. In fact the respondent has proceeded on the basis of these orders and regulations and claimed to be entitled to certain rights under them. We also, therefore, decide the appeal on that basis
9.  The result is that this appeal must be allowed and the High Court's order and decree must be set aside and we direct accordingly. We do not think this is a fit case in which to make any order for costs
Appeal allowed.
