Deputy Director of Consolidation, Azamgarh v Deen Bandhu Rai
Supreme Court of India

23 August 1963
Civil Appeal No., 483 of
1963
The Judgment was delivered by : N. Rajagopala Ayyangar, J.
1.  Section 16-A of the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953 (U.P. Act No. V of 1954), which for brevity we shall refer to as the Act as it stood at the relevant date, enacted :
2. "16-A. (1) After the publication of the  statement u/s. 16 and until the issue  of a notification under section 52, a tenure-  holder shall' not, except with the permission  in writing of the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) previously obtained, transfer by  way of sale, gift or exchange any plot or  share in any holding included in the scheme of  consolidation notwithstanding  anything  contained in the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and  Land Reforms Act, 1950. (2)The Settlement Officer shall grant the  permission referred to in sub-s. (1)  unless for reasons to be recorded in writing  he is satisfied that the proposed transfer is  likely to defeat the scheme of consolidation."
2.  The four respondents before us made two  applications to the Settlement Officer  Consolidation, for permission under sub-s. (1)  of the above provision for transfer by way of  exchange of certain plots in 11 villages which  were includded in schemes of consolidation in  those several villages in which such  proceedings were taking place. The officer,  however, refused the permission sought under  sub-s.(2) and his decision was affirmed on an  application by way of revision filed by the  respondents, by the Deputy Director-of  Consolidation. Challenging the lagality of  the said orders of the Consolidation  authorities the respondents filed a petition  before the High Court of Allahabad for  quashing the same by the issue of a Writ of  Certiorari under Art 226 of the Constitution.  The learned Single Judge  who heard the petition dismissed it. A  special appeal was thereupon preferred and the  Bench allowed the appeal holding that the  Settlement Officer in passing his order  rejecting the applications for exchange had  proceeded on grounds not germane for the  purpose on the terms of the statute and on  that finding set it side and issued a writ of  mandamus directing the Settlement Officer to  pass fresh orders in accordance with the law  as was explained in their judgment. Aggrieved  by this the Settlement authorities-the Deputy  Director of Consolidation and the Settlement  Officer, Consolidation, Sought a certificate  from the High Court under Art. 133(1)(c) of  the Constitution but this was refused. They  then applied for; and obtained special leave  of this Court under Art. 136 and that is how  the appeal is before us.
3.  After hearing learned Counsel for the parties  we have reached the conclusion that while the  learned Judges of the High Court were right in  setting aside the order of the Consolidation  authorities refusing the application under s.  16-A of the Act, the directions which the High  Court gave to the Settlement Officer in the  matter of his reconsidering the applications  were in their turn not proper and consequently  while the appeal has to be allowed, the  applications have to be remitted to the  Settlement Officer for being disposed of  properly in accordance with law.
4.  We shall now proceed to set out our reasons  for the above conclusion.
5.  The facts of the case do not appear very  clearly from the proceedings which are on the  record. As far, however, as could be gathered  they are briefly as follows: There are four  respondents. Respondents 1 and 2 are  brothers, being the-sons of the 3rd  respondent, and the 4th respondent is their  mother. A division had been effected of the  entire properties of the family by a decree of  Court passed in 1940. Under this decree and  the division effected thereby, while  respondents 1 and 2 i.e., the sons have got  parcels' of land in all the 11 villages, the  third respondent-the father -has land in 8  villages and the 4th respondent--the mother-in  5 villages. In all these 11 villages  proceedings for consolidation were in  progress. While so, two applications Were  made to the Settlement Officer for permission  to exchange the lands in such a way as to make  the sons (respondents 1 and 2) the sole  tenureholders in 3 villages. and the father  (the third respondent) the sole tenureholder  in 6 villages and petitioner 4 to be the sole  tenureholder in respect of the property in the  other two villages. We shall be referring a  little later to the stage which the con-  solidation proceedings had reached by the time  the application was filed, but passing over  this, it might be stated that the petitions  for exchange were rejected by the Settlement  Officer by an order dated February 28, 1951.  All stated earlier, a revision to the Deputy  Director was also dismissed by an order dated  February 28, 1959 but nothing turns on this.  It is the legality and propriety of the  reasons given for the rejection of the  applications by the Settlement Officer that  forms the subject of debate between the  parties.
6.  To appreciate the points urged before us by  learned Counsel for the appellant it would be  necessary to read certain of the relevant  provisions of the Act which bear upon the  procedure for consolidation as well as the  grounds upon which an application seeking  permission to transfer could be dismissed. We  might point out even at this stage that the  Act has undergone radical alterations by  amendments effected in 1958 and 1963, and what  we are setting out are the 'provisions as they  stood as the time relevant to this appeal.
7.  The preamble as well as the short title of the  Act specify the object of the enactment as  being "the consolidation of agricultural  holdings for the development of agriculture".  The expression "Consolidation" is defined in  s. 3 (2) thus:
"3.(2). 'Consolidation' means the re-  arrangement of holdings in any area between  the several tenure-holders entitled thereto in  such a way as to make the holdings held by  them as such more compace"
(1) omitting the  portions not material for our purpose. Sec-  tion 4 with which Ch. II opens enacts;
"4.(1) With a view to consolidation, the State  Government may declare that it has decided to  make a scheme of consolidation for any  district or other local ,area.
(2)Every such declarations shall be  published in the official Gazette and in each  village of the said district  or local area:' S. 5 specifies the statutory effect of a declaration under s. 4. This is stated to be that the district or the local area "shall be deemed to be under consolidation ope- rations from the specified date and the duty of preparing and maintaining khasra and the Annual Register shall stand transferred to the Settlement Officer". The other provisions of this chapter (Ch. 11) relate to the examination of the revenue records and the correction of entries therein and provide for objections being taken to the provisionally published statements of plots, tenureholders and other details regarding these. Chapter III which is more relevant for the question in issue in the present appeal is headed 'Preparation of Consolidation Scheme' and that is the Chapter in which s. 16-A occurs. S. 13 contains, what might be termed, a definition of a 'Consolidation Scheme' and it runs:
"13. The Consolidation Scheme shall consist  of-
(a) the statement of principles referred to  in section 14
(b) The statement of proposals referred to  in s. 19 and
(c) such other statements as may be  prescribed."
9. S. 14 which is referred to in s. 13(a)  enacts:
"14.(1)The Assistant Consolidation Officer  shall prepare in respect of each village under  consolidation operations, a statement  (hereinafter called the Statement of  Principles) setting forth in writing the  principles to be followed in framing the  consolidation scheme. The statement shall  also show in broad outlines the proposed  resurvey and layout of the village including-
(a) the existing and the proposed means of  communications:
(b) the area proposed to be planted with  trees or to be set apart for pasture,  fisheries, manure pits, khaliyans, cremation  grounds and grave-yards;
(c) the area to be set apart for abadi;
(d) the location of works of public utility;
(e) provision for public conservancy;
(ee)the basis on which the tenureholders  will contri-bute towards land required for  public purposes and the extent to which vacant  land may be, utilised  with a view to the said purpose; and
(f) any other matter which may be  prescribed,
(2) The Assistant Consolidation Officer  shall prepare the statement in consultation  with the Consolidation Committee in the manner  prescribed.
(3) If there is a difference of  opinion between the Assistant Consolidation  Officer and the Consolidation Committee in  regard to any matter, it shall be referred to  the Settlement Officer (Consolidation) whose  decision shall be final."
S. 15 is, as it were, a rider to s. 14  and sets out the principles to be followed in  the preparation of the "statement of  principles" under s. 14. It reads:  15, (1) The Assistant Consolidation Officer  shall, in preparing the statement of  principles under section 14, have regard to  the following principles:
(a) the allotment of plots shall be made on  the rental value thereof :  Provided that the area of the plots proposed  to be allotted shall not differ in any case,  except with the permission of the Director of  Consolidation by more than 20 per cent from  the area of the original plots:
(b) as far as possible, only those tenure-  holders shall get land in any particular block  who already held land therein and the number  of chaks to be allotted to each tenureholder  excluding areas earmarked for abadi and those  reserved for public purposes shall not exceed  the number of blocks in the village except  with the permission of the Director of  Consolidation of Holdings;
(c) every tenure-holder is, as far as  possible, allotted land at the place where he  holds the largest part of holdings;
(d) the tenure-holders belonging to the same  family shall, as far as possible, be given  neighbouring chaks;
(e) location of the residential house of the  tenureholder or improvement, if any, made by  him shall, as far as possible, be taken 'into  account -in allotting chaks ;
(f) small tenure-holders shall, as far as  possible, be  given land near the village abadi.  (9) an existing compact holding or farm  which is 6 1/4 acres or more in area' shall  not, as far as possible, be disturbed or  divided.
(2) The Assistant Consolidation Officer  shall also have regard to such other  principles as may be prescribed or specified  by the Consolidation Committee and are not  inconsistent with the provisions of this Act  and the rules."
8.  S. 16 provides for the publication of the principles prepared under s. 14 in the village to which that statement relates, and under s. 16(2) persons likely to be affected by the scheme are enabled to make objections "in the manner prescribed" within 15 days of the publication. This is followed by s. 16-A which we have already set out. s. 17 deals with the disposal of objections filed under s. 16(2) and appeals from such orders and under s. 18 where no objections are filed or where they are filed and are finally disposed of provision is made for the confirmation of the statement and thereupon the statement, as confirmed, is declared to become final and is directed to be published in the village. S. 19 is the provision referred to in s. 13(b) as relating to the statement of proposals. That section enacts;
11. "19.(1)-As soon as the statement has been  confirmed under section 18, the Assistant  Consolidation Officer shall, in accordance  with the Statement, prepare a statement of  proposal in the prescribed form showing-
(a) the particulars specified in cl. (b)  of sub-s. (1) of s. 11 in respect of  each tenureholder;
(b) the khasra number of the plots proposed  to be allotted to each tenureholder in lieu of  the original plots of his holding, the nature  of rights therein, the rental value and soil  classification of the field so allotted;
(c) briefly the reasons in support of the  proposal in caluse (b).
(d) the compensation for trees, wells,  buildings or any other improvement calculated  in the manner prescribed;
(e) the area earmarked for public purposes  and the layout of such areas and the rental  value thereof;
(f) the revenue or rent of the allotted plot  payable by the tenure-holder; and
(g) such other particulars as may be  prescribed.
(2) The Statement of proposals shall be  accompanied by a village map showing the  proposed arrangement of plots.
(3) Whenever in preparing a Statement of  Proposal it appears to the Assistant  Consolidation Officer that it is necessary to  amalgamate any land used for public purposes  any holding in the scheme, he shall make a  declaration to that effect stating in such  declaration that it is proposed that the  rights of the public as well as of all  individuals in or over the land shall be  transferred to any other land earmarked for  public purposes in the statement and whenever  the rights are so transferred they shall stand  extinguished in the land from which they are  transferred.
(4) The Statement of Proposals shall be  prepared in consultation with the  Consolidation Committee in the manner  prescribed.
(5) If there is difference of opinion  between the Assistant Consolidation Officer  and the Consolidation Committee in regard to  any matter contained in the Statement of  Proposals, it shall be referred to the  Settlement Officer (Consolidation) whose  decision shall be final."
9.  Under s. 20(1) the statement of proposals prepared under s. 19 is required to be published in the village and under. 20(2) the persons affected by "the proposals" are permitted within 15 days of such publication to file objections in writing before the Assistant Consolidation Officer. S. 21 deals with the disposal of objections filed under s. 20 and the procedure to be followed in such disposal. S. 23 comes into play where no objections are filed under s. 20 or if they are filed, after their disposal and the second sub-section of this section enacts: "23.(2) The Statement as confirmed shall be published and shall be final except in so far as it relates to land which is the subject-matter of references made to the. Civil Judge and which have not been disposed of till then." The other chapters and provisions of the Act deal with the execution and enforcement of schemes so framed and arc not necessary to be set out.
10.  We shall now proceed to narrate the details of the facts so far as they appear from the record. The exact date upon which the applications for permission to exchange was filed is not ascertainable from the record; nor, of course, the details of the exact prayer made, with reference to each of the 11 villages. The following is, however, what is gatherable from the writ petition filed by the respondents; The 11 villages in which the properties of the petitioners are situate are: (1) Garhar Buzurug, (2) Mahmauni, (3)Bibipur, (4) Bhitari, (5) Tahabarpur, (6) Taraudhi, (7) Shambhupur, (8) Shrikantpur,  (9) Lachahara, (10) Nawada, and (11) Garhar Khurda. Of these, the consolidation work in Garhar Buzurug, Mahmauni, Bibipur, Bhitari and Tahabarpur was at the stage of proceedings under s. 12 of the Act and, in Nawada and Lachahara proceedings under s. 20 were going on and in Shrikantpur and Shambhupur the scheme had been confirmed and was being enforced. In the village of Garhar Khurda publication of the statement of proposals under s. 19 had been objected to and as a result of the objection being upheld fresh principles were directed to be formulated under s. 16 and this was being done. This was admitted by the Consolidation authorities to be a correct representation of the stage at which the proceedings stood on the date of the application. There was one further allegation in the writ petition to which it is necessary to refer and this was that in the villages of Shrikantpur, Shambhupur and Lachahara the properties sought be exchanged were in adjacent chaks.
11.  This would be the convenient point to refer to the grounds upon which the Settlement Officer rejected the applications under s. 16-A(2). As stated earlier, there were two applications--one by the father and the two sons, and the other by the mother and the sons. After setting out briefly the gist of the applications the Settlement Officer stated: "Under this section [16-A(2)] it is to be considered as to whether the exchange is likely to defeat the scheme of consolidation or not."
12.  He then pointed out that from his file and the inquiry which he conducted it was disclosed that the statement of principles under s. 16 had been published in 7 villages, while in respect of 5, besides the principles, a statement of proposals had also been published under s. 20 of the Act. Nothing was mentioned in it about the other 4 villages in regard to which also application for exchange had been made. He promised the discussion of the- reasons' for rejecting the applications by referring to the report of the Consolidation Officer which he had called for on receipt of the two applications thus:
"the consolidation officer reported that chak formation was in hand in these villages."
13.  By "these villages" he apparently meant the 5 villages of Shambhupur, Nawada, Garhar Khurda, Lachahara and Shrikantpur in which not merely the principles but "the proposals" also had been published under s. 20 and he continued:
"I entirely agree with him that the exchange  of land, which is of considerably big area  shall disturb either the concluding phase of  chak formation or the proposed chaks already  formed. If the exchange is permitted, the  provisions of S. 15(c) and (b) of the Act  shall necessitate the review of the chaks of  these tenureholders and obviously such a  review shall dislocate and disturb other chak  holders also and he concluded by saying:
"By the exchange prayed for, the parties, who  are big tenureholders would become bigger  still and the obvious increase of land in  their favour shall adversely affect the  interest of other small tenureholders and  would cause undesired disturbance and  dislocation to them. Moreover, as the parties  are father, mother and sons, as far as  possible they would be deriving benefits of  sec. 15(d) of the C.H. Act also."
17. The learned judges of the Division Bench analysed the grounds given by the Settlement Officer for rejecting the application and came to the conclusion that the two main reasons which induced him to make an order adverse to the respondents were (1) that, having regard to the stage at which the chak formation had reached the granting of the petition would entail considerable work on the officers 37-2 S. C. India/64 of the Consolidation Department in the matter of readjusting the chaks of others, (2) that the petitioners being big land-holders the granting of permission would mean that if the exchanges were allowed they would have become even bigger land-holders. The learned Judges pointed out that neither of these considerations would be Legitimate or pertinent grounds on which an application for exchange made under s. 16-A(1) could be rejected and so the writ petition was granted.
18. If the terms of s. 16-A(2) were borne in mind it is clear that where an application fell within the terms of s. 16- A(1) i.e., where it was filed at the stage referred to in it the Settlement Officer is enjoined to allow the application unless the conditions laid down in the last portion of sub- sec. (21 were satisfied. The condition is that the officer should be satisfied that the proposed transfer is likely to defeat the scheme of consolidation. One of the points urged by the respondents before the High Court was as regards the meaning of these words "the scheme of consolidation". The contention was that the word "scheme" had to be understood in a popular sense or as explained in a dictionary, and meant "the mode" or "process" of effecting consolidation. On this construction it was contended that as the exchanges for which permission was sought would have' if allowed effected an aggregation, the applications should have been granted. Both the learned Single judge as well as the learned Judges on appeal rejected this submission and held that by "the scheme of consolidation" was meant not some method of effecting consolidation as popularly understood, but the words were a specific reference to the provisions of s. 13(a), (b) and (c) which we have quoted. This is obviously correct and, indeed, learned Counsel for the respondent did not dispute the correctness of this position before us.
19. The next question is whether the reasons given for the rejection of the application for exchange contravene the matter set out in s. 13(a), (b) or (c). It is to the criteria there laid down that the Settlement Officer has to direct his attention and it is only where he is satisfied that either " the principles" formulated under s. 14 or "the proposals" under s. 19 or some other matters prescribed to be taken into account under s. 13.(c) are contravened by allowing the proposed transfer, that he could reject an application and besides he is enjoyed to record the reasons which induce him to do so in writing. We should point out that the order of the Settlement Officer is far from clear as to the precise grounds upon which the rejection was based. We also entertain little doubt about two points: (1) that at least in great part the reasons underlying the order of the Settlement Officer for rejecting the applications were the two we have set out earlier as those relied on by the High Court as grounds for holding his order to be invalid, and (2) that these reasons are not germane or pertinent for rejecting the application for exchange under s. 16-A(2). If these matters were taken into account, it is clear that the resulting order could not be justified and we consider, therefore, that the learned judges of the High Court acted properly in setting aside order of the Settlement Officer under Art. 226. Before parting with the order of the Settlement Officer there is one other matter also to which reference has to be made. In their petition to the High Court and in the affidavit they filed in support of their petition, the res- pondents asserted that the lands in 3 villages which they sought to exchange-Shrikantpur, Shambhupur and Lachahara- were in adjacent chaks-in the "proposals".
20. This allegation was not denied by the appellant in the counter affidavit filed before the High Court, but on the other hand there was an express admission regarding the correctness of this allegation. If really the lands were in adjacent and contiguous chaks, it is difficult to see how the granting of the permission to exchange would violate any "principle" or "proposal", for in such an event the rights of no others would be affected and instead of a mother and a son or a father and the son holding adjacent chaks, one of them would be holding both. Mr. Aggarwala did not contest this position either. In fact, even the Settlement Officer pointed out in his order that having regard to the relation- ship between the parties they would be "deriving benefits of s. 15(d) of the Act", which Mr. Aggarwala suggested was a reference to the feature of continguity in the light of their relationship. If this was what the officer had in mind, that would be a circumstance which should have led Fm to allow the exchange in regard to some, at least, of the lands, and in this view the rejection of the permission to exchange in respect of every item of land could not be sustained. This would be an additional reason why that order should be set aside.
21. We shall deal next with the complaint of the learned Counsel for the appellant regarding the directions of the learned judges to the Settlement Officer in regard to the fresh disposal of the applications. The learned Judges explained what, according to them, was the law on the point and practically required the Settlement Officer to grant the permission sought and it is this portion of the judgment of the learned Judges that is challenged by the appellant as erroneous and incorrect. The learned judges stated the position thus:
"It seems to us that there was nothing in the  statement of principles or statement of  proposals which could militate against  formation of larger chaks in the case of a  particular tenure-holder. On the contrary the  whole scheme of the Act including the  statements of principles and proposals  envisage that as far as possible every tenure-  holder should have one single Chak and the  chak should be as large as possible. The  transfer, therefore' instead,of defeating the  scheme of consolidation would only have  furthered it...... Section 16-A(2) is in the  mandatory form in which the Settlement Officer  is bound to grant permission unless he is  satisfied that the proposed transfer is likely  to defeat the scheme of consolidation and as  we have arrived at the view that this exchange  was not likely to defeat the scheme, he was  bound to grant permission", and in the concluding portion of the judgment they directed the Settlement Officer to pass an order keeping in view the principles of law which they have set out earlier i.e., in the passage extracted. This brings us to the question as to the scheme of the Act and the precise, import of the phrase "likely to defeat the scheme of consolidation" in s. 16- A(2). Adopting the language of s. 13 of the Act, the question to be considered is whether the transfer for which permission is sought would contravene the principles referred to in s.- 14 or the proposals referred to in s. 19. The two matters to be noticed in respect of both "the principles' of consolidation under s. 14 and of "the proposals" under s. 19, is that the Act specifically provides for objections being filed and for their being considered before the "principles" or the "proposals" attain finality.
22. It is not very clear whether the present respondents filed or did not file any objections to the principles or the proposals under s. 16(2) or s. 20(2) respectively based upon their claim to exchange. If such objections have been filed, they would be dealt with in the manner prescribed and the decision on the objections and on the application for sanction would be founded on the same grounds. If, however, no such objections were filed the question which would have to be considered by the Settlement Officer in dealing with the application under s. 16-A(1) would be whether the proposed transfer, if permitted, would affect substantially and in a concrete manner any of the "principles" which had become final under s. 18 or the "proposals" which were confirmed under s. 23. The conflict to justify a rejection under s. 16-A(2) must exist between "a principle" as formulated or a concrete "proposal" as confirmed, on the one hand and the transfer prayed for. If there should be such a conflict the officer would be entitled to refuse the permission but otherwise the applicant would be entitled to the grant of the permission sought. We need hardly add that it is for the officer to decide whether these conflicts exist and to pass a speaking order setting out the grounds for holding that such conflict exist and the jurisdiction of the Court would be attracted only if there were an error apparent on the face of the record or similar infirmity in his order. The direction of the learned Judges, therefore, does not, with great respect to them, appear to us to be in accordance with the proper interpretation of s. 16-A(2) read with the other relevant provisions and we, therefore, set aside the order of the learned judges also.
23. Before concluding there is one matter to which we have already adverted and that relates to an assertion by the respondents in their petition to the High Court that the lands, transfer of which was sought, were contiguously situated in three of the villages concerned in the applica- tions. We have further noticed that this statement was admitted by the appellant in his counter-affidavit.
24. Mr. Aggarwala, while conceding that if the factual position was as above, the applications for transfer by way of ex- change would have in respect of those plots had to be allow- ed, submitted that a mistake had been made in drafting the counter-affidavit in the High Court and that in fact, except in one village, there were lands belonging to third parties intervening between the chaks of the several respondents in the other two villages. Normally, there is no doubt that where allegations of fact are admitted, a party would not be allowed to go behind them, but this case is rather peculiar, in that parties do not seem to have paid attention to the details of the facts, but rather concentrated on whatthey considered to be points of law. In view of this we consider that it would not be proper to hold theappellant to the admission made in his affidavit beforethe High Court and particularly in view of the order we are passing directing the Settlement Officer to dispose of the applications filed to him in accordance with law' the Settlement Officer could have regard to the actual location of the plots in the matter of granting the permission sought.
25. It is only necessary to mention that subsequent to the order of the learned judges of the Division Bench the Settlement Officer took up the matter afresh and passed an order on August 31, 1962 granting permission under s. 16-A(1). But it is clear on a perusal of the said order thatthe same was granted not after any examination of theapplication with reference to the relevant provisions of the Act and of the "principles" and "proposals" under ss. 14-18 and ss. 19- 23 respectively but only because of the order of the High Court. Learned Counsel for the respondents attempted to suggest that second order dated August 31, 1962 had become final and therefore could constitute a preliminary objection to the hearing of the appeal, on the ground that without setting aside this order the appellant could not obtain any relief regarding the correctness of the order of the High Court now under appeal. We consider that this objection by the respondents is without substance as this subsequent order of the Settlement Officer is wholly dependent on and was passed in mechanical compliance with the order of the High Court, and if the order of the learned Judges was wrong and  ought to be set aside the existence of this order would be no bar to such a course, for this order of the Settlement Officer would fall with the order of the High Court on which it was based.
26. We therefore allow the appeal and set aside the order of the learned Judges as also the order of the Settlement Officer dated August 31, 1962 which was dependent on it, and direct the Settlement Officer to take the applications of the respondents for permission to effect the exchange to his file and dispose of them in accordance with law and in the light of the observations contained in this judgment. We consider it necessary to add, to avoid any misconception, that the Act has (in 1958 and 1963) undergone radical alterations, and the Settlement Officer in dealing with the applications according to law would have regard to these later enactments only in so far as they apply to the case on hand.
27. In the circumstances of the case we make no order as to costs in this Court.
Appeal allowed.
