Naini Gopal Lahiri and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

8  May  1964
Cr.A. No. 113 of 1960
The Judgment was delivered by: SHAH, J.
1.  On November 13, 1946 the United Hindustan Films Ltd. was incorporated as a public limited company with its head office at Calcutta
"to carry on the business of cinematographic trade and industry and particularly the film industry both silent and talkie, ...to manufacture and deal in educational films, commercial and agricultural pictures and to purchase films or to take on hire films from other film producers."
2.  The articles of association provided that the company may pay a commission for subscribing or agreeing to subscribe for any shares or agreeing to procure subscribers for any shares, but so that the commission in respect of the shares shall not exceed ten per cent of the shares subscribed or to be subscribed. The articles also provided that "Messrs. Estland Trust"- a firm- will be appointed managing agents for a period of twenty years with authority inter alia to appoint underwriters on a commission of ten per cent. on sale of shares of the company sold directly or through brokers or agents appointed by them.
3. On November, 30, 1946 the prospectus of the company was filed with the Register. Joint Stock Companies, West Bengal. On December 2, 1946 Ram Kishore Chatterji, the third appellant in this appeal, applied to the managing agents of the company offering the services of Messrs. Chatterji and Co of which he was a partner as underwriters of the company. By letter dated December 9, 1946 Messrs, Chatterji and Co were informed that the application had been placed before the board of directors and it had been decided to appoint Messrs. Chatterji and Co. as underwriters of the company. A formal contract was then executed. At a meeting of the board of directors held on June 21, 1947 the appointment of Messrs. Chatterji and Co as underwriters of the company with a commission of ten per cent. On the face value of the shares sold by them was confirmedThe activities of the company were restricted to the area of the District of Benaras and neighboring districts.
4.  Sheo Prasad Sharama, appellant No. 2 was appointed managing director of the company's branch at Benaras. He also worked as branch  manager of the Bengal Express Bank at of the company at Benaras, Ram Kishore Chatterji appellant No. 3, was a part-time clerk of the company at Benaras and also worked as accountant of the Bengal Express Bank at Benaras. The Accounts Office East Indian Railway at Benaras during the period 1946-47.
5. Many person residing in the District of Benaras purchased shares of the company. In a complaint addressed to the Home Minister, Uttar Pradesh some time in the year, 1951 it was alleged that office-bearers of of the company including the appellants had made false representations to the public the the company intended opening a cinema house at Benaras and that the venture was likely to yield large profits and relying upon the representations the public were induced to purchase shares of the company.
6.  Investigation was directed into this complaint and a police report was submitted against the three appellants and eight others in th court of the Magistrate 1st Class Benaras charging them with offenses of conspiracy to commit cheating criminal breach of trust, falsification of accounts and alternatively of committing those offenses in furtherance of the common intention of the accused. The case was tired before the Court of Session on charges against the accused for offenses u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code and also for offenses under sections 406, 408, 409, 417, 471, 477A read with section 120B of the Indian Penal Code.
7. The sessions Judge, Benaras convicted the appellants and two others B B Biswas and R C Moitra of offenses under sections 417, 420, 409, 465, 471 and 477A read with sections 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to suffer imprisonment for various termsIn appeal to the High Court of Allahabad the order of conviction and sentence passed against B B Biswas and R C Moitra was set aside.
8.  The High Court also set aside the conviction of the appellants, Naini Gopal Lahiri, Sheo Prasad Sharma, and Ram Kishore Chatterji for offenses under sections 417, 465, 471, 477A and 409 read with section 120B and s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, but maintained the order of conviction for offenses u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code on the charge of cheating in a sum of Rs. 6, 680 paid by the company to Messrs. Chatterji and Co. as commission under the underwriting agreement. The High Court confirmed the sentences passed by the Court the appellants have appealed to this court
9. The only question which falls to be determined in this appeal is whether on the findings recorded by the High Court the appellants are proved to have committed in furtherance of their common intention the offense of cheating the company, and thereby inducing it to part with Rs. 6, 680 as commission under the underwriting agreement. By the ninth head of charge framed by the Court of Session the appellants, Sheo Prasad Sharama, R K Chatterji and R C Moitra (who was acquitted by the High Court), were charged with having dishonestly or fraudulently induced the company to pay share commission in the sum of Rs. 6, 630 with the knowledge that by that act wrongful loss was likely to be caused to the shareholders on the basis of a fictitious "deed of underwritership" which those three persons knew or had reason to believe to be fictions.
10.  Separate charges were also framed against the appellant for criminal breach of trust in respect of Rs. 6, 989-6-0 which included Rs. 6, 680 paid as underwriting commission. The foundation of the charge for the offense u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code was that Sheo Prasad Sharama, R K Chatterji and R C Moitra had by setting up a "fictitious deed of underwritership" dishonestly on fraudulently induced the company to pay underwriting commission and had thereby caused wrongful loss to the shareholders. The three named accused were called upon to meet the case that by setting up an underwriting agreement in favour of Messrs. Chatterji and Co, which was a sham or "ficitious deed", the company was induced to pay Rs. 6, 680 as underwriting commission to Messrs. Chatterji and Co which was not payable to that firmThe High Court for reasons which we will presently set out in detail held this charge proved.
11. But somewhat inconsistently the High Court, instead of convicting R C Moitra who was named in the charge as a person concerned in the offense of cheating in the matter of the undertaking commission with the two appellants, R K Chatterji and Sheo Prasad Sharama convicted the appellant, Naini Gopal Lahiri of the offense punishable u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, The High Court acquitted R C Moitra and B B Biswas and convicted the appellants of the offense of cheating. In so recording its judgment, the High Court appears to have fallen into some error: there was no charge against B B Biswas for the offense punishable u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal Code nor was there any charge against N G Lahari for that offense.
Apart from this infirmity the judgment of the High Court is otherwise unsubstainable. The material findings recorded by the High Court in the light of the evidence may be set out.
12.  The High Court declined to place any reliance upon the testimony of Dr. S K Moitra the approver on whose testimony apart from some documentary evidence the prosecution primarily relied for establishing its case generally. The High Court held that the evidence did not establish the case of the prosecution that the funds of the company were misused and that the State had failed to establish that the real purpose for the formation of the company was to finance the Bengal Express Bank, which it was alleged was a noribund company.
13. The High Court also held that the story about the fraudulent representations alleged to have been made in pursuance of a criminal conspiracy in the prospectus of the company so as to induce shareholders to subscribe to the share capital was not established and that the charge for the offense u/s. 147 of the Indian Penal Code in respect of certain shares alleged to have been purchased by three ladies, Shaila Bala, Sabita Devi and Surja Bala, was also not made out. The only charge which in the view of the High Court was proved was one relating to fraudulent and dishonest inducements made to the company to pay Rs. 6, 680 as commission pursuant to the underwriting agreement.
But the High Court found that the case of the State that the underwriting agreement was a "sham or fictitious" agreement was not made out. By the memorandum of association Messrs. Estland Trust were appointed as managing agents and power was conferred upon them to appoint underwriters. Such an appointment was, in the view of the High Court, made by a written agreement. The Court of Session held, that this was a sham document brought into existence to support a fraudulent claim for commission which the company was not bound to meet.
14. The underwriting agreement was in the view of that court a sham transaction which was never intended to be operative : it was merely used as a cloak by the three appellants with a view to induce the company to pay commission which the company was not bound to pay. On this view, the Court of Session convicted three appellants of the offense of cheating u/s. 420 read with section 120B of the Indian Penal Code and also for the offense u/s. 409 read with sections 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal CodeBut the High Court took a different view.
15.  The High Court held that the underwriting agreement was not "sham or ficitious". They pointed out that under the articles of association Messrs. Estland Trust had been specifically mentioned as managing agents of the company for a period of twenty years that the managing agents were authorised to carry on the business of the company subject to the supervision and control of the board of directors and they were empowered to pay underwriting commission of ten per cent. on sale of shares sold directly or through agents appointed by the underwriters. It could not be said that Messrs. Estland Trust- the managing agents- had not come into existence on the date of incorporation of the company in fact Messrs. Estland Trust had started functioning as managing agents from the date on which the company was incorporated as a joint stock company. The managing agents had full authority to appoint underwriters and they did in fact appoint Messrs. Chatterji and Co as underwriters.
16.  Therefore there was nothing illegal or improper about the appointment of Messrs. Chatterji and Co as underwriters. There was also no evidence led by the State showing that R K Charatterji was connected with Merrs. Eastland Trust or their appointment
". The High Court if inferred from these circumstances that the agreement was not a "fictitious" agreement. But the High Court still held appointment Lahiri the first appellant and Sharama the second appellant, exploited the underwriting agreement to their own advantage by selling the shares themselves and manipulated things in such a way that, although underwriting commission was debited as paid to Messrs. Chatterji and Co. a substantial part thereof that the the appellants, Lahiri and Sharama and one Banerjee were canvassing for sale of shares and were receiving share application money on behalf of the company and the evidence disclosed that out of 1, 100 applications for shares not one bore the signature of R K Chatterji as agent of the underwriters, nor were any other applications shown to have been made in which Messrs Chatterji and Co had acted as underwriters.
The High Court observed that the shareholders who were examined as witnesses had deposed that they had purchased shares from Lahiri, Sharma and K L Banarji and that R K Chatterji had not negotiated the sale of the shares to them, From, this the High Court inferred that in reality shares were sold by Lahiri and Sharama and not by Chatterji, The High Court also relied upon two documents, exhibits Kaa-989 and Ka-534 recovered in the course of investigation which recorded that the underwriting commission paid to Messrs. Chatterji and Co was divided as recorded in the account head "P /L Account Commission." In the view of the High Court the two documents disclosed that Lahiri, Sharama and Chatterji were sharing the share commission. On this evidence the High Court recorded its findings as follows"
17.  It is conceded that both s.P. Sharma and N. G. Lahiri could not had directly taken part in the sale of shares so as to earn share commission from the company. Both of them were directors of the company, and as such should not have participated in the business transactions of the company. As directors they stood in fiduciary relationship with the shareholders and the public and, therefore, they could not directly and openly earn profit on the s ale of shares. It was to abate this difficulty that they employed a camouflage and took advantage of the existence of the underwritership agreement in f favour of Chatterji and company., The evidence in the case makes out that not only S.P. Sharma and lahiri but even some of the shareholders of the Company had been participating in the sale of shares and thereby earning commission on their own account. All this would have been possible only with the concurrence and connivance of S.P. Sharma and Lahiri who were the brain trust of the company at Banners, which was the main centre of activity of the company.
18. The High court inferred that the illegal acts committed by the three appellants were committed by them in furtherance of their common intention to cheat the company of the share commission, and convicted them of offenses punishable u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian penal code.
19.  The High court also observed that the court of session had recorded the order of conviction against the appellant, sharma, Lahiri and Chatterji and also Moitra for the offenses punishable u/s. 409 red with s. 34 of the Indian Penal code in that they were proved to have committed the offenses of criminal breach of trust in respect of underrating commission obtained by cheating the company, but once a conviction was recorded for the offenses of chatting, it would be anomalous to convict the same person of the criminal breach of trust on the same factsAs we have already observed the foundation of the charge u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal code was that relying upon the fictitous underwriting agreement the company was made to part with the underwriting commission.
The High court reached that conclusion in three steps: first, that the directors of the company were not entitled to participate in the sale of shares' second, that even though there was a genuine agreement in favour of Messrs. Chatterji and Co. appointing then as underwriters of the company, in act nothing was done by Chatterji and co and third, that the shares were sold by lahiri, sharma and others and the commission which was nominally paid over to the underwriters was shared between lahiri, sharma and R.K. Chatterji.
"We may usefully refer to the terms of the underwriting agreement
Name of underwriter - Messrs. Chatterji and co. Address B/8/48, Sonapura, Benaras. Place of business. Throughout India
Date of appointment, [Nill]
Terms and conditions are as blow
[1] That you guarantee a business worth Rupees one lakh within a year
[2] That you will receive a commission of ten per cent. on the face value of shares
[3] That you will receive your commission from time to time when the allotment money due on your business have been received by the company
[4] And that you are authorized to appoint any number of ordinary, special and district agents to procure business."
20. It is clear from these terms that Messrs. Chatterji and co had agreed to underwrite business of Rs. 1 Lakh within a year i.e. to procure other persons to subscribe for shares of the value Rs. 1 lakh or to purchase the shares of that value.
21.  The underwriters were expressly authorised by the underwriting agreement to appoint ordinary, special and district agents to procure business, An underwriter is a person who agrees with the company in consideration of a commission payable to him, that if all or a particular number of the company's shares are not taken up by the public he will make up the deficiency and make u the total number of shares under written by him. Underwriting is in he nature of an insurance against the possibility of inadequate subscription.
22. A public company cannot proceed to allot shares offered to the public. unless the amount specified in the proceed to allot shares offered to the public unless the amount specified in the prospectus as the minimum ascription is raised by the issue of shares. It is therefore usual for a new company to enter into an underwriting agreement. An underwriter is entled to enter in to subsidiary agreements with which the company is not concerned. They are not required to be disclosed in the prospectsIt is recorded by the High court that it was conceded that the director were not entitled to canvass directly for sale of shares of the company. We think that such a concession can have no value. Counsel appearing on behalf of the State very fairly did not contend that the concession is based on the true legal position.
23.  We fail to appreciated why a director is no titled to participate in canvassing the sale of shares. There is nothing in the underwriting agreement which prevented the directors or others form acting as agents for Chatterji and co. In conviction the sales of shares. The underwriting agreement being a contract that the underwriter will either himself purchase or procure purchasers for the shares underwriter peccaries the purchasers. On the finding recorded by the High court it is clear that the underwriting agreement was genuine, and commissions was in fact debited to Chatterji and Co. For shares subscribed by the public. It is true that according to the High court, in the applications for shares submitted by the public the underwriters did not figure, and the work of canvassing was mainly done by lahiri, appellant No. 1 Sharma, appellant No. 2 and others. This may give rise to two alternative inferences consistent with probabilities
[1] That the canvassers acted as agents of the underwriters who were expressly authorised to appoint agents
[2] that the underwriters after obtaining the agreement for some reason remained supine, and other persons independently of them canvassed shares purchased by the public were covered by the underwriting agreement and obtained payment
24. If the first be a legitimate inference, no offenses of cheating can be deemed to be made out.
25.  The High court, it appears, raised the alternative inference and convicted the appellants. But it must at once be alternative that there was no charge against the appellants or any of them, that they made a representation that the shares sold by the efforts of the direction were sold through the agency of the underwriters, and thereby they induced the company to pay to chatterji and co Commission which they were not entitled to . The Charge it may be recalled, was that the company was induced to by the underwriting commission on the faith of an agreement which was fictitious."S. 415 of the India Penal Code. which defines cheating provides."
"Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person or to consent that any person shall retain any property or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so d received, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or proper, is said to cheat."
26.  The definition consists of two parts. A person who induces another to deliver any property is said to cheat, if he does so fraudently or dishonestly. Similarly a person who deceives another and intentionally induces that person to do or omit to do something, which he would not have otherwise done or omitted to do is also said to cheat, if the act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage to him. In the first, the offender may induce the victim to deliver any property to another, or to consent that any person shall retain property. In the second the of under may induce the victim to do or omit to do both the parts is the deceiving of the victim, that is, the victim must be representation be made to believe as true, what is not true, and which the offender knows or has reason to believe is not true.
27. The Representation may be express, or may be inferred from conduct. But mere deception is not sufficient : The victim in consequence of the deception must be induced to act to his prejudice, and the offender must, in offering the inducement, have the specified means rea
28.  The charge of fraud, by the court of session, part from the infirmity set out earlier, does not refer to any deception of the company. There is no mention of any representation made to the company and defects are not technical, but of substance. Our attention is not invited to any specific evidence of representation, express or by conduct, which deceived the company, nor has the High court recorded any finding in that behalf. The vouchers submitted by Messer. Chatterji and Co. are produced. Unless there was a representation which deceived the company and the company was induced fraudulently or dishonestly to part with property, the offenses of cheating could not be deemed to be committed. Chatterji and co. had undertaken to procure purchasers for shares of the value of Rs. 1 lakh within one year.
29. Assuming that they claimed commission in respect of the shares which were sold by other persons, it could not be said merely on that account that the company was deceived and it was induced dishonestly or fraudulently to part with the amount of commissionThe view expressed by the High court that the directors were incompetent to act for the purpose of canvassing for sale of shares is wholly unsubstainable, and proof of the mere fact that under an existing binding agreement between Messrs. Chatterji and co. for underrating the shares, commission was paid to them for shares in the sale of which l Lahiri and Sharma were concerned, will not establish the case of cheating for there is complete lack of evidence both about the deception practiced and the inducement of the company with the requisite intention to pay commission to Chatterji and co
30.  Counsel for the state sought to contend that deception was practiced by the managing agents by submitting a statutory report under section 77[2] of the Indian companies act, 1913, mentioning that no appointment of underwriters was made. No such case was however, set out in the charge, nor at any stage in the trial court or even before the High court, and we cannot go into that question. This, if established, would be a charge and may necessitate enquiry different from the one found in the change, and may necessitate enquiry on several matters of fact which has not been made.
31. Counsel for the State also sought to contend that the High court was in error in concluding that the underwriting agreement was a genuine agreement, and not fictitious as found by the court of session. The High court has, however, marshaled in its judgment evidence which shows that the agreement was genuine and we do not think, in an appeal b the accused u/art. 136 of the Constitution we, would be justified in interfering with the conclusion of the High court on that point
32.  Counsel for the State finally contended that in any event this court may on the findings recorded by the High court convict the appellants of the offenses u/s. 509 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal code i.e. of the offenses of committing criminal breach of trust of the Company's funds in furtherance of their common intention. But in relation to the payment of commission on the shares underwriter a charge u/s. 409 read with s. 34 of the India Plan code was expressly framed and all the three appellant were convicted of that offenses by the sessions Judge.
33.  The High court acquitted the appellants of that offenses and no appeal has been filed by the State challenging the correctness of that decision. It was open to the State to apply for leave to appeal against the order of acquittal passed by the High court but they took no saps in that behalf. We will not in the circumstances be justified in entertaining the plea of the state and in calling upon the appellants to answer at this date a charge of criminal breach of trust for which they have already been tied and acquitted.
34. Without considering, therefore, whether in an appropriate case the appellate court may have the power in an appeal against an order of conviction of cheating to convert it into one for the offenses of criminal breach of trust we are definitely of the view that this is not a case in which, assuming that we have the power, it may be exercisedThe appeal is therefore allowed and the three appellants are ordered to be acquitted of the offenses u/s. 420 read with s. 34 of the Indian Penal code. The fine if paid is to be refunded.
Appeal allowed.
