Punjab Distilling Industries Limited v Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab
Supreme Court of India

9 February 1965
Civil Appeal No. 414 of 1965
The Judgment was delivered by : K. Subbarao, J.
1.   This appeal by certificate raises the main question whether s. 2(6A)(d) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, hereinafter called the Act, is ultra vires the Central Legislature.
2.   The assessee, a public limited company, was incorporated on May 23, 1945, under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, with a share capital of Rs. 50 lakhs. On December 15, 1947, at the instance of the appellant the High Court sanctioned the reduction of the capital of the company from Rs. 50 lakhs to Rs. 25 lakhs. On December 16, 1953, the High Court sanctioned a further reduction of the share capital from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 15 lakhs. On November 4, 1954, the Registrar of Companies granted the requisite certificate under s. 61(4) of the Indian Companies Act.
3.  On November 5, 1954, the appellant issued notices to the shareholders inviting applications for the refund of share capital so reduced. On the receipt of the applications, appropriate debit entries were made in the accounts of the shareholders and the amounts were actually paid to them during the previous year, i.e., December 1, 1954, to November 30, 1955. Under s. 2(6A)(d) of the Act, "dividend" includes any distribution by a company on the reduction of its capital to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits, whether such accumulated profits have been capitalised or not.
4.   In assessing the income of the appellant-company for the assessment year 1956-57, the Income-tax Officer held that the said dividends were distributed during the accounting year and on that finding he calculated the rebate on super-tax in terms of el. (i)(b) of the second proviso to paragraph D of Part I1 of the first schedule to the Finance Act, 1956. If the dividends were distributed during the accounting year. i.e., December I, 1953, to November 30, 1954, the appellant would be entitled to a higher rate of rebate on super-tax under el. (ii) of the first proviso to paragraph D of Part II of the first schedule to the Finance Act, 1956.
5.  The Income-tax Officer further held that the assessee's accumulated profits at the time of the reduction of the Capital from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 15 lakhs were Rs. 8,42,337. On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner accepted the said figure arrived at the Income-tax Officer. On further appeal, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, for the reasons recorded by it in its order, reduced the figure under the said head by a sum of Rs. 3.61,40.5.
6.   It was contended on behalf of the assessee that in as much as the certificate from the Registrar for the reduction of the capital from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 15 lakhs was obtained on November 4, 1954, the distribution of the dividends should be deemed to have taken place during the year 1953-54 and, therefore, the said dividends were not eligible to tax for the assessment year.
7.  The Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal concurrently rejected that plea and held that, as the Actual payment to the shareholders of the refund of the capital and the debit in the accounts of the shareholders were effected in the accounting year, the said dividends must be held to have been distributed in the accounting year.
8.   There is another sum of Rs. 11,687-3-0 received by the appellant as security deposit on account of empty bottles. A question was raised whether the said amount could be considered as capital gains and, therefore, should be excluded from the accumulated profits. The Appellate Tribunal held in favour of the assessee.
9.   The assessee and the Commissioner of Income-tax filed two applications before the Tribunal for referring questions of law arising out of the Tribunal's order to the High Court. The Tribunal referred the following questions of law to the High Court for its opinion.
(1) Whether the provisions of s. 2(6A)(d) of the Indian Income-tax Act are ultra vires of the Central Legislature.
(2) Whether the accumulated profits amounting to Rs. 4,69,244-13-0 could be deemed to have been distributed on the reduction of the capital from Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 15 lakhs within the meaning of Section 2(6A)(d) of the Indian Income-tax Act.
(3) Whether the amount of Rs. 11.687-3-0 received by the assessee us security deposit on account of empty bottles could be considered as Capital Gains.
(4) Whether the accumulated profits could be considered as dividend deemed to have been distributed in the assessment year 1955-56 in view of the certificate granted by the Registrar of Companies under Section 61(4) of the Indian Companies Act, 1913, or could be considered us dividend deemed to have been distributed in the assessment year 1956-57 because the debits of refunds were actually made in the accounts of the shareholders during the accounting period of the assessment year 1956-57.
10.   The High Court answered all the questions against the assessee. Hence the appeal. Mr. N.C. Chatterjee, learned ,counsel for the assessee, did not contest the correctness of the answer given by the High Court in 'regard to the third question and, therefore, nothing further' need be said about it.
11.   The first question is whether s. 2(6A)(d) of the Act is ultra vires the Central Legislature. Sub.section (6A) was inserted in s. 2 of the Act by s. 2 of the Indian Income-tax (Amendment) Act,. 1939 (Act VII of 1939). Section 2(6A)(d) of the Act reads:
"'Dividend' includes any distribution by a company on the reduction of its capital to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits which arose after the end of the previous year ending next before the 1st day of April, 1933, whether such accumulated profits have been capitalised or not."
12.   The said Act VII of 1939 was passed by the Central Legislature in exercise of its powers conferred under s. 100 of the Government of India Act, 1935, read with entry 54 of List I of the. Seventh Schedule thereof. Entry 54 reads:
"Tax on income other than agricultural income." Mr. Chatterjee contends that while the said entry 54 enables the appropriate Legislature to impose a tax on "income", the Legislature by enlarging the definition of dividend so as to include the amount received by a shareholder towards the share capital contributed by him, which cannot possibly be income, seeks to tax a capital receipt, and, therefore, the said clause is ultra vires the Central Legislature."
10. Mr. R. Ganapathy lyer, learned counsel for the Revenue, contends that a legislative entry must receive the widest connotation and should not be interpreted in any narrow or restricted sense, and if so construed the said entry enables the Legislature to make a law to prevent evasion of tax on income by devious methods and that the Legislature in the instant case seeks to prevent the growing evil of tax evasion by companies distributing profits under the guise of reduction of capital.
13.  It is well settled rule of construction that entries in the legislative lists cannot be read in a narrow or restricted sense: they should be construed most liberally and in their widest amplitude. In the words of Gwyer, C.J., in The United Provinces v. Atiqa Begum "each general word should be held to extend to all ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be comprehended by it." This Court in a number of decisions held that the expression "income" in entry 54 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935, and the corresponding entry 82 of List 1 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, shall be widely and liberally construed so as to enable a Legislature to provide by law for the prevention of evasion of income-tax.
14.  In Sardar Baldev Singh v. Commissioner Income-tax, Delhi and Ajmer this Court maintained the constitutional validity of s. 23A(1) of the Income-tax Act, which empowered the Income-tax Officer to impose super-tax in a case where a private limited company distributed less than sixty per cent. of the total income of the company as dividends on the ground that the object of the section was to prevent avoidance of super-tax by shareholders of a company in which the public were not substantially interested.
15.  In Balaji v. Income-tax Officer, Special Investigation Circle, this Court ruled that s. 16(3)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Income-tax Act, which enabled the Income-tax Officer in computing the total income of a person to include the share of the income of his wife and minor sons therein, was constitutionally valid for the reason that it was intended to prevent evasion of tax by persons putting the properties in the names of their wives or minor children, as the case may be.
16.  This Court again in Navnitlal C. Javeri v.K.K. Sen, Appellate Assistant Commissioner Income-tax, "D" Range, Bombay, sustained the validity of s. 2(6A)(e) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, which included the definition of "dividend", inter alia, payment made by the company by way of advance or loan to a shareholder to the extent to which the company possessed accumulated profits on the ground that it was a measure to prevent private controlled companies adopting the device of making advances or giving loans to their shareholders with the object of evading payment of tax.
17.  The question in the instant case, therefore, is whether the constitutional validity of s. 2(6A)(d) of the Act can be supported on the ground that it was enacted to prevent evasion of income-tax. While an entry delineating a legislative field must be widely and liberally construed, there must be a reasonable nexus between the item taxed and the field so delineated. The said clause deals with the distribution by a company on the reduction of its capital to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits. Accumulated profits of a company may be utilised in the following 3 ways:
(1) For increasing the capital stocks;
(2) For distributing the same among the shareholders by way of dividends; and
(3) For reducing the capital. Ordinarily a company reduces the capital when there is loss or depreciation of assets; in that event there is no question of distribution of profits to the shareholders but the shares are only devaluated. But a company may, on the pretext of reducing its capital, utilise its accumulated profits to pay back to the shareholders the whole or part of the paid up amounts on the shares.
18.  A shareholder though in form gets back the whole or a part of the capital contributed by him, in effect he gets a share of the accumulated profits, which, if a straightforward course was followed, he should have received as dividend.
19.  This is a division of profits under the guise of division of capital; a distribution of profits under the colour of reduction of capital. If this was permitted, there would be evasion of super-tax, the extent of the evasion depending upon the prevalence of the evil. The Legislature, presumably in the interest of the exchequer, enlarged the definition of
Order accordingly
