Rm. Ar., Ar. Rm. Ar. Ramanathan Chettiar v Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras
Supreme Court of India

27 October 1966
Civil Appeal No. 728 of 1965
The Judgment was delivered by
1. Ramaswami J. This appeal is brought by special leave on behalf of Ramanathan Chettiar  from the judgment of the High Court of Madras dated September 24, 1962 in T.C. No. 144 of 1960.
2. Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) was a resident of Devakottai, Ramanathapuram District who owned extensive properties including properties in Ceylon. He married three wives viz., Valami Achi, Lakshimi Achi and Nachiar Achi. Valami Achi died in 1913 leaving behind her a son Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) and three daughters. Lakshimi Achi and Nachiar Achi did not have natural born sons. Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) died July 9, 1934. Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) died on February 23, 1938. He was survived by his two widows Lakshimi Achi and Nachiar Achi and by the widow of his predeceased son, Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) viz., Umayal Achi. After the death of Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) disputes arose between his two widows and the widow of Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) Umayal Achi, in respect of the estate of Arunachalam Chettiar (senior). Umayal Achi filed O.S. No. 93 of 1938 in the Subordinate Judge's Court of Devakottai for administration and partition of the estate of deceased Arunachalam Chettiar (senior). She claimed a half-share in the properties under the provisions of the Hindu Women's Rights to Property Act. During the pendency of the suit the Subordinate Judge appointed two Advocates as Receivers for the administration of the estate. On the death of Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) the Estate Duty Authorities of Ceylon levied Estate Duty on what was described as the
"deceased's half -share of the assets of the business carried on by the family in Ceylon"
3. Estate Duty was also levied on the death of Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) in 1938. The two Advocate Receivers who were administering the estate paid under protest to the Commissioner of Estate Duty in Ceylon the Estate Duty claimed from them. The administrators subsequently filed a suit in the court of the District Judge, Colombo questioning the validity of the Estate Duties. The District Judge upheld the levies, but the Supreme Court of Ceylon allowed the appeal of the administrators and ordered the refund of the Estate Duty together with interest. The Attorney-General of Ceylon took the matter in appeal to the Judicial Committee in P.C.A. Nos. 16 and 17 of 1955. By its judgment dated July 10, 1957 the Judicial Committee affirmed the Judgment of the Supreme Court of Ceylon and dismissed the appeals. In consequence of this decision the Estate Duty Authorities of Ceylon bad to refund a sum of Rs. 7, 97, 072/- as interest payable on the amount of Estate Duty formerly collected. Meanwhile, the litigation in O.S. 93 of 1938 filed in the Subordinate Judge's Court of Devakottai had also reached the Judicial Committee and at that stage the parties compromised. In pursuance of this compromise the two widows of Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) took a boy each in adoption on June 17, 1945, Lakshmi Achi taking in adoption one Arunachalam Chettiar and Nachiar Achi taking in adoption one Ramanathan Chettiar. The widow of Arunachalam Chettiar (junior) Umayal Achi also adopted a son to her deceased husband, a boy called Veerappa Chettiar on June 17, 1945.
4. The estate was divided into three equal shares, Lakshimi Achi and her adopted son taking one-third share Nachiar Achi and her adopted son taking another one-third share, and Umayal Achi and her adopted son Veerappa taking the balance of one-third share.Ramanathan, the adopted son of Arunachalam Chettiar (senior) taken in adoption by Nachiar Achi was assessed to income-tax for the assessment year 1958-59, the relevant previous year being the year ending March 31, 1958. He was assessed in the status of a Hindu undivided family on a total income of Rs. 2, 53, 828/- and a total tax of Rs. 1, 79, 412-12 nP was levied. The assessment included a sum of Rs. 1, 93, 328/- which was received by the assessee as his share of the amount of interest paid by the Estate Duty Authorities of Ceylon consequent to the judgment of the Supreme Court of Ceylon ordering the refund of the amount. The assessee objected to the inclusion of this amount on the ground that it was not a revenue receipt assessable to income-tax and that, in any event, the receipt was of a casual and non-recurring nature falling within the exemption under s. 4(3) (vii) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). The Income tax Officer overruled the objection and his order was affirmed in appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and by the appellate Tribunal. Before the appellate Tribunal the assessee contended that the amount of Rs. 1, 93, 328/- received from the Estate Duty Authorities, Ceylon was not income, but was only damages received for the unlawful retention of money, and even assuming that it was a revenue receipt, it was of a casual and non-recurring nature and, therefore, was not liable to assessment. The contentions of the assessee were over-ruled by the appellate Tribunal. At the instance of the assessee the appellate Tribunal referred the following questions of law to the High Court:
"1. Whether the aforesaid interest receipt constitutes income ?
2. If so, whether it is exempt under s. 4(3) (vii) , of the Income-tax Act as a receipt of a casual and nonrecurring nature ?"
5. The first question to be considered in this appeal is whether the amount of Rs. 1, 93, 328/- received by the assessee as his one-third share of the amount of interest paid by the Estate Duty Authorities of Ceylon can be taxed as income. It was contended on behalf of the appellant. that the amount constituted damages for unlawful retention of money by the Estate Duty Authorities of Ceylon and the amount received by the assessee was therefore, capital receipt. We do not think there is any justification for this argument. The amount was paid by the Ceylon Estate Duty Authorities under the. judgment and decree of the Supreme Court of Ceylon the relevant portion of which reads as follows:
"I would therefore, set aside the order under appeal and substitute a decree (a) declaring that no Estate Duty was -payable under Estate Duty Ordinance (Cap. 187) in respect of the estate of Arunachalam Chettiar (Senior) and (b) ordering the Crown to refund to the appellants the sum of Rs. 7, 00, 402.65 with legal interest thereon from the date on which these proceedings were instituted in the District Court. The appellants are also entitled to -their costs in this court and in the court below"
6. Under the provisions of the Estate Duty Act of Ceylon, as it stood at the material time, any person aggrieved by the assessment of estate duty could appeal to the appropriate District Court naming the Attorney-General as the respondent. After the Attorney-General is served in the matter the appeal is proceeded with as an action between the assessee as plaintiff and the Crown as defendant. The statute specifically provides that the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code and of the Stamp Ordinance shall apply to the proceedings. The petition of appeal should be stamped as though it were a plaint filed for the purpose of originating the action, and if it is not stamped with the requisite stamps it may be dealt with in the same manner as if it is a plaint which is insufficiently stamped. Any party aggrieved by any decree or order of the District Court may further appeal to the Supreme Court in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code. The relevant provision under the Ceylon Civil Procedure Code empowering the Court to award interest is contained in s. 192 of Ordinance 11 of 1889 which is to the following effect:
"When the action is for a sum of money due to the plaintiff, the Court may in the decree order interest according to the rate agreed on between the parties by the instrument sued on, or in the absence of any such agreement at the rate of nine per cent per annum to be paid on the principal sum adjudged from the date of the action to the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum, for any period prior to the institution of the action, with further interest at such rate on the aggregate sum so adjudged from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as the Court thinks fit..........."
7. This provision corresponds to s. 34 of the Civil Procedure Code in India. S. 192 of the Ceylon Ordinance II of 1889 expressly uses the word 'interest' in contrast to 'principal sum adjudged' and we do not see any reason why the expression should not be given the natural meaning it bears. In its judgment dated October 12, 1953, the Supreme Court of Ceylon acted under this section and ordered the Crown to refund to the appellant the sum of Rs. 7, 00, 402.65 with legal interest thereon from the date of the institution of the proceedings in the District Court. We see no warrant for accepting the submission of the appellant that the interest awarded by the Supreme Court of Ceylon under s. 192 of Ordinance 11 of 1889 should be taken to be a capital receipt being in the nature of damages for wrongful retention of money. In Westminster Bank, Ltd. v. Riches,  the question at issue was whether the amount of interest awarded by the Court in exercise of its discretionary power under s. 3 of the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1934 was-'interest of money' within the meaning of Sch. 'D' and General Rule 21 of the Income-tax Act, 1918 and whether income tax was accordingly deductible there from. It was contended in that case on behalf of the respondent that the amount though awarded under a power to add interest to the amount of debt and though called interest in the judgment, was not really interest such as attracts income-tax but was damages.
8. This argument was rejected by the House of Lords and it was held that there was no incompatibility between the two conceptions and that the amount was taxable as interest of money within Sch. 'D' and General Rule 21 of the Income-tax Act, 1918. It was pointed out that the real question in cases of this type was not whether the amount received was interest proper or damages but whether it had the quality of income or it was a capital sum estimated in terms of interest. In the course of his judgment, Lord Wright observed at page 189 of the Report as follows:
"The contention of the Appellant may be summarily stated to be that the award under the Act cannot be held to be interest in the true sense of that word because it is not interest but damages, that is, damages for the detention of a sum of money due by the Respondent to the Appellant, and hence the deduction made as being required under Rule 21 is not justified because the money was not interest. In other words the contention is that money awarded as damages for the detention of money is not interest and has not the quality of interest. Evershed, J., in his admirable judgment rejected that distinction. The Appellant's contention is in any case artificial and is, in my opinion, erroneous, because, the essence of interest is that it is a payment which becomes due because the creditor has not had his money at the due date. It may be regarded either as representing the profit he might have made if he had had the use of the money, or conversely the loss he suffered because he had not that use. The general idea is that he is entitled to compensation for the deprivation. From that point of view it would seem immaterial whether the money was due to him under a contract express or implied, or a statute, or whether the money was due for any other reason in law. In either case the money was due to him and was not paid or, in other words, was withheld from him by the debtor after the time when payment should have been made, in breach of his legal rights, and interest was a compensation, whether the compensation was liquidated under an agreement or statute, as for instance u/s. 57 of the Bills of Exchange Act, 1882, or was unliquidated and claimable under the Act as in the present case. The essential quality of the claim for compensation is the same, and the compensation is properly described as interest."
9. We shall proceed to consider the next question whether the receipt of interest, even if it constituted income, was exempt under s. 4(3) (vii) of the Act as receipt of a casual and non-recurring nature. S. 4(3)(vii) of the Act is in the following terms:
"4. (3). Any income, profits or gains falling within the following classes shall not be included in the total income of the person receiving them:
(vii) Any receipts not being capital gains chargeable according to the provisions of section 12B and not being receipts arising from business or the exercise of a profession vocation or occupation, which are of a casual and non-recurring nature, or are not by way of addition to the remuneration of an employee."
"(i) Subject to or produced by chance; accidental, fortuitous, (ii) Coming at uncertain times; not to be calculated on, unsettled"
10. In other words, the contention of the appellant was that the receipt was a capital receipt and was not assessable in his hands. It is not, however, open to the appellant to advance this argument at this stage because the question did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal and no such question ;was referred by the appellate Tribunal for the decision of the High Court. Mr. A. K. Sen for the appellant also referred to the decision of the Madras High Court in Commissioner of Revenue, Madras v. Veerappa Chettiar 1965 Indlaw MAD 70.) which dealt with a share of the same income by another branch of the family. It was decided by the Madras High , Court in that case that the receipt of interest prior to February 17, 1947 should be regarded as capital and the rest should be regarded:as income receipt. But the question of the disruption of the status of joint family on February 17, 1947 and the effect of that disruption upon the character of the interest receipt was never raised before the appellate Tribunal and was not decided by it in the appeal before us. In Commissioner of Income-tax, Bombay v. Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. ( 1961 Indlaw SC 283 : 1961 Indlaw SC 283.) it was pointed out by this Court that in hearing a reference under s. 66 of the Act the High Court acts purely in an advisory capacity, and it is of the essence of such a jurisdiction that the court can decide only questions which are referred to it and not any other questions. In the present case, the High Court has rightly pointed out that the question did not arise out of the, order of the Tribunal and was not the subject-matter of reference to the High Court.For the reasons already expressed we hold that the judgment of the High Court is right and this appeal must be dismissed with costs. V.P.S. Appeal dismissed.
