1.  This appeal arises out of a suit for the recovery of possession of the house known as Sama Khana and five tiled rooms inside the compound of a dargah at Katalamandi, Hyderabad. The property belongs to Dargah Hazarat Habbeeb Ali Shah Saheb. The dargah while in possession of the property was dispossessed by the defendants long ago. Counsel for the plaintiffs conceded before us that the dargah was dispossessed of the property on or about September 20, 1937, when the defendants filed objections in the course of certain proceedings for enrolment of the property as endowed property under the Hyderabad Endowment Regulations. While the Hyderabad Limitation Act II of 1322 F was in force in Hyderabad, there was no limitation for a suit for recovery of a wakf property. S. 29(c) of the Act applied to suits relating to wakf. By virtue of s. 29(c), a suit for recovery of a wakf property was outside the Act.
2.  On April 1, 1951, the Part B  States (Laws) Act. 1951, came into force and extended the Indian Limitation Act 1908 to Hyderabad, and the corresponding law in force in Hyderabad stood repealed. On February 3, 1956, the mutawalli of the dargah and the Board of Muslim Endowments, Hyderabad, instituted the present suit for recovery of the property from the defendants. The suit was substantially a suit on behalf of the wakf who while in possession of the property had been dispossessed. On the assumption that the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 applies to the suit, prima facie the suit would be governed by art. 142 of that Act and would be barred by limitation. The trial court dismissed the suit on the ground that it was so barred. On appeal, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh held that the suit was governed by the Hyderabad Limitation Act and was not barred by limitation.On this finding the High Court decreed the suit. Some of the defendants now appeal to this Court by special leave.
3.  The High Court held that the application of the Indian Limitation Act 1908 to the suit would bar and confiscate the existing cause of action for the recovery of the suit property, as the Part B  States (Laws) Act. 1951 while extending the Indian Limitation Act to Hyderabad did not allow a reasonable time to the plaintiffs for enforcing the existing cause of action and consequently the Indian Limitation Act could not affect the suit and the suit was governed by the Hyderabad Limitation Act. Now, the Part B  States (Laws) Act. 1951 was passed on February 22, 1951. The Act came into force on April 1, 1951 by virtue of a notification of the Central Government dated March 7, 1951 and published in the gazette on March 10, 1915. It extended to the Part B States the Indian Limitation Act 1908 as amended with the addition of s. 30 which is in these terms:
"30. Provision for States for which the period prescribed is shorter than that prescribed by any law previously in force in. a Part B State. Notwithstanding anything herein contained, any suit for which the period of limitation prescribed by this Act is shorter than the period of limitation prescribed by any law corresponding to this Act in force in a Part B State which is repealed by the Part B States (Laws) Act, 1951, may be instituted within the period of two years next after the coming into force of this Act in that Part B States or within the period prescribed for such suit by such corresponding law, whichever period expires first".
4.  S. 30 should be construed liberally considering that it is intended to alleviate hardship consequential on the introduction' of a shorter period of limitation. Ex-facie, S. 30 applies to a suit for which the period of limitation prescribed by the Indian Limitation Act 1908Part B  States (Laws) Act. 1951 while extending the Indian Limitation Act 1908.
5.  Counsel submitted that the present suit was a suit by or on behalf of the State Government and was therefore governed by art. 149 of the Indian Limitation Act 1908. He submitted that the Board of Muslim Endowments, Hyderabad, which according to him was the Board of Wakfs constituted under the Muslim Wakfs Act, 1954, was an agent of the Central Government. By s. 9(2) of the Muslim Wakfs Act, 1954, the Board of Wakfs is a body corporate and by s. 15 of this Act, the Board is vested with the right of general superintendence of wakfs and is empowered to take measures for the recovery of the lost properties of any wakf and to initiate and defend suits and proceedings relating to wakfs. Counsel submitted that a corporation may be an agent of the State Government, and in support of this contention relied upon Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Ed., Vol. 9, p. 10 Tamlin v. Hannaford ([1950] 1 K.B. 18, and the observations of Shah, J. in State Trading Corporation of India Limited v. The Commercial Tax Officer 1963 AIR(SC) 811). He submitted that the State Government has delegated its functions of superintendence over wakfs to the Board of Wakfs and the Board should therefore be regarded as an agent of the State Government.
6.  We are unable to accept this contention. By the Religious Endowments Act, 1863, the Government divested itself of the management and superintendence of religious endowments which was vested in it under Reg. 19 of 1810 and Regulation 7 of 1817. The Board of Wakfs though subject to the control of the State Government, is a statutory corporation and is vested with statutory powers, functions and duties. The Board has power to hold property and is in control of the wakf fund (ss. 9 and 48). The State Government has no concern with the property vested in the Board save during the period of supersession of the Board under s. 64. Nor is the State Government liable for any expenditure incurred by the Board in connection with the administration under the Act (S. 54).The Board of Wakfs is not discharging a governmental function. The Act nowhere says that the Board would act as the agent of the State Government. It rather indicates that the Board is not the agent of the Government and the Government is not responsible for its acts. We must, therefore, hold that the Board of Wakfs is not an agent of the State Government and a suit instituted by it for the recovery of a wakf property is not a suit by or on behalf of the State Government.
7.  Counsel next submitted that the mutawalli is the agent of the State Government and that in any event the limitation for a suit by the mutawalli starts on the date of his appointment. In support of this contention counsel relied upon the decision in Jewun Doss Sahoo v. Shah Kubeer-ood Deen, ( 2 Moo.1.A. 390 at p.222) where the Privy Council held that under the law then in force it was the duty of the Government to protect endowments and the mutawalli in that case was the procurator of the Government and his right to sue arose on his being appointed mutawalli. This ruling of the Privy Council was given under Regulation 19 of 1810. Since the passing of the Religious Endowments Act, 1863, the mutawalli cannot be regarded as a procurator of the Government. He is not appointed by the Government, nor does he manage the endowment on its behalf and a suit by him for the recovery of the wakf property cannot now be regarded as a suit on its behalf, see Shaikh Laul Mahomed v. Lalla Brij Kishore (17 Weekly Reporter Sutherland) 430.) and Behari Lal &Ors. v. Muhammad Muttaki (I.L.R 20 All 482, 488). If the wakf while in possession of its property is dispossessed, it has an immediate right to sue for recovery of the property and the limitation for the suit begins to run.
8.  On his appointment, the mutawalli acquires no new right of suit and his appointment does not give him a fresh starting point of limitation for the recovery of the property. The suit, therefore, is not by or on behalf of the State Government and art. 149 has no application. The suit is governed by art. 142. The date of dispossession of the wakf is the starting point of limitation under this article. It was suggested that as limitation did not run under the Hyderabad Limitation Act, the date when the Indian Limitation Act 1908
9.  In the result the appeal is allowed. The decree of the High Court is set aside and the decree of the trial court is restored. The suit is dismissed. There will be no order as the costs of this appeal.
Appeal allowed.
