1.  These appeals are brought, by certificate, from the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court dated November 18, 1963, in Writ Petitions Nos. 757, 758, 761, 762, 763, 775 and 776 of 1961. The appellant (hereinafter called "the assessee") is an individual carrying on business in distribution and exhibition of cinema films. The assessee owns a cinema theatre called the New Talkies at Nellore. The original assessments of the assessee's income for the years 1943-44 to 1949-50 were completed during 1944 to 1950.
2. In the course of assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1957-58, the Income-tax Officer found that the assessee had a current account in the Imperial Bank of India in the name of his father-in-law till the latter's death. This fact came to the notice of the Income-tax Officer when the assessee was asked to explain a cash credit of Rs. 40,000 found in the assessment year 1950-51.
3.  Similarly, a sum of Rs. 70,000 was advanced by the assessee to Jagamani Pictures on January 9, 1946, which the assessee failed to disclose in the course of the assessment proceedings for the relevant assessment year. When later on Jagamani Pictures could not meet this debt the assessee got their distribution right in lieu of the amount advanced and exploited the films. It was also detected by the Income-tax Officer that in the relevant returns the assessee had not shown income from property in the names of his sons, wife and daughter, though many of the properties were purchased by him in their names. The Income-tax Officer had therefore reason to believe that, by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and trully all the basic and material facts necessary for the assessment for those years, income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment or was under-assessed. After obtaining the requisite permission from the Central Board of Revenue, the Income-tax Officer issued notices dated September 5, 1959, u/s. 34(1)(a) of the Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter called "the Act") to reopen the assessment for the assessment years 1943-44 to 1949-50. The assessee raised an objection to the issue of the notices on the ground that the proceedings were barred by limitation and the Income-tax Officer was seeking to revise assessments merely on a change of opinion.
4.  Thereafter, the Income-tax Officer wrote a letter to the assessee dated November 16, 1959, wherein he gave details of the cash credits for which he required explanation as well as the properties whose incomes should be assessed in his hands. After exchange of some correspondence, the assessee moved the High Court of Andhra Pradesh for grant of a writ u/art. 226 of the Constitution directing the Income-tax Officer to forbear from proceeding further in pursuance of the notices issued u/s. 34(1)(a) of the Act. By its judgment dated November 18, 1963, the High Court dismissed the writ petitions holding that the notices issued after March 31, 1956, were not barred by time and there was material before the Income-tax Officer which justified his belief that the income chargeable to tax had escaped assessmentIt is convenient to set out at this stage the material provisions of s. 34 of the Act as amended by the Finance Act, 1956
"34. (1)--
If (a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part of an assessee to make a return of his income u/s. 22 for any year or to disclose fully and truly all material facts, necessary for his assessment for that year, income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax have escaped assessment for that year, or have been under-assessed, or assessed at too low a rate, or have been made the subject of excessive relief under the Act, or excessive loss or depreciation allowance has been computed ...... he may in cases falling u/cl. (a) at any time ...... serve on the assessee ... a notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under sub-s. (2) of s. 22 and may proceed to assess or reassess such income, profits or gains or recompute the loss or depreciation allowance ; and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under that sub-section.
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue a notice u/cl. (a) of sub-section (1)--
(i) for any year prior to the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1941 ;
(ii) for any year, if eight years have elapsed after the expiry of that year, unless the income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax which have escaped assessment or have been under-assessed or assessed at too low a rate or have been made the subject of excessive relief under this Act, or the loss or depreciation allowance which has been computed in excess, amount to, or are likely to amount to, one lakh of rupees or more in the aggregate, either for that year, or for that year and any other year or years after which or after each of which eight years have elapsed, not being a year or years ending before the 31st day of March, 1941 ;
(iii) for any year, unless he has recorded his reasons for doing so, and, in any case falling under clause (ii), unless the Central Board of Revenue, and, in any other case, the Commissioner, is satisfied on such reasons recorded that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice
(1A) If, in the case of any assessee, the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe--
(i) that income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax have escaped assessment for any year in respect of which the relevant previous year falls wholly or partly within the period beginning on the 1st day of September, 1939, and ending on the 31st day of March, 1946 ; and
(ii) that the income, profits or gains which have so escaped assessment for any such year or years, amount, or are likely to amount, to one lakh of rupees or more ;
he may, notwithstanding that the period of eight years or, as the case may be, four years specified in sub-s. (1) has expired in respect thereof, serve on the assessee ... a notice containing all or any of the requirements which may be included in a notice under sub-s. (2) of section 22, and may proceed to assess or reassess the income, profits or gains of the assessee, for all or any of the years referred to in clause (i), and thereupon the provisions of this Act (excepting those contained in cls. (i) and (iii) of the proviso to sub-s. (1) and in sub-ss. (2) and (3) of this section) shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly
Provided that the Income-tax Officer shall not issue a notice under this sub-section unless he has recorded his reasons for doing so, and the Central Board of Revenue is satisfied on such reasons recorded that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice.
Provided further that no such notice shall be issued af ter the 31st day of March, 1956."
5.  The first question raised in these appeals is whether the proceedings for reassessment for the assessment years 1943-44 to 1946-47 are barred by limitation u/s. 34(1A) of the Act since the notices were issued after March 31, 1956. It was conceded by Mr. S. T. Desai on behalf of the appellant that this question is concluded by the decision of this court in Commissioner of Income-tax v. Shahzada Nand and Sons, in which it was held that notice can be issued u/s. 34(i)(a) of the Indian Income-Tax Act, 1922, as amended by the Finance Act, 1956
6.  Even if it may be assumed that, from the books produced, the Income-tax Officer, if he had been circumspect, could have found out the truth, he is not on that account precluded from exercising the power to assess income which had escaped assessment. Shah J., speaking for the court, observed as follows:
"The Income-tax Officer had, therefore, prima facie, reason to believe that information material to the assessment had been withheld, and that on account of withholding of that information income liable to tax had escaped assessment. From the mere production of the books of account it cannot be inferred that there had been full discloure of the material facts necessary for the purpose of assessment. The terms of the explanation are too plain to permit an argument being reasonably advanced, that the duty of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts is discharged when he produces the books of account or other evidence which has a material bearing on the assessment. It is clearly implicit in the terms of ss. 23 and 34 of the Income-Tax Act that the assessee is under a duty to disclose fully and truly material facts necessary for the assessment of the year, and that the duty is not discharged merely by the production of the books of account or other evidence. It is the duty of the assessee to bring to the notice of the Income-tax Officer particular items in the books of account or portions of documents which are relevant. Even if it if be assumed that from the books produced, the Income-tax Officer, if he had been circumspect, could have found out the truth, the Income-tax Officer may not on that account be precluded from exercising the power to assess income which had escaped assessment."
7.  For the reasons expressed we hold that there is no merit in these, appeals which are accordingly dismissed with costs.
Appeals dismissed.
