1.  This is an appeal by special leave from a judgment of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh dated July 2, 1964, in Writ Appeal No. 25 of 1963 whereby the judgment of the learned single judge allowing a petition u/art. 226 of the Constitution was confirmed The facts briefly are these. H. E. H. the Nizam of Hyderabad had, by a deed of trust dated August 6, 1950, created a trust known as "H. E. H. the Nizam's Miscellaneous Trust" for the benefit of his family and dependants. One of the beneficiaries was Sahebzadi Ghousunnisa Begum, a stepsister of the Nizam, to whom an annuity of Rs. 12, 000 had to be given. She died on November 10, 1955. The property passing on her death became, liable to estate duty under the Estate Duty Act, 1953 (XXXIV of 1953), hereinafter called "the Act". The trust fund consisted of three, items one of which was a loan deposited with the Government of Hyderabad bearing interest at 1 1/4%.
2. The main dispute before the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty related to the correct valuation of the aforesaid loan. He valued it at Rs. 2, 01, 30, 000 and, after making the other necessary calculations, the net market value of the estate of the deceased was assessed at Rs. 6, 61, 347 on which demand was created at Rs. 83, 519.40. The trustees preferred an appeal before the Central Board of Revenue disputing the correctness of the valuation of the estate of the deceased (Begum) made by the Assistant Controller. The Board of Revenue in its order dated August 6, 1959, expressed the view that the securities in question had not been overvalued but had been undervalued. According to the Board the correct valuation should have been Rs. 3, 06, 83, 760 ; in other words, its opinion was that the face value of the securities being Rs. 4.5 crores, the market value should have been at the rate of 78% whereas the basis adopted by the Assistant Controller came to 52%. He proceeded to say towards the concluding portion of his order:
"However I find that there is some force in the argument advanced by the appellant's representative against any enhancement being made by the Board in appeal proceedings. I refrain therefore from making the proposed enhancement in the value of the securities and confirm the value adopted by the Assistant ControllerThe Act was amended by the Estate Duty (Amendment) Act, 1958, hereinafter called "the amendment Act." By s. 21 of the amendment Act, ss. 56 to 65 of the principal Act were substituted by the new sections. The new s. 59 for the first time gave power to the Controller of Estate Duty to assess or reassess property escaping assessment. It is common ground that the amendment Act came into force on July, 1 1960. The Assistant Controller issued a notice on August 12, 1960, to the trustees in exercise of the powers conferred by the new s. 59 of the Act. In that notice it was stated that he had reasons to believe that property chargeable under the Act to estate duty had escaped assessment by reason of undervaluation and, therefore, a statement of account was called for in respect of the market value of the securities of Rs. 4.5 crores. On September 20, 1960, the present respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity and legality of the notice issued under s. 59 of the Act and praying that it be quashed. In the writ petition two main points were raised: the first was that s. 59 had been introduced by the Amendment Act and it could not be made applicable to assessments which had become final before July 1, 1960, the date on which the amendment Act came into force. Secondly, the conditions laid down in s. 59 had not been fulfilled. It had not been stated what information had been received or was in the possession of the Assistant Controller in consequence of which he had reason to believe that property had been undervalued. It was contended that mere change of opinion would not justify the reopening of assessment. The present appellant in the return filed to the writ petition in the High Court claimed that s. 59 as introduced by the Amendment Act was applicable and that the Central Board of Revenue had expressed the opinion that the correct value of the securities should be 78% of the face value as against 52% as adopted in the assessment order and the appellate order had been received on August 15, 1959, and therefore, the appellant was fully justified in issuing the notice as he had reason to believe by virtue of information which had come into his possession that the securities had been undervalued. The learned single judge hold that the appellant had no jurisdiction under section 59, as newly introduced by the Amendment Act, to reopen a matter which had been completed and which had became final before July 1, 1960. On the second point he was of the view that the opinion of the Central Board of Revenue did not amount to "information" within the meaning of s. 59(b) of the Act. The writ petition, Consequently, was allowed. The appellant preferred an appeal u/cl. 15 of the Letters Patent which was disposed of by a Division Bench on July 2, 1964. The Bench did not decide the first point, namely, whether s. 59 as newly introduced by the Amendment Act was applicable or not and rested its decision on the second point. It was held that a mere expression of opinion by the Central Board of Revenue did not amount to "information" within the meaning of s. 59(b) of the ActThe learned Solicitor-General has argued on behalf of the appellant that the decision of the High Court on the second point was erroneous. According to him any matter of fact or law which may come to the notice of the appellant after the making of assessment including a finding by a higher authority would be "information" for the purpose and within the meaning of s. 59. It is urged that the appellant bad not taken action on mere change of his opinion. The predecessor in office of the appellant had adopted a wrong mode of valuation and the opinion expressed by the Central Board of Revenue about the correct mode was "information" which led to the appellant entertaining a reasonable belief that the property assessed to estate duty had been undervalued. Reliance has been placed on a number of decisions in which the meaning of the word "information" in parallel provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1922, and other enactments came up for consideration. In Maharaj Kumar Kamal Singh v. Commissioner of Income-tax, it was held that the word "information" in s. 34(1)(b) included information as to the true and correct state of law, and so would cover information as to relevant judicial decisions. The following observation may be reproduced with advantage"
3.  If the word ' information ' used in any other provision of the Act denotes information as to facts or particulars, that would not necessarily determine the meaning of the said word in s. 34(1)(b). The denotation of the said word would naturally depend on the context of the particular provisions in which it is used. It is then contended that sections 33B and 35 confer ample powers on the specified authorities to revise the Income-tax Officer's orders and to rectify mistakes respectively and so it would be legitimate to construe the word ' information ' in s. 34(1)(b) strictly and to confine it to information in regard to facts or particulars. This argument also is not valid. If the word ' information ' in its plain grammatical meaning includes information as to facts as well as information as to the state of the law, it would be unreasonable to limit to information as to the facts on the extraneous consideration that some cases of assessment which need to be revised or rectified on the ground of mistake of law may conceivably be covered by sections 33B and 35In Commissioner of Income-tax v. A. Raman & Co., it was said that the expression "information" in the context of s. 147(b) of the Income-tax Act, 1961
4. The Division Bench did not decide the first point which related to the applicability of s. 59 to assessments completed before the amendment Act came into force. This matter will have to go back for decision of that question.
5.  The appeal is allowed and the order of the High Court is set aside. The case is remanded to the High Court for disposal in accordance with law. Costs shall be costs in the High Court.
Appeal allowed.
