Orient Paper Mills Limited v Union of India
Supreme Court of India

5 October 1968
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  Order No.1298, dated April 28, 1956 issued under Section 43-A of the Motor Vehicles Act,1939, whereunder certain directions were given to the Transpsort Authorities in the discharge of their quasi-judicial functions. The G.O. in question was struck down by this Court. In the course of the judgment, Gajendragadkar,J., speaking for the Court, observed thus:- :In reaching this conclusion, we have been influenced by certain other considerations which are both relevant and material. In interpreting Section 43-A we think, it would be legitimate to assume that the legislature intended to respect the basic and elementary postulate of the rule of law, that in exercising their authority and in discharging their quasi-judicial function, the tribunals constituted under the Act must be left absolutely free to deal with the matter according to their best judgment. It is of the essence of fair and objective administration of law that the decision of the Judge or the Tribunal must be absolutely unfettered by any extraneous guidance by the executive or administrative wing of the State. If the exercise of discretion conferred on a quasi-judicial tribunal is controlled by any such direction, that forges fetters on the exercise of quasi-judicial authority and the presence of such fetters would make the exercise of such authority completely inconsistent wit h the well accepted notion of judicial process.
2.  It is true that law can regulate the exercise of judicial powers. It may indicate by specific provisions on what matters tribunals constituted by it should adjudicate. It may be specific provisions lay down the principles which have to be followed by the tribunals in dealing with the said matters. The scope of the jurisdiction of the tribunals constituted by statute can well be regulated by the statute and principles for guidance of the said tribunals may also be prescribed subject of course to the inevitable requirement that these provisions do not contravene the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. But what law and the provisions of law may legitimately do cannot be permitted to be done by administrative or executive orders. This position is so well established that we are reluctant to hold that in enacting Section 43- A the Madras Legislature intended to confer power on the State Government to invade the domain of the ex ercise of judicial power.
3.  In fact, if such had been the intention of the Madras Legislature and had been the true effect of the provisions of Section 43-A, Section 43-A itself would amount to an unreasonable contravention of fundamental rights of citizens and may have to be struck down as unconstitutional. That is why the Madras High Court dealing with the validity of Section 43-A had expressly observed that what Section 43-A purported to do was to cloth the Government with authority to issue directions of an administrative character and nothing more. It is somewhat unfortunate that though judicial decisions have always emphasised this aspect of the matter, occasion did not arise so long to consider the validity of the Government order which on the construction suggested by the respondent would clearly invade the domain of quasi-judicial administration.
"11. The rule laid down in the above decisions is fully applicable to the facts of this case. It is obvious as well as admitted that both the Collector and the Central Government proceeded on the basis that the direction given by the Board was decisive of the matter. The revision applications filed before the Government were heard and decided by one of the members of the Board. He appears to have proceeded on the basis that in view of the directions given by the Board nothing more need be said as to the point in dispute. It is regrettable that when administrative officers are entrusted with quasi-judicial functions, of ten times they are unable to keep aside administrative considerations while discharging quasi-judicial functions. This Court as well as the High Courts have repeatedly tried to impress upon them that their two functions are separate; while functioning as quasi-judicial officers they should not allow their judgments to be influenced by administrative considerations or by the instructions or directions given by their superiors. In this case both the Collector as well as the Central Government have ignored the line that demarcates their administrative duties and their judicial functions. Dr. Syed Mohammed did not try to justify the directions given by the Board nor did he contend that that direction has any force of law. On the other hand, his main codntention was that the grounds urged before this Court were not at all taken before the Collector and the Central Government and therefore the appellant should not be permitted to take those grounds in this Court. We do not think that Dr. Syed Mohammed is right in his contention. Before the Central Government the appellant had definitely contended that no copy of the report relating to chemical examination of "M G. Poster paper" had been given to the appellant and therefore the same could not have been taken into consideration. At that stage the appellant could not have known that the statement of the Collector relating to chemical examination of "M.G. Poster paper" was incorrect. As regard the validity of the direction given by the Board, it is clear from the notes of argument maintained by the member of the Board wh o heard the revision applications that that contention had been taken before him, though not in the form in which it was presented before this Court. This is what we get from the notes maintained by him:- "The matter (as to whether" M. G. Poster paper"
is `printing and writing paper' or `packing and wrapping paper') was red-examined in detail, in consultation with all the concerned authorities, viz., the Ministry of Commerce and Industries, the Indian Standards Institution and the Chief Chemist. The views of Collectors of Central Excise as well as those of Collectors were also invited. Ultimately it was re- affirmed vide the Boards' letter No.F. No.21/36/61/CXIV dated November 6,1961, that poster paper was correctly assessable as `packing and wrapping paper' and should continue to be assessed as such. F.M.'s approval was also secured before confirming this position. This therefore should settle the main issue regarding the classification of the poster paper". From these notes it is clear that at any rate the correctness of the direction issued by the Board was put in issue during the hearing of the revision applications. That apart, we are clearly of the opinion that even if the question of the legality of the directions issued by the Board had not been taken before the authorities under the Act, as that direction completely vitiates the proceedings and makes a mockery of the judicial process, we think we ought to consider the legality of that direction.
4.  For the reasons already mentioned, we hold that direction was invalid and the same has vitiated the proceedings dbefore the Collector as well as the Government.
5.  Both the appellant as well as the Revenue invited us to decide the case on the basis of the material on record. Ordinarily this Court does not go into questions of fact. That is the duty of the authorities under the Act. We see no exceptional circumstances in this case requiring us to deviate from the ordinary rule.
6.  For the reasons mentioned above these appeals are allowed and the orders of the Central Government as well as that of the Collector are set aside, and the proceedings remitted to the Collector for deciding the question whether "M.G. Poster paper" should be assessed as "printing and writing paper" or as "packing and wrapping paper" afresh. The respondents shall pay the costs of the appellant in all theser appeals; hearing fee one set. ".G. oster paper". Upto February28,1961, the date on
Appeal allowed.
