Banaras State Bank Limited v Commissioner of Income Tax, Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

13 August 1968
The Judgment was delivered by: SHAH, J.
1.  Two questions were referred by the Tribunal to the High Court of Allahabad u/s. 66(1) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. We are concerned with the first question alone, because the second has been answered in favour of the assessee and no appeal has been filed by the revenue against the decision on that question. The question which was decided against the assessee reads as follows:
"Whether the interest on securities issued by the erstwhile Indian States of Travancore and Cochin is assessable u/s. 8 of the Act or u/s. 12 of the Act ?"
2.  There is no dispute that the securities held by the appellant bank were issued by the Indian States of Travancore and Cochin some time before August 15, 1947. The securities were "tax free". U/s. 8 of the Income-tax Act, 1922, the tax shall be payable by an assessee under the head "Interest on securities" in respect of the interest receivable by him on any security of the Central Government or of the State Government or on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on behalf of a local authority or a company. The third proviso to that section provides
"Provided further that the income-tax payable on the interest receivable on any security of a State Government issued income-tax free shall be payable by the State Government."
3.  The appellant-bank contended that the securities of the Indian State of Travancore and Cochin were State Government securities and relied upon the definition of State Government in s. 3(60) of the General Clauses Act. The High Court rejected the contention holding that the securities were "Government securities" within the meaning of s. 3(24) of the General Clauses Act and, on the express terms of that clause, Government securities did not include securities of the Government of any Part B State where reference was made in any Act or Regulation before the commencement of the Constitution to such securities. But s. 8 does not use the expression "Government securities". It uses the expression "securities of the State Government" and there is no reason to substitute in a taxing statute an expression which the legislature has used by another expression which it has not used.
4. The question is covered by a judgment of this court in Commissioner of Income-tax v. H. E. H. Mir Osman Ali Bahadur, where this court held, in dealing with the claim of an assessee to exemption from liability to pay tax in respect of the Hyderabad State Securities issued before the Constitution was enacted, that the assessee was entitled under section 8, third proviso, to exemption from tax on interest on those securities.
5.  The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the answer recorded by the High Court on the first question discharged. The answer to the first question will be that the securities issued by the Indian State of Travancore and Cochin were assessable u/s. 8 of the Income-tax Act, 1922. The Commissioner will pay the costs of the appellant-bank in this court and in the High Court.
Appeal allowed.
