Raja Bahadur S. A. N. M. H. Mohapatra (Dead) By L.R.S v Bidyadhar Nayak
Supreme Court of India

17 February 1969
C.A. No. 278 of 1966 decided on 17 February 1969.
The Judgment was delivered by: SIKRI, J.
1. This appeal by special leave is directed against the jugdment and order of the High Court of Orissa in the appeal filed by Raja Bahadur S.A.N.M.H. Mohapatra, since deceased, ex-Ruler of the erstwhile State of Narasinghpur, hereinafter referred to as the original appellant, u/s. 44 of the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1951, hereinafter referred to as the Act.
2. The appeal to the High Court arose out of the proceedings started u/s. 41 of the Act at the instance of Bidyadhar Nayak, respondent before us, for a declaration that the institutions, numbering 67, were public religious endowments. The original appellant filed objections and his plea was that most of these institutions were his private institutions. In the alternative he prayed that he be declared as a 'hereditary trustee' as defined under the Act. Before the High Court the appellant did not contest the findings of the Assistant Commissioner of Endowments and the Commissioner of Endowments that they were public institutions. We may mention that the learned counsel for the appellant tried to resuscitate this point but we did not allow him to raise this question.
3. The only question which the High Court had then to deal with was whether the original appellant ought to have been declared as a hereditary trustee within the meaning of the words 'hereditary trustee' under the Act.
4.  The learned counsel for the appellant urges that the High Court has dealt with the appeal under a misapprehension as to its powers and duties u/s. 44 of the Act, and complains that the High Court has not dealt with questions of fact as a court of appeal.S. 44 reads thus :
"44 (1) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the Assistant Commissioner u/s. 41 of sub-ss. (1) and (6) of S. 42 or S. 43 may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the order u/s. 41 or S. 43 or from the date of the publication of the order under Section 42, as the case may be, appeal to the Commissioner.(2) Any party aggrieved by the order of the Commissioner under sub-s. (1) or under sub-s. (1) or (6) of S. 42 may appeal to the High Court within thirty days from the date of the order or publication thereof as the case may be"
5.  In our opinion it does seem as if the High Court misunderstood its powers and duties u/s. 44 of the Act. It was urged before this Court in Sri Sadasib Prakash Brahmachari v. The State of Orissa (1956 Indlaw SC 111) that "a mere right to appeal to the High Court would virtually be in the nature of a limited appeal confined to challenge only on certain basic matters and probably limited to questions of law.
"Jagannadhadas, J., speaking for the Court, repelled this contention in the following words :
"
If this is the scope of the appeal it is quite apparent from the judgment of the High Court that it did not discharge its duties u/s. 44 of the Act, for the High Court observed :"
6.  It may be that the findings of the Assistant Commissioner of Endowments and the Commissioner of Endowments could not be successfully challenged even after going through the evidence, but the High Court must first consider the evidence and come to its own conclusions.
7.  In view of our conclusion we must set aside the judgment of the High Court and remit the case to it to dispose of it in accordance with law. Costs in the appeal will be costs in the cause.
Order accordingly.
