1. M/s. Modi Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd., hereinafter called "the company", was incorporated in 1946. From time to time the company purchased and installed machinery of the value of Rs. 75 lakhs for its factory. In proceedings for assessment of income-tax, the company was allowed in computing its income from business for the assessment years 1950-51, 1951-52 and 1952-53 "initial depreciation" aggregating to Rs. 15, 91, 511 in respect of new machinery installed in the relevant previous years. The company was also allowed "normal depreciation" at the appropriate rates. In the assessment year 1956-57 the aggregate of all depreciation allowances including "initial depreciation" exceeded the original cost of the machinery, but the Income-tax Officer, on the written down value of the machinery computed at Rs. 16, 48, 053, allowed Rs. 2, 59, 236 as normal depreciation. In so computing the normal depreciation, the Income-tax Officer apparently lost sight of cl. (c) of the proviso to s. 10(2)(vi) of the Income-tax Act, 1922. Depreciation allowance was also allowed in the assessment years 1957-58 and 1958-59 as a percentage on the appropriate written down value in those years. The Income-tax Officer on November 26, 1964, issued notices of reassessment for the three years tinder s. 148 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1961
"by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment of that year"
2. By cl. (vi) of sub-s. (2) of s. 10 of the Income-tax Act, 1922, as amended by Act No. 8 of 1946, in computing the profits or gains of business, profession or vocation carried on by him, an assessee was entitled to allowances not only of normal depreciation but also initial depreciation at the rates set out in clauses (a), (b) and (e) in respect of buildings which had been newly erected, or the machinery or plant being new had been installed after the 31st day of March, 1945. It was, however, expressly enacted that the initial depreciation was not deductible in determining the written down value for the purpose of clause (vi). Allowance for initial depreciation was therefore not to be taken into account in determining the written down value for determining the normal depreciation. But on that account proviso (c) to s. 10(2)(vi) was not modified
3. The written down value of the machinery of the company in the year 1956-57 was Rs. 16, 48, 053, but for the application of cl. (c) of the proviso to s. 10(2)(vi), the initial depreciation allowed in the years 1950-51, 1951-52 and 1952-53 had to be take into account. The Income-tax Officer inadvertently failed to be taken into account the initial depreciation, and the company was allowed normal depreciation in the year 1956-57 in excess of the amount permissible under proviso (c) to s. 10(2)(vi). The Income-tax Officer later sought to rectify the error and to bring to tax the income which had escaped taxBefore R. S. Pathak J., it was contented that the definition of "written down value" in s. 10(5)(b) applies wherever the expression is used ill s. 10(2) and on that account the company in setting out the written down value in column (2) of Part V of the return was obliged to take into account all the depreciation actually allowed to it including the initial depreciation and as the company computed the written value only by deducting the normal depreciation and not the initial depreciation, it failed to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for the purpose of assessment. This argument was not accepted by the learned judge. But he was still of the opinion that the Act imposed upon the company a duty to disclose all material facts which went to show the true amount of the allowances to which it was entitled, and the company by failing to disclose that initial depreciation had been allowed in three earlier years, had failed to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment, and on that account s. 147(1)(a) was attracted and the notice was properly issued
4. In appeal, the High Court observed that the "only question for consideration" was whether the Income-tax Officer was justified in issuing a notice under s. 148 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. After stating that there was apparently
"a mistake and error on the side of the company as well as the Income-tax Officer"
"It is difficult to hold that the Income-tax Officer while issuing the notices under s. 148 of the new Act could not reasonably hold the view that prima facie the assessee was responsible for the escape in the assessment"
"(1) If--
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part of an assessee to make a return of his income u/s. 22 for any year or to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for that year, income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax have escaped assessment for that year, or have been under assessed, or assessed at too low a rate, or have been made the subject of excessive relief under the Act, or excessive loss or depreciation allowance has been computed, or
he may proceed to assess or reassess such income, profits or gains or re-compute the loss or depreciation allowance ; and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply accordingly as if the notice were a notice issued under that sub-section : ........"
5. S. 34 confers jurisdiction upon the Income-tax Officer to issue a notice in respect of the beyond the period of four years, but within a period of eight years, from the end of the relevant year, if two conditions exist-- (1) that the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax had been under-assessed ; and (2) that he has also reason to believe that such "under-assessment" had occurred by reason of either (i) omission or failure on the part of an assessee to make a return of his income under section 22, or (ii) omission or failure on the part of an assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for that year. These conditions are cumulative and precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction to issue a notice of reassessment : Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer, Companies District I, CalcuttaIn deciding the appeal, the High Court held that the Income-tax Officer did in fact decide that the income had escaped assessment, but the High Court did not consider whether the income escaped assessment by reason of omission or failure on the part of the company to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment
6. The judgment of the High Court is set aside and the case is remanded for determination of the question whether by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the company to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessement of the company for the three years in question, any income, profits or gains chargeable to income-tax have escaped assessment or the company has been given excessive depreciation allowance in computing its income
7. Costs of these appeals will be costs in the High Court. One hearing fee
Appeals allowed. Case remanded
