Nanak Chand and Another v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

21 January 1970
Cr.As. No. 44 and 45 of 1969.
The Judgment was delivered by: JAGANMOHAN REDDY, J.
1.  These two appeals are by special leave against the judgment and order of the High Court of Allahabad confirming the death sentence of Madan Patel under Section 302, I.P.C. but setting aside his conviction u/s. 148 and also acquitting Nanak Chand of his conviction u/s. 148 but confirming his conviction  under weighed at the time of granting special leave was the averment that the orders of the Bench of the High Court of Allahabad having granted three applications by the accused for additional evidence by summoning and examining certain witnesses were completely ignored by the next Bench, that finally heard and disposed of the appeals;
otherwise there was a concurrent finding by both the Sessions Judge, Agra and the High Court which would not have entitled the appellants for the grant of special leave. But Mr. Nuruddin Ahmed learned counsel for Madan Patel and Mr. S. P. Sinha for the appellant Nanak Chand have however urged before us that the grant of special leave would entitle them to urge that the conviction cannot be sustained on the evidence. Before we deal with these points we may state the case against the accused briefly. It appears that on April 7, 1967 a meeting of the Executive Committee of Anterang Sabha of the Arya Samaj was to take place at 8.30 p.m. in the Navin Hall in the Free Gunj Mohalla in the City of Agra. There had been an election in February, 1967 at which Anand Sharma, Nanak Chand, Satyanarain and Ram Autar, four of the accused amongst other, did not participate.
2.  Chandra Dutt Tewari, the Secretary of the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha of Lucknow intervened in March, 1967, and reconstituted the Executive Committee making Anand Sharma the Vice-president, Nanak Chand a member and Ram Autar, the auditor. Certain persons who had been elected including the deceased Sureshchand Bansal, Rajendra Prasad Singh, P.W. 3 and Puranchand Bharadwaj, P.W. 4, were excluded from the reconstituted committee. Thereafter Dharmpal Vidyarthi, P.W. 12 made representations to Chandradatt Tewari, P.W. 9, to co-opt four more members which request sanctioned. P.W. 12 then called a meeting for 7th April to co-opt the members and circulated an agenda. Accused 2 and 3 objected to the co-option. Rajendra Parshad Singhal, P.W. 3, Pooran Chand Bharadwaj, P.W. 4 and Bhagwan Swarup, P.W. 1, were the special invites to this meeting. On the date of the meeting all the six accused are alleged to have asserted that the meting will not be held while other present asserted equally that they will hold the meeting. This led to excitement and confrontation between the rival factions. Among the persons who were remonstrating with the accused on the brick platform outside the hall that the meeting be held was P.W. 1. In the course of this altercation it is alleged that accused 6, Kedar Nath and Satya Narain, accused 5, seized Suresh Chandra Bansal, deceased, by the arms while Madan Patel drew out a knife and plunged it into his chest. Similarly, accused 2, Anand Sharma and accused 1, Ram Autar Sharma, held Bhagwan Swarup P.W. 1 while Nanak Chand Sharma, accused 3, took out a knife and tried to stab him in the chest but he twisted round with the result that the blow struck the upper part of his arm, piercing it right through.
3.  There-after all the accused ran away. P.W. 1 was taken to the emergency ward of the S.N. Hospital for treatment and his brother Anand Swaroop was picked up from his shop on the way. He was medically examined at 9.10 p.m. Suresh Chandra Bansal who had collapsed on the ground was taken off to the District Hospital by Rajendra Prasad, P.W. 3, but by the time he reached there at 9.40 p.m. he was dead. It may not be out of place here to say that when the faction were altercating at the time when the meting was to be held P.W. 12 immediately informed the flying squad who seem to have arrived at the spot. A report about the incident, was alleged, dictated by Bhagwat Swaroop in the S.N. Hospital to Suresh Chander Gupta who however has not been examined. The post-mortem report of the deceased is Ex. Ka-22 and the injury report is Ex. Ka-21. It was revealed in the post-mortem report that the deceased died of shock and haemorrhage as a result of stab wound 1 1/2"X 1/2" on the front of the chest which pierced his left lung and heart. Bhagwat Swarup's injuries were penetrating wounds on the posterior and lateral aspect of the upper portion of the left arm measuring 2"X 1" X 5
"deep communicating with an exit wound on the medical side of the arm measuring 1/2"X 1/2" together with another wound measuring 1/2"X 1/2" X 1/2"
4.  The defence was a denial and it was particularly urged before us that Accused 4 was not even a member of the Arya Samaj and could not have been present there and therefore the case a foisted one. The Sessions Judge while convicting Accused 1, 2, 5 and 6 u/s. 147 I.P.C. sentenced them to one year's rigorous imprisonment each but acquitted them of the charges under Section 302/149 and 307/149 I.P.C. Accused 4 was convicted u/s. 302 read with S. 148 and he was awarded the sentence of death u/s. 302 while accused No. 3 was convicted u/ss. 148 and 307 and was awarded five year's rigorous imprisonment for the latter offence. In appeal, as we have already observed, Accused 3 and 4 were acquitted of offences u/s. 148 while the death sentence on Accused 4 Madan Patel as well as the sentence of imprisonment on Accused 3, Nanak Chand, were confirmed. The other accused who were convicted u/s. 148 were acquitted and the State appeal against their acquittal under Sections 302/149 and 307/149 was dismissed. The appeal to the High Court was heard in part on May 21, 1968 but without any further hearing on the day of following, it was directed to be heard afresh on the re-opening of the Courts after the vacation. It appears that on the 23rd May before the same Division Bench three applications were prayed that permission be given to the appellant to take photographs of the different signatures (admitted and disputed) of Suresh Chander Bansal, deceased, on the agenda register Ex. Ka-3 and the signatures be sent to an expert to find out their genuineness.
5.  On this the Court gave permission to the applicant to take photographs of the signatures of the deceased on the Agenda Register as prayed for but the admissibility of any photographs taken or report obtained, it attempted to be field in court, was to be considered by the Court at the time of filing. By the second application a prayer was made that summons for examination of : (1) Suresh Chander Gupta, scribe of the report dated 7th April, 1967; (2) Dr. S. S. Agarawal, P.W. 13 along with the Bed-Head-Ticket, Madicolegal Register and memo book of the relevant period; (3) Investing Officers Ram Singh and Tej Pal Singh along with the General Diary of Police Station of Hariparwat, Agra from 7-4-67 to 9-4-67 and Police Station Kotawali, Agra from 7-4-67 to 8-4-67; (4) Dr. R. R. Dixit, Medical Officer, S.N. Hospital alleged to have granted a certificate in respect of the condition of Bhagwat Swarup Arya at the time of recording of the dying declaration and (5) Sri S. Prasad, the magistrate who recorded the said dying declaration. On this application the Court observed that Suresh Chand Gupta's evidence would not be helpful but that the other witnesses named in the application might be summoned through the District Magistrate Agra who was inform the Court when they i.e. the witnesses, would be able to attend after 8th July, 1969 and a date shall be fixed for examination of the witnesses in the case after the receipt of the report. The third application was another attempt to get Suresh Chand Gupta summoned as a defence witness for explaining a portion of the report scribed by him. On this the Court ordered that the witness might be summoned but the necessity and propriety of examining him would be considered by the bench at the time of hearing.
6.  It is the case of the learned advocates for the appellants that when the matter came up before Broome and Parekh, JJ., in July 1968 the previous order were ignored and no witnesses were summoned, nor were they examined as a result of which, it is strenuously contended, the accused were prejudiced. It may be stated that when the Bench of the High Court at Allahabad rejected the special leave application for leave to appeal they observed in respect of this very allegation that when the case came up before them on 8th July, 1968 they had directed inter alia that
"the question of whether any witnesses are to be examined in this Court will be decided afresh after arguments have been heard"
7.  There is, in our view, justification for the contention of the learned advocate for the State, Shri Rana, that there is no discrepancy between the observations of the learned judges and the affidavit of Chaturvedi. The bench however in so far as the grievance relating to the non-summoning of the defence witnesses which is the subject-matter of his second application, in their judgment remarked that having regard to the finding that the evidence establishment beyond doubt the presence of the two witnesses it renders it unnecessary for them to go into the next question, whether the entry in the agenda (Ex. Ka-9) showing Rajendra Prasad Singhal and Puran Chand Bharadwaj as special invitees was a forged interpolation or not. There is nothing to show from the record that the learned advocate had pressed his second and third applications for adducing additional evidence of the Magistrate etc. and Suresh Chand, the scribe of the F.I.R. No doubt after the special leave application was dismissed by the High Court, an application was made on 16th September, 1968 for ascertaining whether any order has been passed on the three application dated May 23, 1968 after the hearing of the appeal on July 19, 1968 as they were pressed after the arguments to which the reply was 'No'. The question was a rolled up one and it is difficult to hold that the negative reply covered both. In our view, it is only covered by the first part of the question, namely, whether any order had been passed on the three applications after the hearing of the appeal on 19th July, 1968. There was no need for any further order because if it was pressed, the bench would have considered it having regard to the previous order on the applications. In our view, no prejudice has been caused to the accused and it was unnecessary to go into the question of the forged insertion in the F.I.R. of the two eye witnesses as it had been held on the other evidence that they were present. In the abovementioned application by Mr. Chaturvedi to question No. 2 'whether there is any indication or order by the Bench which decided the appeal regarding the photograph of the signature of the decease, Suresh Chandra Bansal and the Expert's opinion which were given by Sri P. C. Chaturvedi, counsel for the appellant on 17th July, 1968 to the Bench hearing the appeal for persual and necessary orders' the answer was that after perusal the Court returned them to Sri P. C. Chaturvedi, advocate. This clearly shows that the photostatic copies of the alleged forged signatures were in fact examined by the Court but they might not have considered it necessary to examine the expert. In fact the admissibility of this evidence was clearly reserved by the Court on the previous occasion and if the advocate has insisted, we are sure that the learned Judges would have given a finding thereon.
8.  Now there remains the other question whether the convictions are sustainable on the evidence. The case of the accused is that one Dau Dayal who had previously injured the deceased Suresh Chander Bansal and was on bail was seen near about the place of the incident about 150 paces from the scene of the occurrence and it is he who could have injured the deceased as he had enmity with him. P.W. 1 no doubt, admitted that Suresh Chander Banasal had pointed out Dau Dayal who was standing at a distance of 150 paces but he denied that he had seen him inside the Arya Samaj at the time of the incident. This defence, in our view, is a red herring drawn across the case to create a doubt but there is no evidence to show that this man was actually present at the place of the occurrence inside the Arya Samaj Hall or near the Chabutra. We have been taken through the evidence of the eye witnesses P.W's. 1, 3 and 4 and in the light of the comments made by the learned advocates we find that the conclusion drawn by the Trial Court and the appeal Court on the evidence is fully justified. No doubt Accused 4 was not a member of the Arya Samaj but he was supporting his brothers in their dispute. The Trial Court observed that Accused 4 was a bully. This conclusion was drawn on the evidence of Dharam Pal Vidyarthi, P.W. 12 who said that on 7th April, 1967 at 2.45 p.m. Anand Sharma, Accused 2, had telephoned to him and asked him to desist from effecting co-option. The witness replied that the sanction of the secretary of the Arya Pratinidhi Sabha, U.P. was given and for this reason it was not right and that he may have a talk with his brother Madan Patel who then spoke to him. Madan Patel said,
"Do not effect co-option; otherwise I shall come at your Gaddi (seat) and beat you with shoes"
9.  To this threat the witness did not give any reply and put down the receiver. Thereafter he went to the place of Babu Lal Singhal whose shop is near his Gaddi. Babu Lal Singhal and he had to attend the meting of the Nation Chamber of Commerce and Industries at Balanganj which was to start at 4 p.m. Seeing the witness looking sad, Babu Lal Singhal asked him what the matter was and why he was looking sad. The witness told him that Madan Patel had threatened to beat him with shoes. Babu Lal asked him to inform the S.S.P. on telephone as a precautionary measure. Babu Lal Singhal confirms this statement and further states that P.W. 12 had told him on his advice that he should inform the S.S.P. that it is the habit of Madan Patel to give abuses in this manner. He further said, "Let us attend the meeting of the chamber. We will consider it later on". Babu Lal Singhal then said that they would proceed on foot and they would come across Anand Sharma and Madan Patel and if they met them he would talk with Madan that this not proper. When they reached the house of Anand Sharma and Madan Patel they found that they were not in the house. In respect of this statement there was hardly any cross-examination except to elicit that there is a telephone in his gaddi and he could have used the same to contact Madan Patel. In our view, this evidence justifies the trial Judge's conclusion that Madan Patel was an aggressive sort of person who would not hesitate to give threats of the kind. In this case his brother were deeply involved in the controversy about the co-option and therefore it is not un-natural, having regard to the threats administered by Madan Patel earlier, that he was present at the Arya Samaj Hall as spoken to by the eye witnesses.
10.  It is again contended that in dying declaration Ex. Ka-1, Bhagwat Swaroop, P.W. 1 had stated that Narain Sharma, Madan Patel and Kedar had stabbed him. The comment of the learned advocate Shri Nuruddin Ahmed was that the High Court was not justified in explaining away statement by statement by saying that P.W. 1. was not in a fully conscious state or that he was conscious. P.W. 1 in cross-examination stated that he was becoming unconscious and did not know as to how the doctor gave certificate that he was fully conscious. He asserted that Satya Narain and Kedar did not knife him and did not know how the statement that Satya Narain Sharma, Madan Patel and Kedar gave him knife blows the witnesses as to the veracity, it cannot be used a substantive evidence.
11.  On the next contention that in the dying declaration he had stated that a brick was thrown on him, the explanation of the witness was that that was not his case. The explanation of the witness was that Suresh Bansal received a knife blow on his chest and fell down on the chabutra and became unconscious. It is perhaps this statement that made the learned judges say that the injury was given on a brick chabutra. Whatever the discrepancy, as we have said the dying declaration is not substantive evidence and even if there are certain contradictions the version of this witness viewed as a whole cannot be declared to be unreliable. P.W. 13 Dr. Agarwal Swaroop, he had stated to him that Nanak Chand, teacher of Agarwal Inter College, Duliagunj had stabbed him with a knife half an hour before. This statement further corroborates P.W. 1 as to the person who stabbed him.
12.  It was again contended that Raghubar Prasad who was one of the eye witnesses was not examined by learned advocate for the State pointed out that Raghubar Prasad was present in Court but had refused to give evidence because he was threatened. The letter written by him was shown to us in which he said that as he was threatened he could not tell the truth and if he was asked to give evidence he would not support the prosecution case. The prosecution had to give him up and since the defence also did not want examine him he was discharged. Therefore the comment that he was to examined would be justified. The witness was an advocate and it was rather strange that he had taken up this attitude.8. From the evidence we have not the least doubt that Madan Patel had given the stab wound on the deceased as alleged and Nanak Chand on P.W. 1. The entire incident took place within a matter of minutes and not more than one blow was given by each of these accused. We have therefore no hesitation in confirming the convictions. But so far as sentence of death sentence awarded by the Trial Court, in this case we do not think there are aggravating circumstances to justify; the extreme penalty and in that view of the matter, alter the sentence of Madan Patel from death to life imprisonment. Criminal Appeal No. 45 of 1969 is allowed to that extent. Criminal Appeal No. 44 of 1969 is dismissed.
Appeal disposed of.
