Satyanarain Prasad v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

9 March 1970
C.A. No. 272 of 1969.
The Judgment was delivered by: SHAH, J.
1.  The Proceedings were started against the appellant a Range Assistant Engineer, for some delinquency in the performance of his duty. A departmental enquiry was held and the enquiry officer submitted his report provisionally holding that the appellant was guilty of the delinquency charged against him. By a notice, dated May 17, 1968, the appellant was called upon to show cause why he should not be removed from service.
2.  The appellant then moved a petition u/art. 226 of the constitution in the High Court of Patna challenging the validity of the notice. The High Court summarily dismissed the petition. An application for a certificate to appeal to this Court was however successful. The High Court granted a certificate u/art. 133(1) on the assumption that the value of the subject-matter in dispute was more than Rs. 20, 000/-. In our judgment the High Court was incompetent to grant the certificate.
3. U/art. 133 of the constitution an appeal may lie to this Court from any judgment or decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if the High Court certifies -
(a) that the amount or value of the subject-matter of the dispute in the court of first instance and still in dispute on appeal was and is not less than Rs. 20, 000/- or such other sum as may be specified in that behalf by Parliament by law; or
(b) that the judgment, decree or final order involves directly or indirectly some claim or question respecting property of the like amount or value; or
(c) that the case is a fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court;
and where the judgment, decree or final order appealed from affirms the decision of the court immediately below in any case other than a case referred to in sub-clause (c), if the High Court further certifies that the appeal involves some substantial question of law.
4.  The High court has not issued a certificate u/art. 133(1)(c). No substantial question of law is stated in the order granting certificate to arise out of the petition. In order that a certificate may be issued by the High Court for leave to appeal to this court u/cl. (a) it is one of the conditions that the value of the subject-matter in dispute in the court of first instance and still in dispute on appeal in the Supreme Court is not less than Rs. 20, 000/-. A certificate u/cl. (b) may be granted if the judgment, decree or final order involves a claim or question relating to property of the like amount or value.
5. A claim in a petition challenging the validity of a notice to show cause why a person in public service shall not be dismissed or removed from service is not capable of valuation and can in no event by regarded an of a value not less than Rs. 20, 000/-. It appears that counsel appearing on behalf of the State in the High Court conceded that the valuation was not less than Rs. 20, 000/- but that concession will not invest the High court with jurisdiction to grant a certificate u/cl. (a) or cl. (b) which the High Court did not possess.
In the absence of a valid certificate this appeal is incompetent.
6.  The appeal fails. It will be open to the High Court to consider on the application filed by the appellant for certificate whether a case is made out for issue of certificate u/art. 132(1) (c).
7.  The appeal is dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
