1.   The respondents are dealers in cotton. The Assistant Commercial Tax Officer assessed the respondents to tax for the year 1957-58 on a turnover exceeding Rs. 12 lakhs under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. The Board of Revenue revised the order delivering the taxable turnover of respondent's turnover.
2.  In appeal by the respondents against that order in the High Court of Madras it was contended that the transactions of sale were liable to tax u/s. 6 of the Central Sales Tax Act. The High Court, following the judgment of this Court in The State of Mysore v. Yaddalam Lakshminarasimihiah Setty and Sons 1964 Indlaw SC 1981964 Indlaw SC 1981964 Indlaw SC 198 held that inter-State transactions of the respondents however in cotton were not taxable under the Central Sales Tax Act because under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, sale of cotton was taxable at the stage of last purchase. The State of Madras has appealed to this Court against that order.
3.   Since the judgment of the Madras High Court was delivered the relevant provisions of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 have been amended. The President first promulgated the Central Sales (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 which was substituted by an amending Act passed by the Parliament.
4.  The Court in The State of Kerala v. P. P. Joseph and Co. and Joseph Elias 1969 Indlaw SC 72 considered the effect of the enactment of the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969, and observed that:
"The effect of the Central Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 is to supersede the judgment of the Supreme Court in Yaddalam's case (supra). It is now made clear under the Ordinance that even if no tax was leviable under general sales tax law of the State in respect of intra-state transactions of sale, tax will be leviable under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
5. In view of that ex-position the order passed by the High Court must be set aside. Since the Central Sales Tax Act has been amended with retrospective effect the assessment to tax must be made in the light of the amended Provisions. We accordingly direct that the orders passed by the High Court and the departmental authorities are set aside and the transactions of sale in respect of which tax is sought to be levied will be levied will be assessed to tax by the Assistant Commercial Tax Officer, Madurai, in the light of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, as amended by the Amending Act of 1969.
The respondents will have liberty to raise all contentions to the liability to be assessed to tax in respect of the transactions. There will be no order as to costs in this appeal.
Order accordingly.
