Delhi Cloth and General Mills Limited v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

11 August 1971
The Judgment was delivered by: HEGDE, J.
1.  This appeal was brought on the strength of a certificate granted by the High Court of Allahabad u/art. 133(1)(a). Dr. L. M. Singhvi, learned counsel for the State, has raised a preliminary objection as to the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that the High Court was not competent to grant a certificate u/art. 133(1)(a).
2. It may be noted that the appellant's prayer was that he may be granted a certificate both u/art. 133(1)(a) as well as u/art. 133(1)(c). The High Court has not granted certificate u/art. 133(1)(c). It only granted a certificate u/art. 133(1)(a).
3.  We have now to consider whether the certificate granted is in accordance with the law. If we come to the conclusion that the certificate granted is not in accordance with the law then this appeal cannot be maintained, and the matter will have to go back to the High Court for consideration whether there are grounds to grant a certificate u/art. 133(1)(4c).
4. As the High Court has not gone into that question, it has to go into that question a new. Whether a certificate u/art. 133(1)(b) can be granted if a prayer is made to that effect is a matter for the High Court to decide, after hearing both the parties The question before the High Court related to the interpretation of s. 6(2b) of the U. P. Agricultural Income-tax Act. The controversy between the parties was whether the appellant had an option to change the method of assessment. This issue was tried as a preliminary issue. The assessing authority came to the conclusion that he could not change the method of assessment. That decision was affirmed by the Board of Revenue. The decision of the Board of Revenue was challenged before a single judge of the High Court in a Writ Petition u/art. 226 of the Constitution.
5.  The learned single judge allowed that application and quashed the impugned orders holding that it was open to the assessee to change the option as regards the method of assessment. But in appeal the Division Bench set aside the order of the learned single judge and dismissed the writ petition. Against that order, this appeal has been brought. Quite clearly the order appealed against does not come within the scope of art. 133(1)(a). The issue before the High Court was incapable of valuation. That being so, the High Court was not justified in granting a certificate u/art. 133(1)(a). Hence we revoke that certificate and send back the case to the High Court for a fresh consideration as mentioned earlierWe make no order as to costs in this appeal.
Certificate revoked. Case remanded.
Order accordingly.
