Bihar State Board Of Hindu Religious Trusts v Bhubneshwar Prasad Choudhary & Anr.
Supreme Court of India

9 April 1974
Civil Appeal No. 1871 of 1967
The Judgment was delivered by ALAGIRISWAMI, J.
1. The question for decision in this appeal is whether the temple of Shree Maharaja Ram Janki Lacchuman Maharaj in the village of Mauza Deogan in the State of Bihar is a religious trust within the, meaning of the term in section 2, cl. (1) of the Bihar, Hindu Religious Trusts Act, or a private endowment.
2. Two brothers, Ram Adhikari Choudhary and Ram Lochan Choudhary, and Amir prasad Choudhary, son of their brother, for himself and as guardian of Ramakant Prasad Choudhary, who were all members of joint Hindu family executed on 17.6.1921 a samarpannama by which they dedicated certain properties t o the above mentioned temple. By that deed of dedication they completely divested themselves of any interest in the properties except that they and the members of their families were to be shebaits. By the same deed five persons, who were absolute strangers to the family, were appointed panches
"to take the rendition of account of the income and expenditure from, the manager, shebait for the time being year after year on the death of the, executants. . . . If in the opinion of the said panches the manager and shebait for the, time being be found (illegal) and extravagant or there be any loss in respect of the income of the dedicated property or the dedicated property which is at present or be acquired in future, in that case they should discharge the manager shebait for the time being and (appoint) other deserving manager, shebait, who be deemed according to the conditions mentioned above, in his place from among the members of the family of the executants."
3. On 7-12-1928 Ram Adhikari Choudhary alone executed another samarpannama endowing some further properties in favour of the temple, containing similar terms as in the earlier samarpannama; but in place of five panches mentioned in the earlier deed he appointed a fresh set of five panches, of whom only one belonged to the earlier set of panches. In this deed also it was provided that
"if any future shebait fails to manage the dedicated properties', arrange ragbhog to the aforesaid deities properly, show negligence, spoil the property, and incur (un)-necessary expenses, the said panches will be competent to dismiss the said shebait and appoint another one out of the members of the family of me, the executant, who happens to be honest and capable."
"the stipulations contained in the samarpannama dated the 7th December, 1928 in respect of maintenance of account of income and expenditure of the dedicated property, shall hold good in respect of the management of the dedicated property and maintenance of the account of income and expenditure."
"as (to) the appointment of shebaits in future, the practice to be followed will be that the shebait in office shall be fully competent to (appoint) during his life time or that after him he who amongst his sons be alive and most capable shall be appointed shebait of the said deities one after another. In case there be no male issue in the family of the shebait in office, firstly, amongst the male issue or in case there be no capable man amongst the children of the aforesaid persons, the shebait in office shall be competent to appoint a shebait amongst the children of my cousin  brothers, deemed to be capable. But the shebait in office is and shall not be competent to appoint a shebait from the family of other persons."
"to participate in any religious or charitable ministration under such trust"
4. The learned Judges of the High Court on the other hand took the view that the mere fact that the temple was situated within independent compound walls, though near the house of the founders, could not by itself indicate that the temple was meant for public purposes. They further took the view that
"the cost over faqirs, sadhus and the occasional festivals would be ancillary to the main purpose, that is, for puja of the deity."
"the mere fact that some other member s of the public might be attending festivals like Ram Navami, Janmashtami etc. does not justify the inference that the trust or temple was created for the benefit or worship of the public at large or of some considerable portion of it."
"Firstly, there is the fact that the idol was installed not within the precincts of residential quarters but in a separate building constructed for that very purpose on a vacant site. And as pointed out in Delroos Banoo Begum v. Nawab Syud Ashgur Ally Khan, it is a factor to be taken' into account in deciding whether an endowment is private or public, whether the place of worship is located inside a private house or a public building. Secondly, it is admitted that some of the idols are permanently installed on a pedestal within the temple, precincts. That is more consistent with the endowment being public rather than private. Thirdly, the puja in the temple is performed by an archaka appointed from time to time."
5. We are also of opinion that the learned Judges of the High Court were not correct in their view that the, fact that members of the public took part in the worship in the temple and the provision for faqirs etc.. was of no significance, and in relying upon the decision of the Privy Council in Bhagwan Din v. Har Saroop 1940 AIR(PC) 7 ) for this purpose. In that case the properties were granted not in favour of an idol or temple, but in favour of a private individual, who was maintaining a temple, and his heirs. The contention in t hat case was that subsequent to the grant the family of the grantee must be held to have dedicated the temple to the public for purposes of worship and it was this contention. that was repelled by the Privy Council by observing that as the grant was initially to an individual a plea that it was subsequently dedicated by the family to the public required to be clearly made out and it was not made out merely by showing that the public was allowed to worship at the temple. But in the present case, as in the case of Deoki Nandan v. Murlidhar, the endowment is in favour of the idol itself and in such circumstances proof of user by the public without interference would be cogent evidence that dedication was in favour of the public. The decision of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court in Ramsaran Das v. Jai Ram Das 1943 AIR(Pat) 135 ) that
"a mere provision for the service of sadhus, occasional guests aid wayfarers in a dedication to an idol does not render the dedication substantially for public purpose"
