1. The appellant in Civil Appeal No. 928 of 1975. M/s. Karam Chand Thapar, Brothers, is a limited company incorporated under the Companies Act, , the six branches of the Company at Allahabad, Moradabad, Kanpur, Varanasi, Gorakhpur, Lucknow are the appellants in Civil Appeal of No. 929 1975.
2. The Company carries on business as coal agents, is registered under the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948, the Central Sales Tax A ct, 1956 with the Sales Tax Officer at Moradabad in Uttar Pradesh. We shall refer to these two statutes as the U.P. Act, the Central Actof brevity.
3. The Company used to arrange supply of coal from collieries situate in West Bengal, Bihar to consumers in Uttar Pradesh. The collieries used to send the coal by rail, the railway receipts were prepared either in the name of the Company or in the name of the consumer in Uttar Pradesh on whose behalf the order for supply of. coal was placed.
4. The collieries sent the bills, invoices in respect of the coal despatched to Uttar Pradesh to the Company's head office in Calcutta; the Company forwarded the railway receipts to the consumers in cases where the receipts were in the names of the consumers, endorsed the receipts that were in the Company's name in favour of the consumers for whom the coal had been despatched. These two appeals, brought on certificates of fitness granted by the Allahabad High Court, arise out of two writ petitions filed in the High Court respectively by the Company, its aforesaid branches. The petition filed by the Company leading to Civil Appeal 928, is directed against an order made u/s. 22 of the U.P. Act giving rise to the question whether s. 9 (1 ) of t he Central Act was applicable to the case enabling the State of Uttar Pradesh to levy, collect Central sales tax in respect of subsequent sales of coal effected by the Company to consumers in Uttar Pradesh by endorsement of the documents of title; in the other writ petition, filed by the Company's six branches, the applicability of s. 9(1) of the Central Act was one of the points raised in the High Court, but this was the only point urged before us in Civil Appeal The assessment year in question in Civil Appeal 928 is 1966-67, that in Civil Appeal 929 is 1969-70.As the Company's appeal covers the question involved in the other case, raises two additional questions, we shall state only the facts of Civil Appeal 928 to indicate how these questions arise. The dispute in this case relates to the amount of Rs. 5, 59, 172/32p. which according to the Company could not be taxed in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Before We proceed further, it would. be convenient to set out the relevant provisions of the two Acts.
5. Taking the Central Act first, s. 2(c) de- fines "declared goods" as the goods declared u/s. 14 to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce. S. 14 which declares certain goods to be of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce mentions coal as one of them. U/s. 3 a sale or purchase of goods is deemed to take place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce if the sale or purchase, (a) occasions the movement of goods from one State to another; or (b) is effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods during their movement from one State to another.
6. The sales we are concerned with in this case were of this second type. Sub-s. (1) of s. 6 provides that subject to the other provisions of the Act, every dealer shall be liable to pay tax under this Act on sales of goods effected by him in the course of inter-State trade or commerce. Sub-s. (2) of s. 6 states that notwithstanding what is provided in sub-section (1), any subsequent sale of goods effected by a transfer of documents of title to the goods, -(A) to the Government, or (B) to a registered dealer other than the Government, if the goods are of the description referred to in sub-s. (3) of section 8, shall be exempt from tax under this Act.
7. There are two provisos to this sub-section, but it is not necessary to refer to them. S. 7(1) requires every dealer liable to pay tax under this Act to apply for registration. Sub-s. (3) of s. 7 provides that if the application is in order, the prescribed authority shall register the applicant, grant to him a certificate of registration in the prescribed form which shall specify the c lass or classes of goodsof sub-s. (1) of s. 8. Rule 3 of the Central Sales Tax (Registration, Turnover) Rules, 1957, states that an application for registration under s. 7 shall be made in Form A, Form A requires the purpose or purposes for which the goods or casses of goods are purchased by the dealer in the course of interstate trade or commerce to be specified; as would appear from the Form, 'resale' is one such purpose.Rule 5 (1 ) of the Rules provides that the certificate of registration must be in Form B. S. 8(1) provides that every dealer who in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, (a) sells to the Government any goods; or (b) sells to a registered dealer other than the Government goods of the description referred to. in sub-s. (3) of this section, shall be liable to pay tax under this Act at the rate of three per cent of his turnover.
8. Subs. (2) of s. 8 states that the tax payable by any dealer on his turnover relating to the sales of goods in the course of inter-State trade or commerce which does not fall within sub-s. (1) shall be--(a) in the case of declared goods, at the rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such goods inside the appropriate State, (b) in the case of goods other than declared goods, at the rate of ten per cent or at the rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such goods inside the appropriate State, whichever is higher. The goods referred to in cl. (b) of sub-s. (1) are specified in sub-s. (3) of this section as goods of the class or classes specified in the certificate of registration of the registered dealer purchasing the goods as being intended for resale by him. Sub-s. (4) of s. 8 says that the
"provisions of sub-s. (1) shall not apply to any sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce unless the dealer selling the goods furnishes to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner (a) a declaration duly filled, signed by the registered dealer to whom the goods are sold containing the prescribed particulars in a prescribed form obtained from the prescribed authority;"*
rule 12(1) of the Rules states inter alia that the declaration referred to in sub-s. (4) of s. 8 shall be in Form C. Cl. (b) of sub-s. (4) is not relevant to the present purpose. S. 9 (1) reads:, The Sales Tax Officer had accepted the contention that the turnover amounting to Rs. 5, 59, 172/32p. was not taxable in Uttar Pradesh.
9. In taking this view the Sales Tax Officer appears to have proceeded upon the observations in a Judgment of the Allahabad High Court in the Company's own assessment case2965-66.. How ever, in several subsequent decisions, the High Court held that m a case where a registered dealer effected a second sale in the course of interstate trade, commerce, sales tax on the turnover was to be realised in the State where the dealer effecting the sale was registered.
10. In one of these cases, M/s. Singhal &Co. v. State &Ors it was pointed out that the earlier decision of the High Court had completely overlooked the proviso to s. 9(2) of the Central Act.
11. The Company being admittedly a registered dealer under the Central Act, liable to pay tax under that Act, the Sales Tax Officer thought that there was an apparent error in the order of assessment made on March 27, 1972 exempting the turnover amounting to Rs. 5, 59, 172/32 p. which in view of the proviso to s. 9(1) of the Central Act was taxable in Uttar Pradesh.
12. Accordingly, he proposed to rectify the error u/s. 22 of the U.P. Act, on March 21, 1974 he issued a notice to the Company requiring it to appear before him on March 25, 1974. In response to the notice a representative of the Company appeared. contended against the proposed rectification, also filed a written objection.
13. The Sales Tax Officer recorded an order on March 26, 197.4 overruling the objections, rectified the order of assessment dated March 27, 1.971.
14. A copy of the order passed on March 26, 1974 rectifying the mistake in the earlier assessment order was served on the Company on March 31, 1974. The Company challenged the order dated March 26, 1974 by a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court which, was dismissed giving rise to this appeal. Mr. Nariman appearingin these appeals pressed the following grounds:, The Judgment of the High Court which the Sales Tax Officer followed in making the assessment for the year in question did not concern itself with the proviso to s. 9(1).
15. The next, and the last, question is whether the order dated March 22, 1974 rectifying the assessment order made on March 27, 1971 was barred by limitation. U/s. 22(1) of the U.P. Act any mistake apparent on the record may be rectified at any time within three years from the date of the order. It is not disputed that the other requirements of s. 22 have been complied with. The Company's representative appeared before the Sales Tax Officer pursuant to the notice served on them on March 25, 1974, and the objections to the proposed rectification were heard . There is no dispute that the order rectifying the mistake was recorded by the Sales Tax Officer on March 26, 1974, and this order was communicated to the appellant on March 31, 1974 According to Mr. Nariman, the order of rectification must be held to have been made on March 31, 1974 when it was communicated to the assessee which was beyond three years from the date of the order of assessment. Mr. Nariman relied on the well- known rule of fairplay that the rights of a party cannot be affected by an order until he has notice of it. In Raja Harish Chandra Rai Singh v. The Deputy Land Acquisition Officer and another, ( 1961 Indlaw SC 482 1961 Indlaw SC 482 ) this Court considering the meaning of the words "the date of the award" occurring in s. 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 observed.
"The knowledge of the party affected by the award, either actual or constructive, being an essential requirement of fairplay and natural justice the expression "the date of the award" used in the proviso must mean the date when the award is either communicated to the party or is known by him either actually or constructively. In our opinion, therefore, it would be unreasonable to construe the words "from the date of the Collector's award" used in the proviso to s. 18 in a literal or me- chanical way....... where the rights of a person are affected by any order and limitation is prescribed for the enforcement of the remedy by the person aggrieved against the said order by reference to the making of the order must mean either actual or constructive communication of the said order to the party concerned."*
16. Following this decision, this Court held in a subsequent ease under the Indian Forest Act, 1927, Madan Lal v. State of U.P. and others, that the right of appeal given by s. 17 of the Forest Act should be deemed to be the date when the party aggrieved by an order came to know of that order from which an appeal was sought to be preferred. But how have the Company's rights been affected in this case?
17. S. 9 of the U.P. Act gives a right of appeal to "any dealer objecting to any order made by the assessing authority, other than an order mentioned in S. 10-A", within thirty days from the date of service of the copy of t he order. In this case the Company was not affected by the order under s. 22 being communicated to it after the expiry of three years from the date of the order because the limitation for an appeal from that order did not begin to run before the communication of the order. The provisions of s. 9 of the U.P. Act make that clear. The appeals therefore fail and are dismissed.
18. Considering the circumstances, we direct the parties to bear their own costs here and in the High Court.
Appeals dismissed.
