Maria Cristina De Souza Sodder and Others v Amria Zurana Pereira Pinto and Others
Supreme Court of India

30 August 1978
C.A. No. 1311 of 1969
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by: TULZAPURKAR, J.
1.  This appeal, by certificate u/art. 133(1)(a) (b) of the Constitution, raises an interesting but complex question of law, namely, what was the law of limitation applicable in the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu to proceedings launched therein prior to and pending at the date of liberation ? The question arises in these circumstance.
2.  One Melquiades Lusitano Joaquim Urbano Pereira died some time prior to 1941 leaving as his hear his widow Maria Cristina De Souza Sodder (appellant 1), two sons Elesbano pereira and Ciano pereira (appellants 2 and 3) and two daughters Maria Zurana Pereira and Linda Pereira (respondent 1 and 2). After the death of Melquiades his estates and property were partitioned on or about January 28, 1941; at that time respondent 1 was a minor. On March 15, 1960, the first respondent and her husband second respondent filed a suit against the appellants and third and fourth respondent (fourth respondent being the husband of the third respondent) in the Comarca Court at Margao alleging that in the partition effected on January 28, 1941 certain items of properties had not been properly valued by the appellants as a result whereof they had suffered a loss, that respondent 1 who was a minor than had come to know of such improper valuation (under valuation) only after her marriage and that, therefore, the said partition be amended and they be compensated for the loss suffered by them. Respondent 3 and 4 filed written statement supporting the allegations contained in the plaint and further filed a counter-claim praying that the said partition be rescinded on the ground that if was null and void due to simulation and collusion. The learned trial Judge by his judgment and order dated March 8, 1968 decreed the suit and the counter-claim. Feeling aggrieved by the said decree the appellants preferred an appeal being First Appeal 6 of 1968 to the Judicial Commissioner's Court at Goa on June 6, 1968.
3.  Two preliminary contentions were raised on behalf of the respondents : (a) that the appeal had not been filed in proper Court and (b) that it was breed by law of limitation. These contentions were based on the provisions of the portuguese Civil Procedure Cord (hereinafter called the Provisions of Portuguese Code). The respondent pointed out that according to the provisions of Portuguese Code (Art. 687) the appeal was required to be filed in the Court which decided the suit and as such the appellants could not have lodged the appeal in the Court of Judicial Commissioner. It was further pointed out that u/art. 686 of the Portuguese Code the period of limitation for filling an appeal was 8 days from the service of the judgment or order of the trial Court and that since the appeal was filed beyond that period it was evidently barred by time. On the other hand, the appellants relying upon certain events that had taken place between the institution of the suit and the pronouncement of the judgment by the trial Court, contended that the appeal had been properly filed in the Judicial Commissioner's Court and that the same was within time.
4. It may be stated that admittedly four events took place during the pendency of the suit viz. -
(a) the territories of Goa, Daman and Diu were liberated and became a part of the Union of Indian with effect from December 20, 1961;
(b) the Limitation Act, 1963 that was enacted by the parliament and which came into force on January 1, 1964, became applicable to the whole of India including the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu,
(c) the Parliament also enacted the Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  and Arbitration Act, 1040) Act 1965 (Act XXX of 1965) whereunder the provisions of the Indian Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, were extended to the territories of Goa, Daman and Diu with effect from June 15, 1966, with the corresponding provisions of the Portuguese Code being repealed and
(d) the Legislative Assembly of Goa, Daman and Diu enacted the  Goa,Daman and Diu Civil Courts Act, 1965  (Act XVI of 1965) which came into force on June 15, 1966. U/s. 34(2) of the last mentioned Goa enactment (Act XVI of 1965) the instant suit which was pending before the Comarca Court at Margao Stood transferred and was continued and decreed by the corresponding Senior Civil Judge and u/s. 22 of the said Act since the property involved in the suit was of value exceeding Rs. 10, 000 an appeal from the decision lay direct to the High Court which expression u/s. 2(f) of the Act meant the Judicial Commissioner's Court.
5.  Relying upon the extension of Indian Civil procedure Code to Goa, Daman and Diu with protanto repeal of the portuguese Code and the aforesaid provisions of the  Goa,Daman and Diu Civil Courts Act, 1965  (Act XVI of 1965), the appellants contended that the appeal had been properly lodged in the Judicial Commissioner's Court especially as the Court of Comarca Court at Margao had ceased to exit, and as regard the bar of limitation it was contended that since Limitation Act was a procedural statue it applied to pending litigation and since the Limitation Act of 1963 had come into force in Goa, Daman and Diu on January 1, 1964 when the suit culminating in the appeal was pending it was the period of limitation provided by that Act which should govern the appeal in question and it was submitted that since the appeal had been filed within a period of 90 days from the date of the judgment and decree as provided by Art. 116 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the appeal was well within time.
6.  The learned Additional Judicial Commissioner, who heard the matter felt that the question whether the appeal should have filed in the trial Court under the Portuguese Code of Judicial Commissioner's Court was, highly debatable, thought he found considerable force in the appellants, contention that the question pertaining to the forum was a matter of procedural law and that after the Indian Code came into force in that Union Territory they forum of appeal will be the one provided by the Indian Code and not by the portuguese Code.  However, he refrained from expressing any final opinion on that question because in his view the appeal could be disposed of on the point of limitation raised by the respondents. As regards limitation he took the view that u/s. 4 of the Central Act XXX of 1965 (which dealt with repeal and savings) thought the Indian Code had replaced so much of law enacted in the portuguese Code as corresponded to it (the Indian Code), the repeal did not affect any right acquired under the repealed part of the Portuguese Code and since the right of appeal arose no sooner the lis was commenced under the portuguese Code it was not affected by the repeal; so also the legal proceedings or remedy in respect of that right could be continued or enforced as if the Indian Code had not passed. He further held that S. 32 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
7.  On the question as to where the appeal could be lodged we are clearly of the view that the forum was governed by the provisions of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  and Arbitration Act, 1940 ) Act, 1965 (Central Act XXX of 1965) read with the provisions of the Goa, Daman and Diu Civil Court Act, 1965  (Goa Act XVI of 1965) both of which came into force simultaneously on June 15, 1966 and the appeal was required to be filed in the Judicial Commissioner's Court. Under the Central Act XXX of 1965 with effect from June 15, 1966 the provisions of the Indian Civil Procedure Code were extended to the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and the corresponding provisions of the portuguese Code were repealed while under the Goa Act XVI of 1965 the instant suit which was pending before the Comarca Court at Margao was contained and decreed by corresponding Court of the Senior Civil Judge, who ultimately decreed it on March 8, 1968. Under the Indian Civil Procedure Code read with S. 2 of the Goa Act since the property involved in the suit was of the value exceeding Rs. 10, 000 the appeal clearly lay to the Judicial Commissioner's Court. The contention that since the right of appeal had been conferred by Portuguese Code, the forum where it could be lodged was also governed by the Portuguese Code cannot be accepted.
8. It is no doubt well-settled that the right of appeal is a substantive right and it gets vested in a litigant no sooner the lis is commenced in the Court of the first instance, and such right of any remedy in respect thereof will not be affected by any repeal of the enactment conferring such right unless the repealing enactment either expressly of by necessary implication takes away such right or remedy in respect thereof. This position has been made clear by cls. (b) and (c) of the proviso to S. 4 of the Central Act XXX of 1965 which substantially correspond to cls. (c) and (e) of S. 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897. This position has also been settled by the decisions of the Privy Council and this Code vide The Colonial Sugar Refining Company Ltd. v. Irving 1957 Indlaw SC 160  and Garikapatti Veeraya v. N. Subbiah Choudhury 1957 Indlaw SC 160 but the forum where such appeal can be lodged is indubitably a procedural matter and, therefore, the appeal, the right to which has arisen under a repealed Act, will have to be lodged in a forum provided for by the repealing Act. That the forum appeal, and also the limitation for it, are matters pertaining to procedural law will be clear from the following passage appearing at page 462 of Salmond's Jurisprudence (12th Edn.)
9.  Whether I have a right to recover certain property is a question of substantive law, for the determination and the protection of such rights are among the ends of the administration of justice; but in what courts and within what time I must institute proceedings are questions of procedural law, for they relate merely to the modes in which the courts fulfill their functions.
10. It is true that u/cl. (c) of the proviso to S. 4 of Central Act XXX of 1965 (which corresponds to S. 6(e) of the General Clauses Act, 18971955 Indlaw RAJ 4. It is thus clear the under the repealing enactment (Act XXX of 1965) read with Goa Enactment (Act XVI of 1965) the appeal lay to the Judicial Commissioner's Court and the same was accordingly filed in the proper Court.
11.  However, the order preliminary objection upheld by the learned Additional Judicial Commissioner is more important and the question that really arises for our consideration is what what the law limitation applicable in the Union Territories of Goa, Daman and Diu to proceeding launched therein prior to and pending at the date of liberation ? In other words, whether the period of limitation for the appeal in question was the one prescribed by the Portuguese Code or by Art. 116 of the Limitation Act, 1963
Appeal allowed.
