Pal Singh and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

12 January 1979
Cr.A. No. 51 of 1972.
The Judgment was delivered by: FAZAL ALI, J.
1.  This appeal under the provisions of Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act, is directed against the order of High Court dated December 10, 1971 by which the acquittal of ten accused before the trial Court was reversed. All the appellants have been convicted under Section 302/149 IPC and have been sentenced to imprisonment for life. Some of them have been convicted u/s. 147 IPC and some u/s. 148 IPC and were sentenced to one year and two years' R.I. respectively. The judgment of the High Court gives a detailed narrative of the prosecution case and the circumstances leading to the death of the deceased.
2. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the evidence. The High Court after a very elaborate discussion of the evidence and circumstances of the case rightly pointed out that the judgment of the trial Court was both perverse and based on a total misreading of the evidence. The High Court has displaced all the circumstances and the reason given by the Sessions Judge which were based on speculations or materials which were against the weight of the evidence on record. Arguments like delay in lodging the FIR or ante-timing it or that the occurrence took place not at the time alleged but sometime later have been fully discussed by the High Court and rejected. We find ourselves in complete agreement with the reasons given and the view taken by the High Court.
3.  Mr. D. Mukherjee appearing in support of the appeal tried to raise some points which had been raised before the High Court and rejected. Mr. Mukherjee also submitted that although some eyewitnesses were mentioned in the FIR but they were not examined and the High Court, therefore, instead of drawing an adverse inference against the prosecution brushed them aside on the ground that the trial Court could have examined them u/s. 540 CrPC. Even if the High Court may not have been wholly correct on this aspect of the matter, the fact remains that after the High Court had believed the eyewitnesses 1 and 2, and having found that their testimony was absolutely credit-worthy and truthful, it could not have rejected the prosecution case merely because some of the eyewitnesses mentioned in the FIR were not examined.
4. In such cases, the question which has to be determined is not whether the absence of the examination of the independent witnesses would vitiate the prosecution case by itself but that the evidence actually produced is reliable or not. Once the court gives a finding of fact that the evidence led by the prosecution is reliable and trustworthy, the infirmities arising out of non-examination of witnesses will not be sufficient to put the prosecution out of court. Lastly, it was submitted that the injuries caused to the deceased are inconsistent with the manner in which the deceased is alleged to have been assaulted.
5. For instance, while the accused were armed with kantas and spears, only one punctured wound was found. We might point out that this is purely artificial argument. The High Court has rightly pointed out that if the accused assaulted with side portion of the blade of the weapons in a slanting fashion, only incised wounds would be caused. Thus the injuries sustained by the deceased are not inconsistent with the medical report which finds a number of incised wounds inflicted on the deceased. On the findings of fact arrived by the High Court, it is clear that the appellants shared the common object to cause the death of the deceased either by participation or by exhortation.
6.  We are, therefore, fully satisfied that this is a case where the judgment of the trial court was perverse and manifestly wrong and not a case where any other reasonable view could have been taken by the trial court. We find no force in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
