Hindustan Sugar Mills v State of Rajasthan and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 August 1979
Review Petition No. 83 of 1979
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  This application for review is directed against certain observations made by this Court in the course of the judgment in Civil Appeal No. 1122 of 1976,1978 Indlaw SC 292. The question which arose in that appeal was whether, in sales of cement effected by the appellant under the Cement Control Order, 1967, the amount of freight formed part of the "sales price" so as to be exigible to sales tax under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
"it is true and we are aware that there is no legal liability on the Central Government to do so, but it must be remembered that we are living in a democratic society governed by the rule of law and every Government which claims to be inspired by ethical and morel values must do what is fair and just to the citizen, regardless of legal technicalities.
We hope and trust that the Central Government will not seek to defeat the legitimate claim of the assessee for reimbursement of sales tax on the amount of freight by adopting a legalistic attitude"
"sales tax, if legally leviable, will be paid in addition to the price given in cl. (4) of the Rate Contract"
2.  The Central Government is plainly under a liability to pay to the appellant the amount of sales tax in respect of freight component of the price since that is held to be chargeable to the appellant both under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954. The assumption on which we made the above observations had been shown to be unfounded and these observations must, therefore, stand deleted from the judgment, in so far as they relate to contracts with the Director-General of Supplies and Disposals which contained cl. (8)(1) or any other similar clause providing for payment by the Central Government of the amount of sales tax legally leviable from the appellant. Where there is such a clause, the Central Government is bound to pay the amount of sales tax on the freight component of the price and we hope and trust that the Central Government will honour its legal obligation and not drive the appellant to file a suit for recovery of the amount of such sales tax.
3. We hopefully expect that the Central Government will not try to shirk its legal obligation by resorting to any legal technicalities, for we maintain that in a democratic society governed by the rule of law, it is the duty of the State to do what is fair and just to the citizen and the State should not seek to defeat the legitimate claim of the citizen by adopting a legalistic attitude but should do what fairness and justice demand.
4.  We accordingly allow the application for review to the extent mentioned above. There will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.
