Satyanarayan Prasad Sah and Others v State of Bihar and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 July 1980
W.Ps. Nos. 326 and 795 of 1979.
The Judgment was delivered by: KRISHNA IYER, J.
1. Mr. Sinha, appearing for the petitioners in the above writ petitions, contended that S. 4(ii) of the Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation Act, 1956 was violative of Arts. 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
2. In his submission, the provision that any proceeding in a civil court of the nature covered by S. 4(ii) would be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the consolidation authorities and any order passed by a civil court regarding land (title or possession or other incident) pending before the civil court would stand abated, was a reasonable restriction on the right of a party to go to an ordinary civil court. It also discriminated that class of litigants from other classes of litigants who enjoyed the right to approach the civil court. In his case the decree had been passed in his favour by a civil court but the subject-matter was pending in an appeal in the High Court and High Court passed an order nullifying the decree of the trial Court having regard to S. 4(ii) of the Act.
3.  We do not think there is substance in the submissions. True, the petitioner is right in saying that the high Court should not have "nullified" the decree of the trial Court but should have merely declared that the proceeding stood abated, which of course, means that the civil proceeding comes to naught.
4. Regarding the constitutional submissions we are not called upon to investigate the merits for the short reason that both the points have been covered by two decisions of this Court, Ram Adhar Singh v. Ramroop Singh 1967 Indlaw SC 1851967 Indlaw SC 185 and Chattar Singh v. Thakur Prasad Singh 1975 Indlaw SC 4101975 Indlaw SC 410. Indeed, the High Court has merely followed these two decisions in reporting the contentions of the appellants. We, therefore, see no merit in the writ petitions and dismiss them.
5.  In the circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions disposed of.
