This appeal  by certificate  granted  u/art. 133(1)(a)  of  the  Constitution  of  India  by  the Allahabad High Court is directed against its judgment dated the 28th  of January,  1966, confirming  on appeal  a decree passed by  the Civil  Judge, Kanpur, for the recovery of Rs. 46,652-14-6 with interest at the rate of 3 percent per annum from the date of the institution of the suit till payment in favour of  M/s. J.K. Gas Plant Manufacturing Company Limited against the sole defendant, namely, the Union of India.
2. The  case of  the plaintiff  company may  be briefly stated thus. The Government of India had supplied some steel to the plaintiff company  for manufacturing  gas plants  at Rampur. Only  a part  of the  steel so supplied was utilized for the  intended purpose  and with  regard to the rest the Regional Deputy  Iron and  Steel  Controller,  U.P.  Circle, Kanpur (here  in after referred to as the Kanpur Controller) directed the  plaintiff company  through a  letter dated the 8th/10th of  November, 1944 (exhibit 16) to deliver the same to the U.P. Registered Stock Holders Association Kanpur (for short the Association). In relation to the recovery of price of the material the letter stated:
"Your bill  for cost of the material supported by      original receipts from suppliers should be made out in      the name  of lorn and Steel  Controller, Calcutta, and      submitted to  this office.  Please make  out a separate      bill for  handling, storage expenses, etc., and send to      this office supported with original freight and payee's      receipt."
The order contained in  letter exhibit 16 could not be implemented on account of lack of transport facilities. The Kanpur Controller  therefore directed  the plaintiff company to deliver  the surplus  steel to  M/s. Govan Brothers Ltd., Rampur (hereinafter  referred to as G. Brothers) and to this extent the  order  contained  in  letter  exhibit  16  stood modified
The plaintiff  company delivered  to  G.  Brothers  the surplus material  lying with it between the 11th April, 1945 and 30th of April, 1945. The deliveries totalled 135 tons, 6 cwt., 1  quarter and  1 pound, the price whereof amounted to Rs. 43,728-6-6 which remained unpaid inspite of  repeated demands  made  by  the plaintiff  company  through  letters addressed to  the Kanpur  Controller to  whom the  bills had been forwarded as desired. Ultimately the plaintiff company was informed  by the  Accounts officer attached to the Iron and Steel  Controller, Calcutta,  that it should take up the matter with G. Brothers.
As the  price of the steel remained unpaid by the Union of India  as well as G. Brothers the plaintiff company filed its suit for Rs. 46,652-14-6 which was inclusive of interest on the principal price calculated at the rate of 6 per cent per  annum   from  April,  1945,  up  to  the  date  of  the institution of the suit,  after serving  the defendant with the requisite  notice under  s. 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
3. In its written statement the Union of India admitted the correctness of the order contained in letter exhibit 16. It pleaded however that  order was cancelled in toto and not merely in  regard to the party to whom the plaintiff company had to make over  the surplus steel. It  was specifically denied that  the disputed  goods had  been delivered  to  G. Brothers at the risk and responsibility of the defendant and that the  defendant Was  liable to pay the price thereof. It was asserted  that the defendant was merely controlling the supply and  distribution of  iron and  steel  and  that  the liability to  pay the price of any goods dealt with by it in the exercise  of its powers of control rested upon the party receiving the  goods. Another  plea taken  was that the suit was not  maintainable in  view of  the provisions of s. 175(3) of  the Government  of India Act, 1935, which enjoins that a contract between the Government of India and a third party has  to be in writing and in a particular form. It was emphasized that  G.  Brothers  alone  were  liable  for  the payment demanded by the plaintiff company.
4. The  trial court held that the Kanpur Controller had undertaken the liability to  pay the  price of the goods to the plaintiff  company even in respect of the delivery to G. Brothers and  that the defendant could not escape liability by reason  of the  contents' of  s. 65  of  the  Indian Contract Act even though the provisions of s. 175(3) of the Government of India  Act, 1935,  had not  been complied with. The  contention raised  by the defendant to the effect that section  17(2) of the Defence of India Act was a bar to the suit  was negatived  by  the  trial  court.  Some  other findings were also arrived at which are not relevant for the purposes of  this appeal.  The trial court therefore decreed the claim of the plaintiff company in full and also directed that it  would be  entitled to the costs of the suit as also interest at  the rate  of 3 per cent per annum from the date of the institution of the suit to the date of payment.
5. When the first appeal came up for hearing before the High Court the contention based on the provisions of s. 17(2) of  the Defence  of India  Act was  reiterated on  the ground that  the suit  was one for damages or compensation. S. 17(2) states:
"Save as  otherwise expressly  provided under this      Act, no  suit  or other  legal  proceeding  shall  lie      against the Crown for      any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in      good  faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of      this Act  or any  rules made  thereunder or  any  order      issued under any such rule."
The High  Court agreed with the learned counsel for the defendant that this section  would be a complete bar to the suit if it was one for damages or compensation but held that the suit  was not  of that nature and, on the other hand, it was for  recovery of  the price  of the goods supplied to G. Brothers  as   was  also  found  by  the  trial  court.  The contention was therefore rejected  as untenable.  The High Court then  proceeded to  examine the  true  nature  of  the transaction culminating  in the  delivery  of  steel  to  G. Brothers and held that the defendant had failed to establish that the  direction regarding  preparation and submission of bills contained in letter exhibit 16 had been cancelled when the plaintiff  company was  required to deliver the goods to G. Brothers.  It was  further  held  that  even  though  the provisions of  s. 175(3) of the Government of India Act were not  complied with  the agreement resulting  from  the correspondence which  took 1  place  between  the  plaintiff company and  the officers of the defendant was good. In this connection reliance  was placed  on  Debi  Prasad  Srikrisna Prasad Ltd.  v, Secretary  of State(l).  The sheet anchor of the judgment  of the  High Court however was its reliance on s. 70  of the  Indian Contract  Act and  on  the  basis thereof it  held the  plaintiff company  to be entitled  to recover the price of the goods from the defendant even if it was assumed that the provisions of s. 175(3) were a bar to  the   recognition  of  the contract  envisaged  by  the correspondence between  the  parties. In  this  connection reference was  made to New Marine Coal Co. (Bengal) Private Ltd. v.  Union of  India. It  was argued  before the High Court that the conditions requisite for the applicability of s. 70  of the Indian Contract Act were not available in the present  case in  as much  as the defendant had not been shown to  have enjoyed the benefit of the transaction which accrued only  to G.  Brothers. The High Court however took a contrary view with the observation:
"The benefit or advantage that has been derived by      the defendants  lies in  the fact that it has been able      to distribute  the  stock to  persons  of  its  choice      according to the rules and regulations framed by it."
It was in these  premises that the High Court dismissed the defendant's appeal with costs.
6. The  argument based  on s. 17(2) of the Defence of India Act has been reiterated before us but it has merely to be  noticed to be rejected. We are clearly of the opinion that the  suit is  not  for  damages, etc.,  such  as  are contemplated by that section.
7. It  was seriously  argued on behalf of the defendant that  throughout   the period  during  which  the  Kanpur Controller  dealt   with  the matter in  dispute  he  was exercising the powers conferred  on him  under the Iron and Steel Control  order, 1941,  that under clause of that order the plaintiff  company could  dispose of  its stock of steel only in  pursuance of  a written  direction from  the Kanpur Controller  and  that  the  mandate  issued  by  the  Kanpur Controller to  the plaintiff company requiring the latter to deliver the  goods to G. Brothers having been found to be an oral one,  the whole  transaction fell outside the ambit of the law so that the Union of India could not be bound by it.
The  argument  as  it  stands  does  not  lack plausibility although it  would be  a question whether the word 'written' occurring in cl. (S) of the Indian Iron and Steel Control order is  directory or mandatory. However we refuse to allow the argument to be raised and that for two reasons. Firstly, it is  a mixed question of  fact and  law which  was  never raised in  the courts  below. Secondly,  the plea  taken  in paragraph 4  of the written statement filed by the defendant was categorically to the effect that "the fresh instructions issued to  the plaintiff  are contained in the letter in the possession of the plaintiff", which plea runs counter to the factual part of the argument. In this view of the matter the legality of  the order under which  the  plaintiff  company transferred its stock to G. Brothers cannot be allowed to be questioned at this a stage.
8. The  only other ground put forward in support of the appeal was  that the  provisions of section 70 of the Indian Contract Act were not applicable to the facts of the present case. That section reads:
"Where a person lawfully does anything for another      person or delivers anything to him, not intending to do      so gratuitously,  and  such  other  person  enjoys  the      benefit  thereof,  the  latter   is  bound   to make      compensation  to  the  former  in respect  of,  or  to      restore, the thing so done or delivered."
As pointed  out in  State of  West Bengal v. M/s.  B.K Mondal 1961 Indlaw SC 161, three  conditions  must  be  satisfied before this section can be invoked:
"The first  condition is  that a person should lawfully      do something for another Person or deliver something to      him. The  second condition  is that  in doing  the said      thing or 'delivering the said      thing he  must not  intend to act gratuitously; and the      third is  that the  other person  for whom something is      done or  to whom  something is delivered must enjoy the      benefit thereof.  When these  conditions are  satisfied      section  70   imposes  upon   the latter person,  the      liability to make compensation to the former in respect      of or to restore, the thing so done or delivered."
On behalf of the defendant the objection raised to the applicability of  this section to the transaction in dispute is two-fold. The first contention in this behalf is that the delivery to  G. Brothers  was unlawful-a contention which we have already  turned down.  Secondly  it  is  said  that  no benefit at all was derived from the transaction by the Union of India  and that  its sole beneficiaries were G. Brothers.
This objection has not only been overruled by the High Court but appears  to us  also to  be without  substance. In this connection reference  may be  made to  some documentary  and oral evidence. To  begin  with,  letter  exhibit  16  which directed the  plaintiff company  to deliver the goods to the Association specifically required that the plaintiff company would make  the bills  in the  name of the Iron  and  Steel Controller, Calcutta,  and send  them  for  payment  to  the Kanpur Controller,  The inference  which may  reasonably  be drawn from  the contents  of the  letter is  that the Kanpur Controller was dealing with the goods as if they belonged to the Government of India  whose duty  it was to pay for them when they  changed hands, and that the identity of the party to whom  the goods  were to  be delivered  by the  plaintiff company under  the  orders  of the  Kanpur  Controller  was immaterial. Secondly,  the Kanpur Controller (Mr.R.R. Chari) in his deposition dated  the 24th of June, 1946 made before the  Second  Special,  Tribunal,  Lahore  (Camp  Bombay)  in Criminal Case No. 3 of 1946, stated thus:
"In September,  1944, J.K. Gas Plant Manufacturing      Co., Rampur,  Ltd., handed  over 137  tons of  iron and      steel  to  Messrs.  Govan   Brothers,  Rampur,   under      instructions from our department. Messrs Govan Brothers      thus held the, materials on behalf of the Government."
It has  been urged by learned counsel for the defendant that this  statement is not admissible in evidence as it was not made  at the  trial of  the case in hand. But' it is too late in the day for such an objection to be entertained. The statement was  admitted in  evidence as  exhibit 15  at  the trial presumably, without objection and cannot now be thrown out. According to it  G. Brothers  held the supply of steel made to then by the plaintiff company not for themselves but on behalf  of the Government. Besides, a letter (exhibit 51) which was issued by the Kanpur Controller  to Mr.  Siddiq Ali Khan of the Department of Industries and Commerce, Rampur, also states:
"In this,  connection I may mention that the steel      is virtually  the property  of the Government of India,      War Transport Department and under no circumstances can      the Government  loose ,  money in the  bargain.  I  am      obtaining the  actual cost  of the  materials plus  all      incidental charges  and I will let you know the amount      to be  paid by  each party along with written orders re      gularising the  issue of these materials to the various      parties. I  have to  hold you  and you  in turn Messrs.      Govan Bros. (Rampur) Ltd., responsible for the recovery      of the cost of the materials when intimated to you."
There is  no reason  for us  to hold,  in view  of this statement that the steel  supplied by the plaintiff company to G. Brothers was not being held by the latter on behalf of the Government of India  and if  that be so, the Government must be  held to have reaped full benefit of the delivery to G. Brother's  and it is immaterial how the steel supplied to the latter was dealt with later on.
9. Learned  counsel  for  the  defendant  cited  S.  1. Railway Co. v. Madura Municipality  for the proposition that the benefit to the defendant was in any case an indirect one which  would   not  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  third condition; envisaged  by the provisions of section 70 of the Indian Contract  Act. In  that case the South Indian Railway had, widened a culvert in compliance with an order passed by the Provincial Government under  certain provisions  of the Railways Act,  1890. The  work was  done primarily  for  the benefit  of   the  private   owners  of   property  in  the neighborhood. The Railway Company however sued the Municipal Committee   within   the   territorial  limits   of   whose jurisdiction the  culvert lay for the cost of widening it on the ground  that the  Municipal Committee received a benefit because it  recovered taxes  from the owners or occupiers of the property.  In turning down the claim of the South Indian Railway Company  Leach, C. J., who delivered the judgment of the division  Bench consisting of himself and Lakshmana Rao. J. stated:
"This is  a very  indirect benefit, and section 70      can in our opinion only have application where there is      direct benefit to the person for whom the work is done.      The persons  who are  enjoying the benefit of this work      are the  owners and  occupiers of the buildings in the      locality. It would be doing violence to      the section to say that in these circumstances the work      was done for the benefit of the municipality."
The judgment  of the Division Bench was upheld by their Lord ships  of the  Privy  Council  in Governor-General  In Council, Represented  by the  General Manager. South Indian Railway  v.   Municipal   Council 1945 Indlaw MAD 319,   Madura,   Through  its Commissioner along  with the  reasons on which it was based. But then  the case  is of  no help  to the defendant who had enjoyed the  full benefit  of the  delivery of goods to  G. Brothers and not merely an indirect benefit thereof.
10. For  the reasons  stated the  appeal fails  and  is dismissed with costs.
