1.  These two appeals by special leave are directed against a judgment dated February 16, 1973, of the Bombay High Court by which the two respondents, who were Accused No. 1 and Accused No. 5 before the Trial Court, were acquitted by the charges framed against them. As both the appeals arise out of the same case, we propose to dispose them of by one common judgment.
2.  The two respondents and others were tried by the Chief Presidency Magistrate under various sections of the Customs Act as also S. 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 read with Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The learned Magistrate convicted the respondents u/s. 135(a) and (b) of the Customs Act read with Section 120B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 and also under S. 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 and sentenced respondent No. 1(A-1), P. K. Pathak to rigorous imprisonment for three years u/s. 135(a) and (b) of the Customs Act and for one year under Section 120B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 and S. 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act.
3. He further directed that the sentences would run concurrently. Respondent No. 2(A-5), Shri Madhukar Keshav Waity, was also convicted of the aforesaid offences but sentenced only to rigorous imprisonment for one year.
4.  We have heard the learned counsel for the State but unfortunately no one appeared on behalf of the respondents, despite repeated calls, although they were represented by a counsel in this Court.
5.  The material facts constituting the prosecution case have been detailed in the judgment of the learned Magistrate and also of the High Court. After conviction the respondents filed an appeal before the High Court which came to the conclusion that the prosecution case was not proved and accordingly acquitted both the respondents. Hence this appeal.
6.  Put briefly, the case arose out of an incident which led to the recovery from both the accused, of a huge quantity of smuggled goods worth Rs. 15 lakhs which consisted partly of imported watches valued at Rs. 12.50 lakhs and partly of diacem antwerpen packed in 40 small cartons (each containing 20 sticks) worth about Rs. 2.50 lakhs.
7.  The central evidence in the case consisted of the confessions made by the respondents before the Customs authorities, particularly P.W. 4, corroborated as it was by the recovery of the smuggled articles at the instance of the respondents witnessed by P.Ws. 1, 2, 4 and 9. P.W. 9 was an independent witness whereas P.W. 1 was a police officer and P.Ws. 2 and 4 were Customs officials. As the confessions were retracted, the learned Trial Court, as a rule of prudence, decided to act on them only if they were corroborated in material particulars by some other evidence.
8. The learned Magistrate found that the search witnesses, P.Ws. 1, 2, 4 and 9, fully corroborated the statements made by the respondents in their confessions. Apart from the recovery of the smuggled articles at the instance of the respondents, the circumstances under which respondent No. 1(A-1) was arrested, at the instance of A-5, from a bus stand which were proved by P.W. 9, was also relied upon by the learned Magistrate in holding that the case against the respondents stood proved.
9.  The High Court disagreed with the view of the learned Magistrate and found that as no independent witness or witnesses from the locality were taken by the Customs authorities to witness the search, no reliance could be placed on the searches or recovery of the smuggled articles and that thus since the confessions were not corroborated, the conviction of the respondents was bad. The High Court also rejected the evidence of P.W. 9 an independent search witness, on the ground - (1) that he was not a witness of the locality, and (2) that he gave his assent to accompany the police and Customs Officers to witness the various recoveries wherever he was taken by the police.
10.  We have gone through the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 2, 4 and 9 who are the witness to the search and we find ourselves unable to agree with the High Court that there were any good reasons to disbelieve their evidence. On the other hand the fact that P.Ws. 2 and 4 were Customs officials would be no ground to distrust their evidence unless there was any serious infirmity in the intrinsic merits of their testimony.
11. The High Court made no attempt at all to consider the intrinsic merit of any of their deposition, an exercise which was called for particularly when the learned Magistrate had relied on the same and a number of other circumstances to hold that the recoveries had been proved. We have gone through the evidence of P.W. 9 and we are unable to find any serious infirmity therein. It appears to be consistent and straightforward. The High Court laid stress on the fact that no witness from the locality was taken to witness the search. It is common knowledge that when dealing with the recovery of smuggled goods, the Customs authorities have to maintain top secrecy least recovery should prove abortive by reason of any leakage. Furthermore, smuggled goods are often kept in lonely places which may or not have habitation.
12.  In the instant case, we find that while respondent No. 2(A-5) got the articles recovered from a toney at the seashore, respondent No. 1(A-1) got the articles recovered from an island which had to be reached through a mechanised vessel, the journey taking an hour and a half. The articles were found concealed in the bushes growing on the island. In these circumstances, it would neither be practical nor reasonable to expect any person of the locality to witness the search. The fact that P.W. 9 was approached by the police and the Customs authorities and accompanied them to witness the search, made at the instance of the respondents, by itself would not show that he was in any way interested or unreliable. Furthermore, the evidence of P.W. 9 is corroborated as regard the search list, Ext. A, by Kulkarni who was a police officer of the rank of Sub-Inspector. The search list, Ext. A, shows that respondent No. 2(A-5) took the witnesses to the seashore near the edge of sea water and recovered a yellow coloured suitcase from a toney and that from inside the suitcase a number of wrist watches of foreign make valued at Rs. 1.50 lakhs and diacem valued at Rs. 50, 000/- were recovered.
13.  Thus the, total value of the goods recovered at the instance of respondent No. 2 was Rs. 2 lakhs. The goods recovered were handed over by P.W. 1, Kulkarni, to the Customs Officers (P.W. 2 and others) under Panchanama Ext. B. Similarly Ext. C which is the recovery made at the instance of respondent No. 1(A-1) from a rocky island called Vasi Uttan is witnessed by P.W. 9 and P.Ws. 2 and 4, the Customs Officers. The articles recovered under Ext. C were also wrist watches and diacem which were taken out from 22 plastic bags at the instance of the first respondent. The total value of these articles was Rs. 13 lakhs, comprised of wrist watches worth Rs. 10.50 lakhs and diacem worth Rs. 2.50 lakhs. These articles were handed over to the Customs Officers under Ext. C-1. Thus, it would appear that the total value of the smuggled goods recovered was in the range of Rs. 15 lakhs.
14.  Merely because P.Ws. 2 and 4 were Customs Officers their evidence could not be rejected outright because they were doubtless competent officers to prove the search and the recoveries. Thus, we are unable to agree with the view of the High Court that in the instant case, the confessions of the respondents were not corroborated by the recoveries as proved by the search lists and the witnesses to the same.
15.  Having considered the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 2, 4 and 9, we are satisfied that the confessional statements made by the respondents before the Customs Officers (which are undoubtedly admissible in evidence) were fully corroborated by the witnesses mentioned above.
16.  On an overall consideration of the evidence, therefore, we are satisfied that the judgment of the High Court acquitting the respondents is vitiated by a clear error of law.
17.  The appeals are accordingly allowed and the judgment of the High Court is set aside and that of the Chief Presidency Magistrate convicting and sentencing the respondents, as indicated above is restored.
Appeal allowed.
