1.  This appeal by special leave is directed against an order, dated July 3, 1979, of the High Court of Allahabad, by which it quashed the prosecution of the respondents in exercise of its powers u/s. 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
2.  The respondents were being tried in the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Farrukhabad, for offences under Rule 126-P(2) (ii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the Defence of India Rules (for short called 'the DIR'), alleged to have been committed by them on April 20, 1967. Under Rule 126-Q of the DIR, no prosecution for an offence could be instituted against the respondents without the consent of the Administrator or any person authorised in this behalf.
3. Such sanction for prosecution is said to have been granted by the Collector of Customs, under whose orders the Assistant Collector on December 27, 1972, filed a complaint against the respondents in court in respect of the aforesaid offences. The High Court quashed the proceedings with these observations : 'Administrator' means the Administrator appointed under Rule 126-J of the Rules. As the Defence of India Act, 1962
4.  Mr. Khader, appearing for the appellant, submits that the Department or the State is not anxious to proceed further with the trial of these accused respondents because of the considerable lapse of time. But, he strongly urges the court to lay down the law in regard to the question as to whether S. 116 of the Gold Control Act, 1968 or S. 6 read with S. 24 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and S. 1(3) of the Defence of India Act, 1962, saves and continues the office, functions and powers of the Administrator appointed under Rule 126-J of the DIR (Part XII-A) for the purpose of authorising or initiating prosecution in 1972 for offences committed in April 1967 punishable under Rule 126-P(2) (ii), (iv), (v) and (vi) of the DIR.
5.  In order to ascertain the primary facts on the basis of which the appellant wants us to answer this question of law, we repeatedly adjourned the pronouncement of orders to enable the appellant to produce the original notification or order under Rule 126-J of the DIR, whereby an Administrator was appointed. We also requested him to produce a copy of any general or special order whereby the Administrator authorised the Collector of Customs to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the Administrator under the aforesaid part of the DIR. In spite of the ample opportunities repeatedly given, Mr. Khader has expressed his inability to supply this basic information.
6. In the absence of such information, which is not available from the record before us, or from the judgment of the High Court, any attempt to answer the question posed will be an exercise in sheer speculation. We, therefore, decline to express any opinion on that question and dismiss this appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
