State of Punjab and Others v Mulakh Raj Nand Lal
Supreme Court of India

17 March 1981
C.A. No. 751 of 1975. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 17 October 1973, of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in L.P.A. No. 446 of 1971. The judgment of the High Court is reported in [1974] 33 STC 42
The Judgment was delivered by: TULZAPURKAR, J.
1.  After hearing the counsel for the appellants we are satisfied that there is no substance in this appeal.
2.  The respondent-assessee, a registered dealer, deals in vegetable ghee - an item on which sales tax is leviable at the first stage of sale under notification dated March, 30, 1966, as provided in s. 5(1-A) of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948. Admittedly, the first stage of sale in respect of the goods in question was at the time when the manufacturer (Amritsar Sugar Mills Co. Ltd.) sold the goods to two unregistered dealers (M/s. Rallia Ram Gurbax Rai, Tarn Taran, and M/s. Krishan Lal Brij Mohan, Amritsar). These unregistered firms in their turn sold the same goods to the respondent-assessee who in due course sold the goods to consumer and the question for determination is whether the respondent-assessee is liable to pay sales tax on the sale of these goods to his consumers and the answer to the question depends on the proper interpretation of s. 5(1-A) and the proviso thereto of the Act.
3.  In our view, the interpretation put by the Division Bench of the High Court on s. 5(1-A) and the proviso thereto seems to be quite correct. The dominant intention of s. 5(1-A) is to impose the levy of a single point tax on the first stage of the sale of the goods specified in the notification issued thereunder. The charging provision is to be found in s. 5(1-A) while the proviso merely provides that subsequent sales will be exempt provided the dealer effecting such subsequent sales furnishes the documents (certificate) mentioned therein. It is not possible to accept the contention on behalf of the State Government that the respondent-assessee having purchased the goods from two unregistered dealers in not entitled to have his sales to his consumers exempted from sales tax. Admittedly, the manufacturer, himself a registered dealer, when he sold the goods to the unregistered dealers had issued the necessary certificates and had undertaken the liability to pay sales tax on the sales effected by him - such sales being the sales at the first stage u/cl. (b) of the notification dated March 30, 1966. The respondent-assessee had produced the certificates to support his claim that he was not liable to pay any sales tax on the sales effected by him of the very goods to his consumers, the same being claimed as subsequent sales effected by him.
4. In our view, the Division Bench of the High Court rightly held that the respondent's sales to his consumers being subsequent sales would not suffer any sales tax. It is difficult to accept that contention that the phrase "registered dealer from whom the goods wee purchased" occurring at the end of the proviso should be construed so as to prevent the assessee's sales being regarded as subsequent sales simply because his purchases were not from immediate registered dealer but were from two unregistered dealers who had purchased from the registered dealer. The words in that phrase are not
"registered dealer from who, he (the dealer effecting the subsequent sales) had purchased the goods"
The appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
