Indubhai Ambalal Patel and Others v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

12 January 1982
C.As. Nos. 1305 and 1306 of 1970.
The order of the was as follows:
In these appeals two parcels of land forming part of one plot were acquired by a Notification issued in April 1956 and the question raised pertains to the market value of these parcels of land on the relevant date. In C.A. No. 1305 of 1970 the claimant, Raja Dhanraj Giriji, had claimed compensation for his parcel of land admeasuring 4628-26 sq. yds. at the rate of Rs 100 per sq. yd. before the Land Acquisition Officer but he awarded compensation at the rate of Rs 35 per sq. yd. He got a reference made to the City Civil Court which granted him compensation at the rate of Rs 80 per sq. yd. exclusive of solatium at 15 per cent and this rate was fixed after taking into consideration the injurious affection suffered by the claimant on account of severance of a small portion measuring 415 sq. yds. for the an unaccessible portion which was left with him and which was of no use to him. The matter was carried in appeal to the High Court both by the claimant as well as by the State Government and the High Court dismissed appeals of both confirming the compensation awarded by the City Civil Court.
1. In the other case the claimants, Indubhai Ambalal Patel had claimed compensation in respect of their parcel of land admeasuring 4513 sq. yds. (sold to them by Dhanraj Giriji at Rs 40 per sq. yd.) at the rate of Rs 125 per sq. yd. but the Land Acquisition Officer granted compensation at the rate of Rs 35 per sq. yd. and in the reference made to the City Civil Court, that court granted compensation at the rate of Rs 45 per sq. yd. The claimants preferred an appeal to the High Court and obviously in view of compensation awarded to Raja Dhanraj Giriji at the rate of Rs 80 per sq. yd. These claimants could not be discriminated and were granted compensation at the same rate, but inclusive of solatium, especially when the two parcels of land formed the part of the same plot originally owned by Raja Dhanraj Giriji. To both the claimants the High Court awarded interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum. Both the claimants have come up in appeal to this Court.
After hearing counsel on either side and having considered the sale deeds and the other documents which were considered by the courts below we are clearly of the view that no question of breach of any principle is involved in these appeals and the question of quantum of compensation solely rests on the appreciation of the material placed before the lower courts and in our view the High Court's appreciation of the entire material seems to be proper and it was right in confirming the trial court's rate of Rs 80 per sq. yd. as representing the fair market value on the relevant date. In regard to two aspects only that were pressed before us some interference seems to be called for.
In C.A. No. 1306 of 1970 the claimants were not granted any interest at all on the compensation amount awarded by the Land Acquisition Officer and when the enhanced compensation was awarded interest has been awarded at the rate of 4 per cent only on the enhanced amount. It has been urged before us that the claimants would be entitled not only to interest on the entire amounts of compensation but also at a higher rate, namely 6 per cent per annum which has been prescribed u/s. 23 of the Hyderabad Land Acquisition Act. There is force in this contention. Interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum seems to have been granted under some apprehension. It has been further urged by counsel for these claimants that solatium at the rate of 15 per cent was also wrongly denied to them. We enquired from counsel for the State as to the basis on which such a solatium was denied and the only basis on which he was able to justify the denial of solatium was that a higher rate, namely Rs 80 per sq. yd. was fixed in the case of these claimants and therefore compensation at that rate was decreed as inclusive of solatium. He suggested that the rate of compensation which was in the mind of the court was Rs 70 per sq. yd. but assuming that the court wanted to give compensation at the rate of Rs 70 per sq. yd. on mathematical calculation the counsel for the State fairly conceded that if solatium had to be denied on this basis the compensation awarded would have been fixed at Rs 73 per sq. yd. and not Rs 70 per sq. yd.
2. In view of this position we are of the view that additional compensation at the rate of Rs 3 per sq. yd. should be paid to the claimants and further, interest at the rate of 6 per cent should be paid to them on the entire amount of compensation from the date of taking possession of the land till the payment. However, while calculating interest at the rate of 6 per cent adjustment will have to be made in respect of the interest if any paid to the claimants on such portion of the compensation which has been already awarded to them. With this modification the decree of the High Court under appeal is confirmed.
In C.A. No. 1305 of 1970 the claimant has also sought interest at the rate of 6 per cent annum which is justified. It appears that initially no interest was awarded but on a review petition being made by the claimant before the High Court interest at the rate of 4 per cent was awarded on the entire amount of compensation awarded to the claimant. In case of this claimant therefore additional interest of 2 per cent over and above that awarded by the High Court from the date of taking possession of the land till the date of payment is hereby decreed. Subject to this modification the order of the High Court under appeal is confirmed. Each party to bear its own costs.
Order accordingly.
