Ramji Lal and Another v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

6 December 1982
Cr.A. No. 662 of 1982 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 3 September 1982 of the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in Cr.A. No. 513 of 1980).
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Special leave is granted.
1.  Appellant original accused 2 and 3 were convicted for an offence u/s. 325 read with S. 34 of the IPC and each of them was sentenced to R. I. for 1 1/2 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 200 in default to undergo R. I. for three months. Both of them were also convicted for an offence u/s. 324 read with Section 34, IPC and each of them is sentenced to suffer R. I. for one year. Both of them are further convicted for an offence u/s. 323 read with Section 34, IPC and each of them is sentenced to suffer R. I. for six months. Substantive sentences are directed to run concurrently. Original accused I was given the benefit of the provisions of Probation of Offenders Act and he was ordered to execute a bond for a period of two years to be of good behaviors. That period has long since expired.
2.  When the special leave was taken up for hearing today, Dr. Chauhan, appeared for the appellants and Mr. B. B. Singh, learned counsel appeared for the original injured complainant. Both drew our attention to an affidavit dated November 1, 1982 filed by the original injured complainant. Nasib Singh, in which he has stated that he has entered into composition and that has been done voluntarily and that even though he was offered compensation he declined to accept the same. He sated that the composition was brought about by the intervention of friends and well-wishes to restore friendly and good neighbourly relations with the accused.
3.  We had considerable hesitation in accepting the genuineness of this composition. More so because the approach of the injured, who has suffered as many as 19 injuries, two of which are certified as grievous, to enter into composition without accepting the monetary compensation. Dr. Chauhan, for his client offered Rs. 2000 by way of compensation. But Mr. Singh told us that his instructions are not to accept the same and the same was not considered necessary for the purpose of composition. This added to our apprehension and we discussed the matter for some time. Ultimately, we were assured that there is nothing hanky-panky about the composition.
4.  All the offences for which the appellants are convicted are compoundable and the composition can be entered into with the permission of the court. Looking to the chastened attitude of the accused and the commendable attitude of the injured complainant, in order to restore harmony in the society, we accept the composition. We grant permission to enter into the composition and accept the same.
5. We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the conviction and sentence imposed on both the appellants. If they are on bail, their bail-bonds will be cancelled. If they are in jail, they will be released from the jail forthwith.
Appeal allowed.
