Chuni Lal v Ved Prakash
Supreme Court of India

14 March 1984
C.A. No. 459 of 1971. (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 20 July 1970 of the Delhi High Court in R.S.A. No. 7-D of 1961).
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  This particular appeal has a chequered history. By special leave granted by this Court the appeal was admitted in 1971. It was called out for hearing on August 14, 1973. The Court proceedings show that on that day Mr Man Mohan Nath, Advocate on record was not present and the Court dismissed the appeal for default. It appears that subsequently, the appellant filed C.M.P. No. 7810 of 1973 for restoration of appeal to file and by an order dated September 19, 1973, his request was granted and the appeal was resorted to file. Since then nearly 11 year have rolled by. The appeal was called out today but Mr Man Mohan Nath, Advocate on record was not present. We resolved not to undertake the futile exercise of dismissing the appeal for default and wait for application for restoration.
2.  In order to acquaint ourselves about the facts of the case, we requested Mr T. S. Arora, counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent to tell us the facts acquaint us with the evidence and the finding. Mr Arora pointed out that the appellant is landlord and he sought eviction inter alia on the ground that the deceased respondent was allotted Government premises as he was a Government servant and therefore landlord is entitled to recover possession of the demised premises. Mr Arora pointed out that this was the allegation in 1956. Nearly 28 years have rolled by since then.
3. The most unfortunate event of which we must take note is that the respondent tenant is dead and therefore the allotment of premises to the deceased tenant as Government servant would have hardly any impact on the outcome of this appeal. Learned Single Judge of the High Court who reversed the finding of the Rent Control Tribunal has observed that
"looking at the case from all the aspects and finding that the judgment under appeal sustains eviction only on the basis of the provisions of cl. (h) of the proviso to sub-s. (1) of S. 14 of the Act"
Appeal dismissed.
