Geep Flashlight Industries Limited v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

10 August 1984
S.L.P. (Civil) No. 654 of 1981, [Arising as an appeal from 1985 (19) E.L.T.68 (All.)]
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  This special level petition is directed against the Judgment of the Allahabad High Court in Writ Petition No. 155 of 1979 by which the writ petition filed by the present petitioner was dismissed holding that plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner was covered by residuary Tariff Item No. 68 and not by Tariff Item No. 15A(2) of Schedule I to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. All the authorities under Central Excises and Salt Act concurrently held that plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner was governed by the residuary Tariff Item. No. 68 and not by Tariff Item No. 15A(2) and this view was upheld by the High Court. We are not inclined to grant leave in this matter but as the learned Counsel urged that the point raised herein is awaiting consideration of this Court in Union Carbide Ltd v. Union of India and Others - Civil Appeal No. 1103 of 1972 and there is a conflict of opinion amongst Gujarat High Court and Allahabad High Court, a reasoned and speaking order would be appropriate.
2.  After hearing the learned Counsel, we are satisfied that the view taken by the Allahabad High Court that the plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner is covered by residuary Tariff Item No. 68 and not by Tariff Item No. 15A(2) is correct and unquestionable and, therefore, we reject the special leave petition by this short speaking order.
3.  Petitioner is admittedly manufacturing plastic torches. It is contended on his behalf that for the purpose of levy of excise duty plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner is governed by Tariff Item No. 15A(2) which reads as under :
"Articles made of plastics, all sorts, including tubes, rods, sheets, foils, sticks, other rectangular or profile shape whether laminated on not, and whether rigid or flexible including lay flat tubings and polyvinyl chlorides sheets...."
4. The learned Counsel Contended that the plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner is nothing else but plastic tube made of plastic in which certain other devices are inserted so as to make it a torch but it none-the-less retains the character of a plastic tube. A mere reference to Tariff Item No. 15A(2) would show that the articles therein described are plastic material in different shape and form and not articles made from such plastic material. There is a noticeable difference between plastic material in different shape and form such as tubes, road, sheets etc, and articles made form such plastic material such as plastic torch.
It would be doing violence to language if one were to include plastic torch in articles under Tariff Item No. 15A(2) on the ground that a plastic tube is used for manufacturing plastic torch. Articles such as tubes, road, sheets, foils, sticks etc. of plastic material merely describe plastic material in different shape and form and each word used therein takes its colour from the word just preceding and just succeeding and the adjectival clause 'articles made of plastics'. Articles made of plastic meaning article made wholly of commodity commercially knows as plastics, and not articles made from plastics along with other materials. By no canon of construction, a plastic torch can be read in conjuction with plastic tubes, rods, sheets, foils etc. made of plastics. Plastic torch is a distinct and different commodity commonly known in the market as torch.
5. Ordinarily, torch is not described by the name of the material used in the tube in which the device of torch is housed. The commodity known advertised, sold and offered in the market is torch. Prefix plastic merely describes the quality of torch as distinguished from other type of torches. It is not sold primarily as plastic tube.
6.  By a catena of decisions it is settled law that an expression used in a taxing statute for describing a commodity must be given the meaning which is generally given to it by a person in the trade or in the market of commodities and should be interpreted in the sense the person conversant with the subject-matter of statute and dealing with it would attribute to it. Ramavtar Budhair Prasad v. The Assistant Sales Tax Officer, Akola and Others 1961 Indlaw SC 351. The High Court approached the matter from this angle and reached the correct conclusion that the expression 'articles made of plastics' used in Tariff Item No. 15A(2) do not cover such articles which are not directly made from the material indicated in sub-item (1) but are made from articles made out of such material.
7.  Before concluding on this point, we may say that if the contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner were to prevail, one can bring any item not otherwise, covered except the residuary Tariff Item No. 68 by merely putting a small plastic tube in the manufacture of the item and contend that it is an article made of plastic.
8.  Having carefully considered the submission of the learned Counsel, we are in agreement with the view taken by the High Court that plastic torches manufactured by the petitioner do not fall under Tariff Item No. 15A(2) and has rightly been included in the residuary Tariff Item No. 68.
9.  It may be mentioned in passing that the Tariff Item No. 68 was introduced by the Finance Act of 1975. If this aspect is kept in view, the extensive argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner as to the view taken by the authorities under Central Excise Act with regard to the plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner prior to 1975 has having been governed by Tariff Items. No. 15A(2) pales into insignificance. Prior to 1975 this plastic torch did not attract Central Excise duty. In order to cover such items and some other items not falling within any specific tariff item that the Parliament engrafted residuary item. Therefore, the High Court was justified in examining the question that if plastic torch manufactured by the petitioner is not governed by Tariff No. 15A(2), whether it would fall under Tariff Item No. 68.
The conclusion reached by the High Court is eminently correct and legal and it calls for no interference. We accordingly reject this special leave petition.
Petition dismissed.
