Haji Abdul Hameed v Commissioner of Income Tax, Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

6 September 1985
C.A. No. 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100 and 101 of 1974
The Judgment was delivered by: V. D. TULZAPURKAR, J.
1.  There is no substance in these appeals which have been preferred by the two assessees, Haji Abdul Hameed and Haji Abdul Shakoor, respectively, who have been denied earned income relief by the taxing authorities as well as by the Tribunal and the High Court. The dispute centres round the income derived by the two assessees as beneficiaries under the deed of wakf executed by their grandfather in 1942 ; the subject-matter of the wakf was bidi business and admittedly for the accounting period relevant to the assessment years 1957-58 and 1960-61, it was Hameed (the beneficiary) who carried on the business as sole mutawalli and in these two assessment years after the income was earned by the wakf, the same was distributed between the two brothers as beneficiaries under the deed and it was in respect of such receipt in the hands of the two assessees that earned income relief was claimed under s. 2(6AA)(b) or (c) of the Indian I.T. Act, 1922.
2.  Admittedly, the assessment, in the sense of levying of the tax on the computed income, proceeded under s. 41(2) and not under s. 41(1) of the Indian I.T. Act, 1922, and earned income relief was claimed either under cl. (b) or cl. (c) of s. 2(6AA). So far as the receipt of income in the hands of Haji Abdul Shakoor is concerned, since the business was not carried on by him nor was the income derived by him from his personal exertions clearly, he was not entitled to earned income relief either under cl. (b) or cl. (c) and the High Court was right in declining that relief to him.
3.   Counsel for the appellants has also not pressed his case for earned income relief before us but counsel did press the case of Haji Abdul Hameed under cl. (b). However, in our view, the High Court was right in declining that relief to him also for valid reasons mentioned in the majority decision of the High CourtConsidering the claim of Haji Abdul Hameed under cl. (b), the High Court took the view that the income was not assessable under the head " Profits and gains of business " under s. 10, but it was assessable under the head " Income from other sources " under s. 12, inasmuch as the source of the receipt was not business but the deed of wakf and hence cl. (b) was not attracted. Further, while considering the claim under cl. (c), the High Court has taken the view that the word " immediately " in cl. (c) denotes direct connection between the personal exertions and the receipt of income in the hands of the assessee, but since, in the instant case, Haji Abdul Hameed had undoubtedly earned the money initially as a mutawalli, it was only after the distribution from the wakf that he received it as a beneficiary and, therefore, the case would not fall within cl. (c). We are in agreement with this view of the High Court and feel that the earned income relief was in the circumstances rightly denied to the assessees.
4.  We would, however, like to point out that the position might have been different if the assessment had proceeded under s.41(1) instead of under s. 41(2) of the Act, but since the option is with the Department to proceed against the assessee under either of these provisions and since, in the instance case, the assessment had proceeded under s. 41(2), no relief is eligible to the assessees.
5.  On behalf of the assessees, reliance was placed by the counsel on the subsequent decision of the same High Court, in the case of the same assessees, for the subsequent assessment year, namely, 1961-62, in which the assessees have been granted relief by the court. After going through that judgment, we are of the view that that decision does not seem to have decided the point correctly; in the first place, admittedly, the aspect whether the earned income relief was available to the assessee under cl. (b) or cl. (c) of s. 2(6AA) of the Act, has not been considered by the court at all and proceeding to consider the question under cl. (b), some observations have been made to the effect that after all the mutawalli was an agent of the beneficiary. If the case was to be brought under cl. (b), the real question to be considered was whether the profits and gains arose to the assessee directly as a result of the carrying on of the business or a result of the intervention of a deed of wakf and if the latter was the position, the relief could not be granted under cl. (b) at all. The appeals are, therefore, dismissed. No costs.
Appeals dismissed.
