Upendra and Others v State of Madhya Pradesh and Another
Supreme Court of India

25 September 1986
W.P. (Civil/Cri.) No. 1071 of 1986
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  The counter-affidavit in this writ petition states that five persons have been identified as bonded labourers and they had been released from bondage and that efforts are being made to rehabilitate them. We wish to emphasise what we have been saying time and again that it is no use identifying and releasing bonded labourers unless provisions are also made for their rehabilitation as otherwise we would be driving them to starvation.
2.   It is therefore necessary that as soon as the bonded labourers are identified and released the State Government should be in a position to rehabilitate them and there is no reason why the State Government should not be in position to do so particularly with regard to the various schemes sponsored by the Central Government as also the subsidies given by the Central Government for this purpose. We would therefore direct that these five persons should be immediately rehabilitated and report submitted to this Court by October 13, 1986 as to what is the manner in which they have been rehabilitated.
3.  Learned counsel for the State of Madhya Pradesh informs us that some other bonded labourers have also been identified in some areas in regard to which other writ petitions have been filed and which are before us. We would direct that these bonded labourers should also be released and rehabilitated immediately and the report of the State Government to be made on or before October 13, 1986 will give particulars of such bonded labourers and the rehabilitation measures already taken to rehabilitate them.
4.  We would also appoint Mr. P. V. Rajagopal, Prayog Samaj, Sewa Sansthan, Post Office Tilda Neora, PIN 493 114, District Raipur, M. P. as Commissioner to visit the villages Bagaijore, Paisada, Durgapalli, Bhanwarpur, Icchapur and Sighnapur in District Raipur and ascertain whether there are any more bonded labourers in these villages and if so to identify them and bring their names and particulars immediately to the notice of the Collector of Raipur for the purpose of releasing and rehabilitating them. The Commissioner will submit a report to this Court on October 13, 1986 and copies of the same may be supplied to the advocates concerned. The State Government will deposit with the Collector of Raipur a sum of 
Rs.1000 to meet the cost, charges an expenses of the Commissioner who will be at liberty to withdraw the same in order to reimburse his cost, charges and expenses. The District Authority of Raipur will render all assistance required by the Commissioner for the purpose of carrying out his assignment. The matter is adjourned to October 13, 1986.
Order accordingly.
