Indian Express Private Limited v State of Tamil Nadu
Supreme Court of India

2 April 1986
C.A. No. 1633 (NT) of 1974. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 27 June 1973, of the Madras High Court in T.C. No. 330 of 1969. The judgment of the High Court is reported at [1974] 34 STC 231 (Mad.)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment of the High Court of Madras allowing a revision petition filed by the respondent in a case arising out of an assessment under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 In this appeal learned counsel for the appellant contends that when the surplus copies of the newspapers were sold they possessed the character of newspapers and were, therefore, exempt from sales tax.
2.   It seems to us clear that when newspapers are sold to the reading public they are sold as a medium containing information regarded as news. They are purchased by members of the public to acquaint themselves with the current news. Information is news when it is fresh and new. With the lapse of time it ceases to be news. So when newspapers become old, they carry information which is no longer news, and therefore they lose their character as newspapers. When they are disposed of as waste paper, their sale cannot be regarded as the sale of newspapers. They are not sold for the purpose of reading the news printed in them. It will be noted that the surplus copies are sold by weight and not per copy. What is exempt from sales tax is the turnover of newspapers and not the turnover of old newspapers or waste paper.
3.  It is also clear from the material on the record that the transactions of sale of the surplus copies must be regarded as a business carried on by the appellant. It was an activity which he pursued regularly, and the motive was to earn a profit. It was incidental to the business carried on by the appellant of printing and publishing newspapers. In the course of carrying on the business of printing and publishing newspapers, it is inevitable that a number of copies should remain surplus and that they should, therefore, be sold as waste paper. The business of selling the surplus copies as waste paper attracted sales tax, having regard to the terms of clause (d) of section 2 of the Act, which defines the expression "business", as it stood at the relevant time.In our opinion, the High Court is plainly right in maintaining the sales tax assessment on the turnover of the surplus copies of newspapers sold as waste paper.
4.  The Learned counsel for the appellant relies on the decisions of this Court in State of Gujarat v. Raipur Manufacturing Co. Ltd. 1966 Indlaw SC 297 and State of Tamil Nadu v. Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd. 1972 Indlaw SC 205. Having regard to the state of the laws at the relevant time, these decisions do not, in our opinion, assist the appellant.
5.  In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed but with out any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
