1. PATHAK, J. These appeals by special leave are directed against the common judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh disposing of four Income-tax References and answering the following identical question of law arising in each Reference in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue:
"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was justified in law in holding that the income derived by the beneficiaries under the two trust-deeds belonged to the beneficiary in individual capacity and not in the capacity as representing the Hindu undivided family?"
2. These appeals involve the construction of two trust- deeds couched in identical terms. To understand their import it is necessary to set out a genealogical table:
Sir Hukumachand Seth (Karta)
M
Lady Kanchanbai (Wife)
Shri Rajkumarsingh (Son)
Smt. Premkumari Devi (Wife)
Raj Bahadur Maharaj Bahadur Jambukumar Ch. Kumar Yesh
Singh(son) Singh (son) Singh (son) Singh Kumar
Singh
m m m (Minor) (Minor)
Smt.Indrani Smt.Sneha Lata Smt.Urmila
Devi (wife) Devi (wife) Devi (wife)
Pravin Dhir- Naina Sunaina Pramod Kumar (son)
Kumar rendra Kumari Kumari
(son) (son) (Daughter)
3. Sir Hukumchand Seth was the head of a well known family of Indore. The family carried on various businesses and owned extensive properties. Prior to March 31, 1950 Sir Hukum Chand and the members of his family constituted a Hindu Undivided family. By a deed of partition dated March 31, 1950 various family properties were partitioned between Sir Hukum Chand, his wife Lady Kanchanbai and their son Raj Kumar Singh in equal shares. Sir Hukum Chand and Lady Kanchanbai executed two trust deeds on the same date, March 21, 1952 purporting to constitute a trust of the properties respectively belonging to them. The trust deeds contained identical terms and conditions. The trustees in each case were Sir Hukum Chand, Lady Kanchanbai, their son Raj Kumar Singh and his wife Prem Kumari Devi and the eldest grandson Raja Bahadur Singh. The beneficiaries named in the trust deeds were Rajkumar Singh and his sons Raja Bahadur Singh, Maharaja Bahadur Singh, Jambukumar Singh, Chandrakumar Singh and Yeshkumar Singh. With the passage of time and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the trust deeds the beneficiaries came into possession of their respective shares of the properties. Originally the income from those properties was returned by them for the purpose of their income-tax assessments in their individual status, but subsequently they began to assert that the properties were received by them as the Karta of their respective Hindu undivided families and that, therefore, the income was liable to be assessed in that status.These appeals arise out of income tax assessments made in the case of Raja Bahadur Singh for the assessment year 1962-63, Maharaja Bahadur Singh for the assessment year 1961-62 and Jambukumar Singh for the assessment years 1961- 62 and 1962-63. The Income Tax Officer assessed all three assessees in their individual status and the assessments were confirmed in that status by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner on appeal. On second appeal by the assessees the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal also took the view that the income from the properties received by the assessees under the two trust deeds fell to be taxed in their individual status. At the instance of the asses sees the Appellate Tribunal referred the cases to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh for its opinion in each case on the question of law set forth earlier. The High Court understood the two trust deeds differently from the Appellate Tribunal and the ta xing authorities and held that the properties had been settled with the assessees in their representative(capacity as Kartas of their respective Hindu undivided families.
4. It may be mentioned at the outset that neither the assessees nor the Revenue dispute the legality of the trust deeds and we must proceed on the assumption, as did the High Court, the Appellate Tribunal and the taxing authorities, that the authors of the trust deeds were competent to settle the properties in accordance with the terms and conditions expressed in those documents.
5. The sole question before us is whether upon those terms and conditions it was intended by the settlors that the beneficiaries should receive the properties in their individual capacity or in a representative capacity as Kartas of the respective Hindu undivided families. It is not necessary to refer to all the provisions of the trust deeds because the parties are in common agreement that the principal provisions calling for consideration are clauses 1, 3 and 4 of the trust deeds. Cl. 1 empowers the trustees to apply the income from the trust properties to the rent, rates, taxes and other liabilities in respect of the trust properties, including the cost of maintenance, and thereafter to divide the balance left over in equal shares between the beneficiaries, so that each beneficiary received one-sixth of the balance. In the event of a beneficiary being a minor, his share of t he income was payable to his natural guardian for being applied towards his education, maintenance and advancement in life, marriage and other expenses. It was also provided that in the event of a beneficiary dying before the time of distribution of the properties between the beneficiaries under clause 4, the share of the beneficiary so dying would be used to support and maintain his widow and his male issue
"in such manner as the trustees shall in their absolute and uncontrolled discretion deem proper"
6. The circumstances surrounding the execution of the two documents indicate that a common intention inspired the minds of the two settlors. This has considerable significance when it is realised that while one trust deed was executed by a male member of the family the other was executed by a female member of the family. The course of devolution under the Hindu law would be materially different in the two cases and, therefore, the principles of the Hindu law governing the devolution of property in the case of property passing from a father to his son and grandsons cannot be invoked in these appeals.Even if the matter be looked at in the context of the Hindu law as it obtained at the relevant time, the terms and conditions of the trust deeds are wholly inconsistent with the property passing into the hands of the beneficiaries as Kartas of their respective Hindu undivided families. There is clear indication in the trust deeds which bears this out. In the first place, had it been intended that the beneficiary should receive the property as Karta of his Hindu undivided family the document would not have empowered the trustees, in clause 1, to exercise an absolute and uncontrolled discretion on the death of a beneficiary to apply his share to t he maintenance of his widow and his male issue and to accumulate the surplus to the account of the said beneficiary for distribution. On the contrary, the trustees would have been under an obligation to entrust the income falling to the share of the deceased beneficiary to the members of his Hindu undivided family and no discretion would have been permissible in regard to the disposal or otherwise of any part thereof.
7. Secondly, the document would not have provided that if before the time of division and distribution a beneficiary died leaving only a widow, the widow would get a half of the share belonging to the deceased beneficiary while the other half would be liable to distribution among the remaining beneficiaries and the heirs of other deceased beneficiaries. These two conditions are sufficient in themselves to lead to the conclusion that it was never intended that the properties should pass to the beneficiaries to be held by them for their respective Hindu undivided families. On the plain terms of the trust deeds, the properties were intended to devolve on the beneficiaries in their individual capacity.
8. It is contended by learned counsel for the assesses that the settlors intended under the two t rust deeds to protect the grandsons, and the scheme incorporated in the trust deeds must be regarded as akin to a family settlement. We are unable to agree. The interest of the grandsons has been sufficiently protected by the terms and conditions of the trust deeds, and in order to safeguard that interest it is not necessary to conclude that the properties were intended to go to the beneficiaries as Kartas of the Hindu undivided families. The grandsons themselves were beneficiaries and on the division and distribution of the properties they would have full power to deal with them according to their will and discretion. It is only where a beneficiary dies before division and distribution of the properties without leaving a widow or sons that the trustees are empowered to intervene and direct, subject to providing for the maintenance, education and marriage of the deceased beneficiary's daughters, that the share of such beneficiary be divided among the remaining beneficiaries and the heirs of deceased beneficiaries.We are of opinion that the High Court has erred in the view taken by it of the two trust deeds and that the Appellate Tribunal was right in its conclusions. Accordingly, we answer the question referred to the High Court in each case in the affirmative, in favour of the Revenue and against the assessees. The appeals are allowed with costs.
