Union of India v Messrs Hanuman Oil Mills Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

14 November 1986
C.A. No. 557 of 1975
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  An award by an arbitrator in terms of which a decree was passed by the trial court was set aside on appeal by the High Court on the ground that there was no concluded contract between the parties in terms of Article 299 of the Constitution of India, and therefore, there was no arbitration agreement either.
2.  The High Court based its conclusions on the circumstance that the post-copy of the telegram of acceptance of the tender, the receipt of which was itself disputed by the party, was signed by one S. S. Bajaj, Deputy Director of Purchase purporting to be 'For and on behalf of the President of India' but that there was no evidence to show that the Deputy Director of Purchase was authorised to act 'For and on behalf of President of India' under Article 299 of the Constitution of India.
3.  The question about the competence of the Deputy Director to accept the tender 'For and on behalf of the President of India' was generally raised by the respondent at the very outset when he said in his objections to the Award that 'there was no valid or unconditional offer of the petitioners contained in tender dated October 31, 1958 by the respondent in the name of President of India or otherwise or by any person duly authorised on behalf of respondents or duly authorised by the President of India'.
4.  The question was expressly raised in the memorandum of grounds before the High Court. However, no evidence was led by Union of India to satisfy the court that the Deputy Director of Purchase was authorised to act 'For and on behalf of the President of India' in terms of Article 299 of the Constitution of India.
5.  The High Court, therefore, had no option but to allow the appeal. Before us, after searching the record for sometime we found a statement in the petition of appeal that the Deputy Director of Purchase was authorised to enter into contracts for and behalf of the Union of India by S.R.O. 3442 dated November 2, 1955. We are not, however, ready to act on this statement in the petition of appeal as no attempt has been made to produce any additional evidence before us nor do we think it just to permit the appellant to produce at this stage any additional evidence when they had ample opportunity to produce any evidence which they had in the trial court and in the first appellate court.
We therefore, dismiss the appeal. No costs.
Appeal dismissed.
