Prabodh Verma and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

19 September 1986
Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 48952 of 1985 with 6790-92 and 26061 of 1986 in C.A. No. 694 of 1980
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  Shri Brijendra Singh, Shri Radhey Shyam Sharma, Shri Sukhi Ram, Shri Rameshwar Dayal, Shri Mohan Lal, who are some of the petitioners in Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 6790-91 of 1986 and Shri Onkar Singh, Shri Brijpal Singh, Shri Virendra Singh, Shri Bhopal Singh and Shri Chandar Prakash Sharma have been appointed and have either joined or waiting to join in the posts to which they have been appointed. It is, therefore, not necessary to consider their cases now.
2.  Shri Jagdish Prasad, Shri Mahendra Singh, Shri Ram Hari Prasad Singh, Shri Dal Chandra Choudhary, Shri Brijendra Singh, Shri Datta Ram and Shri Mool Chand who were some of the petitioners in Civil Miscellaneous Petitions Nos. 6790-91 of 1986 and Shri Dharamvir Singh one of the petitioners in Civil Misc. Petition No. 6792 of 1986 have been offered appointments but they are unable to take charge because of orders of stay granted by the Allahabad High Court at the instance of other teachers who had been appointed on an ad hoc basis.
3.   We direct that these petitioners may be offered employment in other institutions at the earliest opportunity as and when vacancies arise. We also request the Allahabad High Court to take up the stay petitions at least for disposal and deal with them as expeditiously as possible.
4.  In the case of Smt. Manjula Saxena, one of the petitioners in Civil Misc. Petition Nos. 6790 and 6791 of 1986 it is not necessary for us to pass any order because she has filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court and has obtained a stay and is continuing to work as a teacher. She may seek her relief in the Allahabad High Court.
5.  We are now left with the cases of Shri Gopal Prasad Sharma, Shri Radha Shyam s/o. Ram Swaroop, Shri Gokul Chandra Sharma, Shri Radhey Shyam s/o. Chet Ram, Shri Ramesh Chand Verma, Shri Rama Kant Sharma, Shri Prithvi Singh and Shri Dilbagh Raj Sharma. These persons have not been offered any employment on the ground that they are not trained to be teachers. There are two alternatives open to the respondents.
6.   The first is that the government may think of exempting these persons from possessing the requisite qualification if it is permissible to do so; and the second is they may be offered some other employment suitable to their qualification elsewhere. We find that Shri Ramesh Chand Verma is an M. Sc. in Mathematics, Shri Prithvi Singh is an M. Com. and Shri Rama Kant Sharma has now obtained M. A. degree in three subjects viz. History, Sociology and Political Science. Surely, it will not be difficult for the government to absorb them somewhere.
7.   We adjourn these petitions for six weeks to enable the government to consider our suggestion. We will consider the cases of the untrained teachers later. The cases of the other petitioners stand disposed of.
Petitions disposed of.
