Kutti Padmarao, Gen. Sec v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

1 September 1986
W.P. (Civil) No. 725 of 1986
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  Mr. Madhavan, Commissioner appointed by us has submitted a detailed and well documented report stating the position in regard to the Harijan families settled on the land in village Nakkalapalam. The report substantially bears out the allegations made in the writ petition and it shows that there are still some Harijan families who are on the site and they have not yet been given alternative site where they can shift. Mr. Ramkumar, learned advocate for the respondent states that the State Government is willing to give alternative site to these Harijan families. If that is so the State Government must make an affidavit by a responsible officer stating out, which site the State Government is willing to offer as an alternative site to these Harijan families who are still on the land in Nakkalapalam village.
2.   The State Government will file an affidavit within three weeks from today and supply a copy thereto to the learned advocate on behalf of the petitioners. We are informed that the landlord Shri Yeluraru Ramjaneyulu alias Ram Babu has filed a writ Petition No. 5426/86 in the High Court on Andhra Pradesh and obtained a stay order against allotment of site and grant of pattas to the Harijan families. It is pointed out in the report by Mr. Madhavan that this stay order has to some extent been responsible for non-allotment of site to the Harijan families. We would therefore request the High Court of Andhra Pradesh to dispose of the writ petition at a very early date so that whatever impediment there may be in the way in allotment of site to the Harijan families may be removed. The writ petition will stand adjourned to October 1, 1986 for final hearing. The interim order made by us will continue.
Court Master:
3.  We directed by our order dated September 1, 1986 that the State Government will file affidavit within three weeks from the date of the order setting out which site the State Government is willing to offer as alternative site to the Harijan families who as still on land in Nakkalapalam village. Though this period expired long back no affidavit has so far been filed by the State Government. We would like to express our sense of displeasure that the order made by us has not been carried out and even today the affidavit is not ready. We would have ordinarily directed a responsible officer of the government to remain present in court at the next hearing. But since the stay order has already been granted protecting the Harijan families we would give one more opportunity to the State Government. The writ petition is adjourned to October 27, 1986.
4.  The State Government will do the needful on or before October 14, 1986 and supply a copy of their affidavit to the advocate for the petitioner. Meanwhile the Harijan families at the Nakkalapalam village will not be disturbed. The High Court will dispose of C. A. No. 5326/86 at an early date as was directed earlier. Copy of this order may be forwarded to the Registrar of the High Court containing our request as made in the earlier order and he may intimate to this Court on or before October 21, 1986 whether the writ petition at the High Court has been disposed of or not.
Order accordingly.
