Santhal Pargana Antyodaya Ashram v State of Bihar and Others
Supreme Court of India

19 December 1986
W.P. No. 13450 of 1983.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. We have gone through the report made by the Saxena Committee appointed by us. We deeply appreciate the tremendous effort made by Shri Saxena and his colleagues in investigating into the existence of bonded labourers in Mohanpur and Deoghar Blocks of Deoghar District and Saraiyahat Block of Dumka District and submitting a detailed and comprehensive report to the court. The report of the Saxena Committee discloses that there are large number of bonded labourers in these areas and the Saxena Committee has been able to identify 2,515 out of 3,143 such bonded labourers. We accept the report of the Saxena Committee and proceed to give the following directions:
(1) All the labourers who have been found to be bonded by the Saxena Committee may be directed to be released within, two weeks from the date of this order and on their being released the concerned Collector will issue forthwith a certificate to each of them certifying that he or she is a bonded labourer and has been released from bondage. These certificates shall be issued by the concerned Collector and handed over to the bonded labourers simultaneously with their release. These bonded labourers, on making the necessary application to the State Government through the concerned Collector shall be paid a sum of Rs. 3000 each by way of interim relief, and such payment shall be made by the concerned Collector to them, in the following manner:
2. Rs. 500 simultaneously with the release and the balance within two weeks from the date of release. We may point out that the number of bonded labourers, identified by the Saxena Committee and directed to be released by us, under this order, is 2,515, as per the report of the Saxena Committee.
(2) So far as these 2,515 bonded labourers are concerned, they must, on their release be rehabilitated by the State Government on a permanent basis and the rehabilitation programme should be implemented immediately in respect of those persons and its implementation need not wait on account of the pendency of the present proceeding in this Court. The State Government will submit within two weeks from the date of receipt of this order, a report setting out the permanent rehabilitation programme evolved by the State Government for rehabilitation of the bonded labourers and particularly the bonded labourers freed by us under this order so that this Court may be able to scrutinise the rehabilitation programme and approve of it with or without modifications with a view to giving appropriate directions for its implementation.
(3) The other recommendations contained in the Saxena Committee report shall be implemented as far as possible within one month from the date of receipt of this order by the State Government.
(4) The State Government and/or the concerned Collector will carry out all the obligations under the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 and submit a report to this Court of having done so within two months from today.
3. The writ petition will stand adjourned to March 3, 1987 for considering whether the directions given by this order have been carried out or not and for this purpose the State Government and or the concerned Collector shall submit a report to this Court on or before February 20, 1987.
Order accordingly.
