1.  This appeal by the Revenue is by certificate and is directed against the judgment of a Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court which upheld the decision of a single judge in a writ petition quashing the notices issued to the petitioner u/s. 147(a) of the Income Tax Act of 1961 in respect of assessment years 1960-61, 1961-62 and 1962-63. Respondent was assessed to income-tax for the assessment year 1960-61 u/s. 23(3) of the Act of 1922 on 4.3.1961 and for the following two assessmentyears u/s. 143(3) of the Act of 1961 on 10th and 11th June, 1963, respectively. Notices u/s. 147(a) readwith s. 148 of the Act of 1961 were issued to the respondent in respect of these three assessmentyears whereupon he challenged the validity of those notices by filing an application u/art. 226 of the Constitution. Though the notices did not disclose any material to justify their issue, the Income-tax Officer in his return to the rule nisi before the High Court stated:
"The assessment for the year 1963-64 of Smt. Sushila Bala Devi Ladia, wife of the petitioner, wastaken up by me. During the course of the said assessment, she contended having receivedvaluable assets from the petitioner between 11th December, 1955 and 28th October, 1960, without adequate consideration in money or money's worth. It wascontended on her behalf that she received over 1203 totas of gold in jewellery on or about 11.12.1955 and Rs.1,00,000 in cash on or about 28.10.1960. It was further contended on her behalf that the said jewellery was sold between the years 1959 and 1962. The income from thesaid assets which should have been included in the return of the petitioner was not so included byhim. The capital gains arising therefrom wasalso not included or disclosed by the petitioner in his returns."
2.  On behalf of the assessee reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in V.D.M. RM. M. RM. Muthiah Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras, 74 ITR 183 1969 Indlaw SC 239 wherewith reference to failure of the assessee to include the share incomeof his wife and minor child in a firm, this Court held:
"In consideringthe first question it is necessary to refer to certain provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1922. By s. 3 the total income of the previous year of every individual, Hindu Undivided family, company and local authority, and of every firm and other association of persons or the partners of the firm or the members of the association individually was charged to tax for thatyear in accordance with, and subject to the provisions of the Act at any rate or ratesprescribed by the Finance Act. Total income was defined in s. 2(15) as meaning 'total amount of income, profits gains referred to in sub-s. (1) of s. 4 computed in the manner laid down this Act'. S. 4(1) set out the method of computation of total income; it enacted: '(I) subject to the provisions of this Act, a total income of any previousyear of any person includes all income, profits and gains from whatever source derived which:
(a) are received or are deemed to be receivedin the taxable territories insuch year by or on behalf of such person, or
(b) if such person is resent in the taxable territories during such year- (i) accrue or arise or are deemed to accrue or arise to him in the taxable territories during such year, or ........ ' S. 22 by sub-s. (1) required the income-tax officer to give notice by publication in the press in the prescribed manner, requiring everypersonwhose total income during the previous year exceedthe maximum exempt from tax, to furnish a return in the prescribed form setting forth his total income. Sub-s. (2) authorised the Income-tax Officer to serve a notice upon a person whose income in the opinion of the income tax officer exceeded the minimum free fromtax. S. 23 dealt withthe assessment.
It conferred power upon the Income-tax Officer to assess the total income of the assessee and to determine the sum payable by him on the basis of suchreturnsubmitted by him. Rule 19 framed u/s. 59 of the Income-tax Act, 1922 required the assessee to make a return in the form prescribed thereunder, and in Form A applicable to an individual or a Hindu Undivided family or an association of persons there was no clause which required disclosure of income of any person other than the income of the assessee, which was liable to be included in the total income.
the Act and rules accordingly imposed no obligation upon the assessee to disclose to the Incometax Officer in his return information relating to income of any other person by law taxable in his hands."
"But s. 16 sub-s. (3) provided in computing the total income of any individual for the purpose of assessment there shall be included the classes of income mentioned in cls. (a) and (b). Sub-s. 3(a)(ii) insolar as it is material, provided: 'In computing the total income of any individual for the purpose of assessment there shall be included (a) so much of the income of a wife or minor child ofsuch individual as arises directly or indirectly ........ (ii) From the admission of minor to the benefitsof partnership in a firm of which such individual is a partner.'The assessee was bound to disclose u/s. 22(5) the names and addresses of his partners, if any, engaged in business, profession or vocation together with the location and styled of the principal place and branches thereof and the extent of the shares of all such partners in the profits of the business, profession or vocation and branches thereof, but the assessee was not required in making a return to disclose that any income was received by his wife or minor child admitted to the benefits of partnership of a firm of which he was a partner."
Upon this conclusion this Court therein held:
"For failing or omitting to disclosethat income proceedings for reassessment cannot, therefore, be commenced unders. 34(1)(a)." Relying upon this decision the learned Single Judge quashed the notices. The Revenue appealed to the Division Bench but failed to obtain any relief in view of thesaid decision of this Court. The Division Bench also took note of the decision in the case of Malegaon Electricity Co. (P) Ltd. v. Commissioner or Income-tax, Bombay, 78 ITR 466 1970 Indlaw SC 252. Therein after referring to Muthiah Chettiar case 1969 Indlaw SC 239 (supra). Hedge, J. speaking for the Court, stated:
"Hence, by not showing the income of hiswife and minor children, the assessee cannot be deemed to have failed to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment within the meaningof s. 34(1)(a) of the Act."
3. It is appropriate to take note of a laterdecision of this Court in Commissioner of Income-tax, Kerala v.Smt. P.K. Kochammu Amma, Peroke, 125 ITR 624 1980 Indlaw SC 598. That was of a two-Judge Bench. Reliance was sought to be placed on Muthiah Chettiar's case 1969 Indlaw SC 239 (supra). Dealing with the question of imposition of penalty u/s. 271(1)(c) of the 1961 Act, the Division Bench observed:
"It is obvious that on this view the order imposing penalty on the assessee would have to be sustained but there is a decision ofthis Court in V.D.M. RM, M. RM. Muthiah Cheuiar v. Commissioner of Income-tax, [1969] 74 ITR 183 1969 Indlaw SC 239 (SC) which is binding upon us and where we find that a different view has been taken by a Bench of three Judges of this Court. It was held in this case that even if there were any printed instructions in the form of the return requiring the assessee to disclose the income received by his wife and minor child from a firm of which the assessee was a partner. there was, in the absence in the return of any head under which the income of the wife or minor child could be shown, no obligation on the assessee to disclosethis item of income, and the assessee could not be deemed to have failed or omitted to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for hisassessment within the meaning of 34()(a) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922".
4.  With the greatest respect tothe learned Judges who decided this case. we do not think, for reasons already discussed, thatthis decisionlays down the correctlaw on the subject, and had it not been for the fact that since 1st April, 1972, the form of the return prescribed by rule 12 has beenamended and since then. there is a separate column providing that 'income arising to spouse/minor child or any other person as referred to in Chapter V of the Act' should be shown separately under that column and consequently there is no longer any scope for arguing that the assessee is not bound to disclose such income in the return to be furnished by him, we wouldhave referredthe present case to a larger Bench. But we do not propose to do so since the questionhas now become academic in view of the amendment in the form of the returncarried out with effect from 1st April, 1972. we would, therefore, follow thisdecision in Muthian Chettiar's case which being a decision of three Judges of this Court is binding upon us.
5. We agree with what has been stated in Kocharammu Amma's case and for the reasons indicated therein, we do not propose to refer this case to a larger bench. Following the law as laid down in the two cases reported in 74 ITR 183 1969 Indlaw SC 239 and 78 ITR 466 1970 Indlaw SC 252 we dismiss the appeal. There would be no order for costs throughout.
Appeal dismissed.
