Chhita and Another v State of Rajasthan
Supreme Court of India

19 February 1987
Cr.A. No. 259 of 1978
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. This appeal by special leave is against the judgment of the High Court dated April 7, 1978, convicting the appellants for an offence punishable under Section 307 IPC and sentencing them to undergo imprisonment for five years. We have heard learned counsel for the appellants and the respondent.
2. The injured witness PW 6 sustained 21 incised wounds. This cannot be disputed. However, his subsequent conduct and various statements made by him during investigation and trial render the entire prosecution story suspect.
3. He is the only eye-witness to the incident. He made a statement of June 3, 1976, which is marked as Ex. D-3. In this he gives a various different from one given to the police. As per this statement, he has said that he went along with Prahlad and Jiwan from Delhi in order to recover the girl, in relation to whom the offence took place. At the time of cross-examination he gave an affidavit (Ex. D-4) dated June 29, 1976, which purports to bear his thumb impression according to which he is reported to have said that the police were getting statements by him recorded at their pleasure and were trying to protect the real culprits, namely, Jiwan and Prahlad. He is alleged to have put his thumb impression upon an application of the same date addressed to the Judicial Magistrate offering to give statement before the court.
4. This application is Ex. D-5 which was also produced when he was cross-examined. Exhibit D-6, dated July 1, 1976 is another affidavit to the same effect. He engaged a lawyer, examined as DW 3 who filed a complaint in the Court of Judicial Magistrate against Jiwan and Prahlad on July 24, 1976 which is Ex. D-7. This complain was ultimately dismissed for default on August 4, 1976
5. Regarding the conduct of this witness the learned Sessions Judge observed that the complainant was not a wholly reliable person. However, the learned Sessions Judge sought help from the evidence of PW 1 and PW 2 to extricate PW 6. PW 6 denied all the statement. He said that it was made under duress.
6. The High Court has observed that there was an attempt on the part of PW 6 to give a different turn to the story after June 3, 1976. The High Court notes that the complainant had impleaded Jiwan and Prahlad in his subsequent statement, but chose to accept his evidence because on further interrogation he repeated his initial story3. After giving our careful consideration, we find that the prosecution has not come to court with the true story and the conduct of PW 6 leaves considerable doubt in our minds as to what really happened.
7. In our opinion the appellant are entitled to the benefit of doubt. We set aside the conviction and sentence and allow this appeal. The appellants need not surrender. Their bail bonds are discharged.
Appeal allowed.
