Mohd. Shafiq Khan & Ors. Etc v Competent Authority & Ors. Etc
Supreme Court of India

27 November 1987
Special Leave Petition(Civil) Nos. 8865-66 of 1987. etcFrom the Judgment and order dated 2.4.1987 of theAllahabad High Court in W.P. No. 2418/82 and WP No. 3293 of1980
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  The petitioners held permanent stage carriage permits for non notified routes. They made applications to the competent authority under the U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special Provision) Act, 1976 for grant of authorization certificate permitting them to ply their stage carriage vehicles on Unnao-Kanpur and Lucknow-Barabanki notified routes. The competent authority rejected their applications, there-upon they filed writ petitions under Article 226 of theConstitution challenging the validity of the order of the competent authority. A Division Bench of the High Court of Allahabad (Lucknow Bench) dismissed the writ petitions by its order dated 2.4.1987 on the ground that the petitioners were not entitled to any authorization certificate under the U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special Provision) Act 1976 as none of them held permits for plying their vehicles on the aforesaid notified routes on the date the routes were notified. Aggrieved, the petitioners have filed these special leave petitions against the order of the High Court.
2.  After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners we are of opinion that there is no merit in these petitions. There is no dispute that Unnao-Kanpur and Lucknow-Barabanki are notified routes and the relevant schemes do not permit any private operator to ply stage carriage vehicles on those routes or any portion thereof. The Regional Transport Authority has no power to grant any stage carriage permit in respect of a notified route or any part thereof. No private operator is entitled to ply stage carriage vehicles on a notified route of a portion thereof unless authorized to do so by the terms of the scheme itself. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Adarash Travels Bus Service & Another. vs. State of U.P. and Ors., [1985] 4 SCC 557 1985 Indlaw SC 375 made this position clear. The Court held that no operator is entitled to ply on any portion of a notified route even if the operator does not pick up and set down any passengers on the overlapping portions of a notified route. The schemes notifying Unnao-Kanpur and Lucknow-Barabanki do not provide for plying of vehicles of a private operator on those routes. No permit could therefore be granted to any private operator by extending the non- notified route, or by including a portion of the aforesaid notified route in his permit. The competent authority constituted under the U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special Provision) Act 1976 has power to grant authorization certificate to a private operator under Section S of the Act permitting him to ply on a notified route or portion thereof. This Court has held in Hindustan Transport Co. and Another. vs. State of U.P. & Ors., 119841 (Supp.) SCC 22 1984 Indlaw SC 442 that the competent authority has jurisdiction to grant authorization certificate only to those operators who held permit for the route or portion thereof on the date the scheme under Chapter IV A was enforced. If a private operator had no permit in respect of the notified route or a portion thereof on the date of the enforcement of the scheme, he is not entitled to any authorization certificate. We are in agreement with the view taken in Sumer Chand Sharma and Another. Vs. State of U.P. and Another. [1986] 3 SCC 263 1986 Indlaw SC 303. Since none of the petitioners held permits in respect of the disputed notified routes on the date the routes were nationalized they are not entitled to grant of authorization certificate.
3.  If any proceeding is taken or writ petition is filed challenging a scheme of nationalization by the existing operators of the route or portion thereof and if during the pendency of such proceedings or writ petition, interim orders are granted permitting the private operators to ply their stage carriages on the route covered by the scheme, it will not confer any right on the private operator to claim authorization certificate under Section 5 of the U.P. Act 27 of 1976 in the event of failure of challenge to the validity of the scheme or dismissal of the writ petition. Section S of the U.P. Act 27 of 1976 contemplates grant of authorization certificate in favor of an operator who may have been playing on the notified route or portion thereof under a permit granted to him by the Regional Transport Authority or the State Transport Authority or Commission.
4. This benefit cannot be extended to an operator who may be plying under interim orders of a Court or authority without there being any permit in his favor. The petitioners had been plying their vehicles on the notified routes under stay orders issued by the High Court pending writ petitions filed by them. All those stay orders stood discharged on the dismissal of their writ petitions. Therefore petitioners are not entitled to rely on these orders and on the fAct that they were running motor vehicles pursuant to the said orders for the purposes of grant of authorization certificate under Section 5 of the 1976 Act. The petitioners contend that they are entitled to obtain authorization certificate from the competent authority under Section 5 of the Act as they had permit on July 1, 1976 the date on which the U.P. Act 27 of 1976 came into force. We find no merit in this submission in view of the decision of this Court in Sumer Chand's case 1986 Indlaw SC 303 (supra).
The Special Leave Petitions are accordingly dismissed.
Petitions dismissed
