General Secretary, Bihar State Road Transport Corporation, Patna v Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Patna and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 December 1987
C.A. No. 1509 (NL)/87,
The Order of the Court was as follows:
We have heard learned counsel for both the parties.
1.  It is not disputed that a number of Karamcharis working as Drivers, Conductors, Cleaners etc. in the Bihar State Road Transport Corporation have been working for a number of years as casual workers and some of them have been working from 8 to 12 years. We are concerned in this case with only one of the three questions referred to the Tribunal for its decision and that question reads as follows:
"Whether it would be justified to make regular those employees who have completed service for 240 days ?"
2.  The Tribunal while answering this question has directed that only those employees who had been regularly employed and who had completed 240 days of continuous satisfactory service were eligible for regularisation.
3.  Since it is admitted that a large number of people have been working as casual labourers for a long number of years, the question whether they initially appointed regularly or irregularly becomes immaterial for purposes of the question involved in this case. This Court has in a number of decisions already rendered by it directed regularisation of casual labourers wherever it found that such labourers had been working for a number of years Vide Daily Rated Casual Labour employed under P and T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar Mazdoor Manch v. Union of India and Ors. (1988-I-LLJ-370), U.P. Income-Tax Department Contingent paid Staff Welfare Association v. Union of India and Ors. (1988-I-LLJ-396) - Writ Petition 1670 of 1986 decided on December 4, 1987) and Delhi Municipal Karamchari Ekta Union (Regd.) v. Shri P. L. Singhla (Civil Appeal No. 3921 (NL) of 1987 decided on December 7, 1987).
4.  Following the above decisions we direct the respondent Corporation to prepare a reasonable scheme for regularisation of the casual labourers who have been working for more than one year. The scheme will be prepared within 8 months from today.
5. We also direct the respondent-Corporation to pay with effect from 1st January 1987 salary and allowances to the casual labourers at the rates equal to the minimum pay in the pay-scale of regularly employed persons in the corresponding cadres of the Corporation. All arrears payable pursuant to this order shall be paid within four months from today.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
