Baijnath Singh and Others v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 December 1987
Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 23901 of 1987
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioners are casual labourers in the Railways. It is not disputed that their regularisation depends upon satisfying the terms of the scheme which has been framed by the Railways under the orders of this Court. We are told that a draft seniority list has already for filing objections is over.
2.   The petitioners appear not to have raised any objection against the draft seniority list. Learned counsel for the Railway Administration agrees that two weeks further time will be available to them for raising their objections for the draft seniority list. The officer concerned in regard to the petitioners is the Senior Divisional Personnel Officer, Northern Railway, Divisional Railway Manager's Office, Allahabad. Objections should be tendered there and it the petitioners so want they shall be afforded personal hearing through some representative acceptable to them. On the basis of the seniority list to be prepared, Railway Administration agrees that the petitioners will be provided with service according to the terms of the Scheme.
3.  In terms of the draft seniority list, four persons being Shiv Narain, Bhola Prasad, Shyam Lal and Satish Prasad against tentative seniority list sl. Nos. 113, 114, 116 and 120 respectively are qualified to be taken in.
4.   We direct the Railway Administration to take them into service within one week from today subject to the condition that when the seniority list is finalised, if the position is disturbed and they do not qualify the Railway Administration would be free to keep them out from service until their turn comes.
5.  The counsel for the petitioners wanted a date to be fixed by which final seniority list should be published. Learned Additional Solicitor General on instruction wanted two months time but we allow three months time and debar the Union of India from making any application for extension of time. Contempt petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.
