Ram Singh and Others v Ajay Chawala
Supreme Court of India

16 December 1987
C.As. Nos. 2300-02 of 1984 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 10 February 1983 of the High Court of New Delhi in Regular Second Appeal No. 145 of 1983)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals by special leave arise from the orders of the High Court of Delhi dismissing the second appeal on the ground that there was no substantial question of law. The only plea on behalf of the appellants was that they were claiming sub-tenancy from Shri Bhure in respect of the different portions of the premises in question. The question whether civil court had jurisdiction or not in the facts of this case was a substantial question of law. Therefore, it was submitted that the High Court committed an error of law in not allowing the appeal before it. We are unable to accept this contention. It is clear and established that the respondent is the owner of the premises in question by succession. There is no dispute as to his title. The contention of the respondent was that the appellants were in authorised occupation. The two courts on facts have upheld that contention. The High Court refused to interfere with that finding of fact. If these are the facts that is to say the respondent is the owner of the premises and the appellants are in unauthorised occupation of the premises then only the civil court will have jurisdiction to order eviction of the premises in question and no other court. On such a plea and on such finding the respondent could not have gone to any court but to the civil court for eviction.
2.   In that view of the matter, we find no ground to interfere with the orders of the High Court. Our attention was drawn to certain decisions of this Court viz. Babulal Bhuramal v. Nandram Shivram 1958 Indlaw SC 381958 Indlaw SC 38; Om Prakash Gupta v. Rattan Singh  1962 Indlaw SC 315 and Dipak Banerjee v. Smt. Lilabati Chakraborty 1987 Indlaw SC 283421987 Indlaw SC 28342.
3.  These cases dealt with entirely different contexts and observations made therein are not material. In the aforesaid view of the matter there is no ground to interfere with the order of the High Court. These appeals therefore fail and are accordingly dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
4.  The appellants are given time to vacate the premises in question till June 30, 1988 upon filing the following usual undertaking within four weeks from today. If the rooms are locked, keys will be handed over at the time of delivery of the possession to the trial court.
(1) That the appellants will hand over vacant and peaceful possession of the suit premises to the respondent on or before June 30, 1988 from today.
(2) That the appellants will pay to respondent future compensation for use and occupation of the suit premises month by month before tenth of every month.
(3) That the appellants will pay to the respondent arrears of rent, if any, within one month from today.
(4) That the appellants will not induct any other person in the suit premises.
5.  It is further directed that in default of compliance with any one or more of these conditions or if the undertaking is not filed as required within the stipulated time, the decree shall become executable forthwith.
Order accordingly.
