oyal Traders and Others v Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 March 1987
C.A. Nos. 876-883 of 1987 (Arising out Petitions for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) Nos. 13983-85, 14760-62 of 1986 and 3685 and 3728 of 1987)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  There are five claimants to the two plots open to allotment by the Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB of short), the claimants being Rajeev Shipbreakers, Vikas Shipping Corporation, Shri Lal Chand Jain and Sons, M/S Mahalaxmi Shipbreaking Corporation and M/s Goyal Traders. The Division Bench of the High Court has reversed the decision of the Single Judge and has found that the two plots should be allotted to Rajeev Shipbreakers and Vikas shipping Corporation. The Gujarat Maritime Board states that although there are only two plots available at present, it is prepared to develop three more posts for allotment to remaining three shipbreakers provided that respondent 1, Metal Scrap Trade Corporation (MSTC for short) agrees for such allotment and makes allotment of ships in favour of the intending shipbreakers. Counsel for MSTC has referred us to a communication from the Government of India expressing itself against allocation of more shipbreaking plots than those already existing.
2.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances before us, we think it appropriate to direct CMB to grant an individual plot to each of the other claimants - Lal Chand Jain and Sons, M/s Goyal Traders and M/s Mahalaxmi Shipbreaking Corporation. We do not disturb the direction of the High Court in favour of Rajeev Shipbreakers and Vikas Shipping Corporation and leave it to the GMB to allot three more plots one to each of these claimants - after developing the same. Such allotment would be made by the Board within three months from today, each plot being allotted as son as the same is ready for delivery in such order as the Board may decide. The MSTC will allot ships to these three claimants in accordance with the guidelines laid down by it for the relevant year. We make it clear that the plots and the ships already allotted to Vikas Shipping Corporation and Rajeev Shipbreakers will remain undisturbed.
3.  It is pointed out by Mr. Anil Divan that another claimant, Devang and Company has filed SLP No. 3728 of 1987 in this Court against the refusal of the High Court to add it as a party when the cases out of which these appeals arise were pending before the High Court. We are also informed that the writ petition filed by the Devang and Company is still pending before the High Court. It would be open to the High Court to dispose of that writ petition in accordance will law and we pass no order on that special leave petition.
4.  The appeals are disposed of accordingly and there ill be no order as to costs.
Appeals disposed of.
