Dinesh Kumar and others v Motilal Nehru Medical College and others
Supreme Court of India

30 July 1987
Civil Misc. Petitions Nos. 15660 and 17066 of 1987 in W.Ps. Nos. 348-52 of 1985
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These applications have been filed by the States of Rajasthan and Karnataka respectively for modification of the order dated 30-4-1987, which as far as relevant runs thus:
"We also restrain the States and their respective medical colleges from filling up ... 25% of the seats in each postgraduate medical course until further orders."
2.  By an independent direction this Court has deferred the implementation of the main judgment delivered in this case till 1988. Common contention has been advanced before us that in view of the direction that the judgment shall not be implemented so far as postgraduate medical courses are concerned, till 1988, the order of injunction indicated above would not be in the interest of anyone. The Union of India raises no objection and in fact joins in asking that the order as asked for should be made. We have looked into the matter and we are also of the view that in view of the direction that implementation of the judgment is deferred till 1988 so far as postgraduate medical courses are concerned, the restraint order in regard to 25% of the seats as the aforesaid order should be recalled. We, accordingly, modify the order to the extent stated above.
Civil Misc. Petition No.17065 of 1987
3.  This application has been filed by Gujarat Ayurvedic University making grievance that though Ayurvedic institutions were not intended to be covered in the proceedings taken in the cases connected with the case of Dr.Dinesh Kumar and others in the order dated 30-4-1987, the prohibition has been extended to cover this University in regard to the postgraduate studies.
4. All parties agree that the Ayurvedic institutions are not covered by the judgment and, therefore, against Gujarat Ayurvedic University no order should have been made. The order is modified so as to delete Gujarat Ayurvedic University from the purview of the proceedings and the injunction in regard to this institution is withdrawn.
Order accordingly.
