Ramanarain Singh and Others v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

29 July 1988
C.As. Nos. 2530 of 1981 and 1730 of 1986
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The problem posed and the point raised in these appeals is squarely covered against the appellants by a decision of this Court rendered in Rama Kant Chaturvedi v. Divisional Supdt., N. Rly. 1980 Indlaw SC 861980 Indlaw SC 86 In Rama Kant case 1980 Indlaw SC 861980 Indlaw SC 86 the question of seniority had arisen in the context of the employees working as engine drivers on the steam side who were posted on the diesel side as Diesel Engine Drivers after completing the requisite training and qualifying at the requisite test. The problem arose on account of dieselization by switching over from steam engines to diesel engines. Consequently the engine drivers on the steam side were rendered surplus.
2.   The Railway administration instead of retrenching them gave them the option to take the training and to qualify themselves, for being posted on the diesel side. This operation was loosely referred to as "transfer" to the diesel side though in reality it was an operation for "absorbing" the steam side drivers on the diesel side upon their being qualified in this behalf after undergoing training. This Court has taken the view that those who were appointed or absorbed earlier in point of time on the diesel side would be senior to those who were appointed or absorbed on the diesel side at a later date; notwithstanding the fact that the latter were senior in the parent cadre on the steam side.
This Court has formed the opinion that once they ceased to belong to the parent cadre on the steam side the seniority in the said cadre becomes irrelevant. And that seniority on the diesel side must depend on the length of service on the diesel side. It appears that one of the qualifications which was initially prescribed was that only those candidates who were matriculates would be posted on the diesel side. Subsequently, due to exigencies of administration this qualification was relaxed or dispensed with. It was argued before this Court in Rama Kant case 1980 Indlaw SC 861980 Indlaw SC 86 that in as much as the matriculation qualification was relaxed subsequently, their seniority in the parent cadre on the steam side should prevail. This contention was unhesitatingly negatived by this Court.
3.  The view taken is that the subsequent relaxation of the rule cannot enable them to tame "leap-frog" over the head of those who were on the diesel side and that seniority on the steam side is of no relevance in determining the seniority on the diesel side. In the present appeals the identical problem arises in the context of the employees who originally belonged to the "diesel side" but were subsequently absorbed and posted on the "electric side" in view of the electrifications of the tracks. Under the circumstances the view taken by the Madhya Pradesh High Court which is in conformity with the view taken by this Court in Rama Kant case 1980 Indlaw SC 861980 Indlaw SC 86 cannot be faulted.
4.  It may also be mentioned that arranging seniority on the basis canvassed by the appellants will result in anomalous and unjust consequences. An illustration will be useful for proper comprehension of the point. Visualize the case of an employee of 'D' cadre being appointed in the 'E' cadre after training. He is assigned seniority, say, at Sl. No. 150. In case two new employees from the 'E' cadre itself are promoted later on, they will be assigned seniority at Sl. Nos. 151 and 152. If another employee from 'D' cadre subsequently appointed in 'E' cadre is required to be accorded seniority above Sl. No. 150 because the new appointee was senior vis-a-vis him in the parent cadre (Cadre 'D') can the seniority of those who are assigned Sl. Nos. 151 and 152 be disturbed ? If the new appointee who should be at Sl. No. 153 is given seniority above Sl. No. 150, those from 'D' cadre who are assigned seniority ar Sl. Nos. 151 and 152 will become juniors to the new appointee absorbed much later. It is thus entirely that everything will be in utter chaos. Such a system is thus entirely unworkable apart from being unjust. The order under appeal cannot therefore be successfully assailed. Reliance was, however, placed on a decision of the Calcutta High Court in Divisional Personnel Officer, South Eastern Rly. v. M.P. Ranga Reddy .
5.   The Calcutta High Court has taken the view that the appointment on the diesel side of those who originally belonged to the steam side would fall under Rule 311 of the Railway Establishment Manual Rules, and that under the circumstances, the seniority in the parent cadre on the steam side would prevail irrespective of the date of posting on the diesel cadre. We are unable to concur with the view taken by the Calcutta High Court. Rules 310, 311 and 312 which were taken into account by the High Court do not apply to a situation like the present where on account of the modernisation switch over from steam side to diesel side and subsequently from the diesel side to the electric side was necessitated.
The Rules which have been relied upon by the High Court do not contemplate a situation arising in the context of such a switch over. The Rules only contemplate ordinary transfers and not situations arising from absorption of personnel from other cadres on compassionate grounds. So also the High Court was not right in taking the view that it was a "transfer" in the interest of the administration. In fact it was not a "transfer" in the real sense at all. It was absorption of the employees on the diesel side or the electric side upon their acquiring the qualification requisite for being absorbed. So also it was made on compassionate grounds and not in the interest of the administration. The point is squarely covered against the appellants by the decision in Rama Kant case 1980 Indlaw SC 861980 Indlaw SC 86.
6.  The appeals, therefore, fail and are dismissed. Interim orders will stand vacated. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
