Sales Tax Officer v Kathiawar Motors
Supreme Court of India

9 December 1988
C.A. No. 4345 of 1988. Appeal by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 25 March 1988, of the Gujarat High Court in Special Civil Application No. 377 of 1970. The judgment of the High Court is reported at [1988] 70 STC 132
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Special leave granted.
2. We have heard counsel for the parties, and also considered the judgment of the High Court, dated 25th March, 1988, which is challengd in this appeal.
3. It appears that between 1st January, 1960 and 31st December, 1962, the respondent-firm had deposited sales tax on the hire-purchase transactions made by it as a dealer in trucks, cars, etc., on the basis that the sale was completed when the agreement was entered into. Thereafter, this Court delivered judgment in K. L. Johar and Co. v. Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, wherein it was found that the State Legislature when it proceeds to legislate either under entry 48 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935, or under entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to Constitution, can only tax "sale" within the meaning of that word as defined in the  India Sale of Goods Act, 1930.
4. It was further held that hire-purchase agreements are not conditional sales; and that a hire-purchase agreement has two elements:
(1) element of bailment, and
(2) element of sale, in the sense that it contemplates an eventual sale.
5. It was also held that the element of sale fructifies when the option is exercised by the intending purchaser after fulfilling the terms of the agreement. The taxable event under the Madras General Sales Tax Act,1939 (9 of 1939), was the sale of goods and until that taxable event took place, there could be no liability to pay tax. Hence, it was held that though eventually most cases of hire-purchase may result in sales by the exercise of the opinion and the fulfilment of the terms of the agreement, tax was not exigible at the time when the hire-purchase agreement was made, as at that time the taxable event had not taken place; it could only be exigible when the option had been exercised and all the terms of the agreement fulfilled and the sale actually took place.
6. Thereafter, in the instant case, the respondent asked for refund of sales tax paid on the ground that the sale was completed only when the last instalment stood paid and the option to purchase, thus finally exercised by the purchaser. At this, on 25th February, 1970, the Sales Tax Officer issued notices to the respondent under section 37 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 ("the Act"), as amended in the State of Gujarat, alleging that the respondent had collected certain amounts by way of sales tax in violation of section 46 of the Act during the years 1960, 1961 and 1962, requiring the respondent to show cause as to why the said amounts should not be forfeited and penalty imposed.
7. The respondent filed a petition in the High Court of Gujarat, challenging the said notices. It may be mentioned that during the period from 1st January, 1960 to 31st December, 1962, the respondent had paid to the Sales Tax Department various amounts every quarter in respect of the said transactions on the footing that the sale was complete when the agreement was entered into between the respective parties, and later on they claimed refund. The High Court had quashed the said notices for both, i.e., for imposition of penalty and forfeiture. Our attention was drawn to the observations of this Court in R. S. Joshi, Sales Tax Officer v. Ajit Mills Ltd..
8.. After considering the facts and the position in law arrived at by the High Court, we are of the opinion that it was right in so far as it quashed the notice for imposition of penalty for infraction of section 46(2) of the Act.
We are, however, of the opinion that the question whether the Revenue was entitled to forfeit the amounts or whether the assessee/dealer was entitled to claim refund for the amount on account of sales tax paid on the assumption that sales tax was payable even before the sale was complete, would be proper to be gone into in assessment/refund proceedings.  Hence, we do not propose to deal with that aspect. The question, i.e., to say whether the Revenue was entitled to forfeit the money paid on account of sales tax, or whether the assessee/dealer was entitled to claim refund, would be gone into in the said assessment/refund proceedings. We direct that the said proceedings should be completed as expeditiously as possible.
9. We are, however, not expressing any opinion on the correctness or otherwise of the High Court's observations on the aspect of forfeiture in the judgment under appeal. The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above.
Appeal partly allowed.
