K. K. Muthukutty Vaidhyan v Special Deputy Commissioner
Supreme Court of India

6 April 1988
C.A. No. 1284-85 of 1988
The Order of the Court is was follows:
1.  Notice was given that the matter would be finally disposed of today. After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we direct special leave to be granted.
2.  The two appellants applied to the Deputy Commissioner concerned in Bangalore, under the Provisions of Karnataka Land Revenue Act for permission to convert certain separate areas of their agricultural lands into non-agricultural use. The applications were rejected but the Appellate Tribunal granted the applications by reversing the rejection by the Deputy Commissioner. When the matter came up before the High Court and by interim mandamus, the authority was called upon the grant necessary certificate, the High Court was moved by the respondents for quashing the appellate order. The Single Judge declined to interfere and directed implementation of the Tribunal's Order. The Division Bench at the instance of the respondents entertained appeals but order dated 9th March, 1987, dismissed the Writ Appeal Nos. 1938 and 1939 of 1986.
3.   The copy of the judgment which is made available in the paper book shows two dated for the appellate order, one being 9th March, 1987 and the other being the 25th March, 1987. On looking into the judgment we find that paragraphs 1 to 8 were dictated on the 9th March, and rest of the judgment beginning from paragraph 9 till the end appears to have been dictated on the 25th March, 1987. As the contents of paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 would show the judgment of 9th March, 1987 though dictated in the open court had not been signed on account of delay in transcription and the Court chose to continue the same proceeding on the basis of the information gathered by it while disposing of some other similar matters. The net result of the Division Bench's decision was to reverse what had been dictated on 9th March, 1987, and to allow the appeals of the respondents by the order dated 25th March, 1987.
4.  Adequate care and attention have not apparently been bestowed while delivering the judgment. This impression has been formed on account of the fact that the judgment has paragraph 8, 9, 10 and 11 twice over. This has happened obviously on account of the fact that instead of signing the judgment on 9th March, 1987, or having it separately shown without signing the two decisions pronounced on two different dates have been clubbed together and a confusion has been created. It look us some time to find out where the judgment of the 9th March, 1987, ended and from where the judgment of the subsequent date commenced.
5.  This Court had occasion sometimes back to deal with a case of this type to some extent in Vinod Kumar Singh v. Banaras Hindu University, where in open Court a judgment had been pronounced by dictation to the shorthand writer and the Court chose not to sign it and the matter relisted and disposed of by delivering a contrary judgment.
6.   In the peculiar facts of that case we allowed the first judgment to prevail and indicated as to how and under what situations ignoring a judgment dictated in open court should be permitted. This obviously has to be a very rare event as we then indicated. We never thought that we would come across within a short period another instance of the same type. We sincerely hope and trust that the High Court's would not exercise jurisdiction in the way it has been done here as such a practice is likely to shake the confidence of the litigants in the judicial process.
7.  We find that the respondent had not placed any documents or new material in the appeals before the Division Bench. If material available in any other case was intended to be utilised by the High Court, full opportunity should have been given to the parties to meet the same. Before us the learned counsel for the appellants wanted to rely upon some documents which would support their stand that the High Court was not right on merit. We have not considered it appropriate to go into the merit of the matter because in our opinion that would not be appropriate on the other hand. The appeal should go back to the High Court where the questions can be looked into.
8.  In these circumstances, we allow the appeals and vacate the judgment of the High Court bearing the two dates being 9th March, and 25th March, 1987, and remit the two appeals to be dealt with by a Division Bench of the High Court preferably consisting of two other learned judges so that the parties may have no apprehensions.
9.   We intend to say nothing against the learned Judges who disposed of the appeals by the impugned judgment. We express no opinion on merit. The Division Bench shall look into the entire matter giving full opportunity to the parties to canvass their respective contention and dispose of the appeals in accordance with law. The appellants shall be entitled to costs. Hearing fee is assessed at Rs.5,000/-.
Appeals allowed.
