Mahesh Kumar v State of Rajasthan
Supreme Court of India

11 March 1988
Cr.A. No. 129 of 1988
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted. Arguments heard.
1.  In the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are satisfied that the direction made by the learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court for the forfeiture of the amount of Rs 20,000 (Rupees twenty thousand) to the State is wholly unwarranted. It is now accepted principle that the confessional part of the statement made by the accused leading to discovery within the meaning of Section 27 of the Evidence Act, 1872 or Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 can be made use of for purpose of and the disposal of property under Section 452 of the Code. There is a long line of decisions laying down the principle and we would refer to only a few of them.
2.  In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid down that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property which was the subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence with regard to the ownership of the property in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code.
The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor, where it was pointed out that though there is a bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 162 CrPC for being made use of as evidence against the accused, this statement could be made use of in an enquiry under Section 517 CrPC when determining the question of return of property. These two decisions have been followed by the Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj Baldeokishan v. State, 1964 Indlaw RAJ 65 and the Mysore High Court in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda.
3. In the present case, the amount in question was seized from the accused in pursuance of statements made by them under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. The High Court as well as the courts below have found the property to be the subject of theft and the acquittal of the accused is upon benefit of doubt. The accused persons disclaimed the stolen property and there is no reason why the same should not be returned to the owner i.e. the complainant to whom it belongs.
4.  We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the impugned part of the order passed by the High Court directing the forfeiture of amount of Rs 20,000 (Rupees twenty thousand) and instead direct that the same be returned to the appellant to whom the money belongs.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
