1.  Special Leave granted in both the petitions. The Registry is directed toregister and number these petitions as Civil Appeals. These Appeals are both directed against ajudgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, dated September 17, 1987. The Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition No 15073 of 1987 has been preferred by the Chandigarh Administration, Chandigarh and the Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition No 11877 of 1987 hasbeen preferred at the instance of Puranjit Singh Writ petition No. 3287 of 1978 filed in the Punjab & Haryana High Court was transferred to the said Tribunal and treated as T.A No T-5/CHof 1987 and it is the judgment of theTribunal in this petitionwhich is impugned before us. The saidwrit petition was filed by K.S Brar who is Respondent No. 1 in Special Leave Petition No 15()73 of 1987 and Respondent No. 4 in SpecialLeave Petition No. 11877 of 1987 Puranjit Singh, the petitioner in Special Leave Petition No 11877 of 1987 was Respondent No. 4 in the said writ petition and Chandigarh Administration and its officers were Respondents Nos. 1 to 3 We propose to refer to the parties by their description in the said writ petition. Respondent No. 4 was appointed as an Assistant Engineer in the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Wing) on PG NO 800 July 15, 1968 on selection through the Punjab Public Service Commission. On October 7, 1972 Respondent No. 4 was deputed to work with the Chandigarh Administration in its Engineering Department as an Assistant Engineer.
2.  On June 24 1976 the petitioner joined the Chandigarh Administration as an Assistant Engineer as a direct recruit by his selection through the Union Public Service Commission. Respondent No. 4 made an application, while on deputation with the Administrationof the Union Territory of Chandigarh, for absorbing him in the cadre of Sub-Divisional Engineers in the Engineering Department at Chandigarh. Hisrequest was acceded to by the Administration and by an order passed by the Home Secretary on June 17, 1978 he was absorbed in the Engineering Department as a Sub- Divisional Engineer (B & R) in the Chandigarh Administration, working on deputation in the Housing Board, Chandigarh. The order absorbing him as a Sub-DivisionalEngineer was incorporated in aNotification dated March 1, 1979, which was dulyGazetted. Thesaid Notification sets out that the ChiefCommissioner, Union Territory, Chandigarh, in consulation with the Union Public Service Commission, New Delhi, is pleasedto appoint Puranjit Singh as Assistant Engineer (Civil), Class II, in the Engineering Department of Chandigarh Administration on buildings androads side, by transfer from Punjab, P.W.D Buildings and Roads Branch, and that his appointment will be subject to further provisions of P.W D Class II Rules,1965 as applicable to the Engineering Department of the Chandigarh Administration.
3.  There is no mention of public interest or interestof the service in this order. The consent of the State of Punjab as well as theapproval of the Union Public Service Commission with regard tothis appointment of Respondent No 4 was duly taken. On consideration, a tentative seniority list was circulated on November 19, 1979 inviting objections and after hearing the objections RespondentNo. 4 was granted senioritywith effectfrom October 7, 1972, being the date of his joining as anAssistant Engineer on deputation in the P.W.D. Buildings and Roads Branch of the Chandigarh Administration. The Notification dated 14.1.1980 granting him final seniority sets out inter alia as follows:
"AND WHEREAS the Chandigarh Administration considered all the circumstances of the case and keeping the public interest in view, fixed the tentative seniority ofShri Puranjit Singh w.e.f. 7.10.1972, the date of his joining as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D. Buildings & Roads Branch PG NO 801 Now, therefore, in pursuance of rule 12.5 of Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II, P.W.D. (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965, the Chief Commissioner, Chandigarh Administration is pleased to order the fixation of seniority of Shri Puranjit Singh asAssistant Engineer w.e.f. 7.10.1972"
" From this it is clear that Respondent No. 4 was granted seniority with effect from 7.10.1972 when he was appointed on deputation as Assistant Engineer in P.W.D. (Buildings and Roads Branch) as stated earlier. The petitioner in the writ. petition challenged both the order of absorption of Respondent No. 4 in the Chandigarh Administration and the order fixing his seniority on the ground that these orders were not in public interest or in the interest of the service. However, at the hearing before the Tribunal, at the very outset, learned Counsel for thepetitioner made it clear that he was not challengingthe absorption of Respondent No. 4 but only the placement of the petitioner in the senioritylist and theassigning of seniority to Respondent No. 4 from the date he was taken on deputation, namely, 7.10.1972. The contention ofthe petitioner was that, since Respondent No. 4 was appointed bytransfer to the Chandigarh Administration at his own request, he ought to have been placed at the bottom of the seniority list in the year of absorption and below the petitioner. Curiously, although the challenge to the order absorbing Respondent No. 4 in the service of the Chandigarh Administration was given up by the petitioner, the Tribunal came to the conclusion, on the basis of Rule lO of the Punjab Service of Engineers, ClassII, P.W.D. (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules (referred to hereinafter as "the said Rules''). that the orderof absorption was not valid asno special circumstances had been set out or shown justifying thesame and hence, there was a lacuna in the order".
4.   The Tribunal held that, as a result of this Respondent No. 4 should be placedat the bottom of the gradation list ofofficers of his category and granted seniority from the date he was absorbed in the cadre, namely, February 9, 1979. It is against this decision that both, the Chandigarh Administrationand Respondent No. 4, have come by way of these Appeals. Itwas urged by learned Counselfor the Chandigarh Administration as well as learned Counsel for Respondent No. 4 that the question of regularity or validity of the order of absorption was irrelevant to the question of fixation of seniority. Itwas submitted by them that, in view of the challenge to the order of absorption of Respondent No. 4 having been specifically given up by learned Counsel for the petitioner before the Tribunal, it was not open to the PG NO 802 Tribunal to considerthe question of validity of the absorption at all, and that as per the provisions ofsub- rule (5) of Rule 12 of thesaid Rules the Chandigarh Administrationwas entitled to assign a seniority to Respondent No. 4 from a date prior to the date of his absorption in the interest of the public service and after takinginto account all thecircumstances of thecase provided thatRespondent No. 4 could notbe granted seniority more favourably than the seniority determined after allowing him credit for the period of service rendered by him in his previous appointment as Assistant Engineer. It was, on the other hand, contended by learned Counsel for the petitioner that, as the transfer of Respondent No. 4 and his appointment as an Assistant Engineer in the Chandigarh Administrationwas at his own request, he should be placed at the bottom of the seniority list as on the date of absorption. In order to appreciate these respective contentions, it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions. Rule 10 of the said Rules provides for the appointment in Class II service by transfer and reads as under:
"The Government may in special circumstances with the approval of the Commission, appointan Officer to the service by transfer." Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 12 of the said Rules reads thus:
"12(5) in the case of an of officer appointed by transfer as an Assistant Engineer, while normally he would be placed junior to all the officers appointed directly or by promotion as Assistant Engineers in a particular year, the Government may in the interest of the public service and taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case, fix his seniority on ad hoc basis. Provided that the seniority thus fixed shall in no case, be more favourably than theseniority determined after allowing him credit for the period of servicerendered by him in previous appointment as Assistant Engineer or on a post the duties of which in the opinion of the Government are of equivalent or greater responsibility The decision of Government on this point shall be final "
5.   As far as the appointment of Respondent No 4 as PG NO 803 Assistant Engineer in the chandigarh Administration is concerned, we must proceed on the footing that it wasmade at his own request. Rule 10 of thesaid Rules clearly provided thatsuch an appointment can be made only in special circumstances. In our view, where the requestmade by the officer concerned is based on circumstances showing the request for transfer is justified, this might be looked up as a special circumstance. It was, however, pointed out by learned Counsel for the petitioner that the order of appointment by transfer does not refer toany special circumstance and hence, the appointment of Respondent No. 4 in the Chandigarh Administration by transfer is itself not regular. However, we do not wish to go into the question as to whether such an appointment could be said to be invalid or irregular merely because no special circumstances has been recited in the order because the challenge to the order appointing Respondent No 4 by transfer has been specifically given up by the petitioner in the Tribunal.
6.   In our view, for the question of determining seniority, what one has to see is not Rule 10 but Rule 12(5) of the said Rules which, in terms,provides that any person appointed to a post in the service in question by transfer can be assigned seniority as of a date earlier than the date of absorption providedthis is done in the interest of the public service The Notification dated 14.1.1980 relating to thefixation of seniority of Respondent No 4 expressly sets out that the order assigning a higher seniority to him has been passed by the Chandigarh Administration taking into account all the circumstances of thecase and keeping inview public interest and after considering the representations made in connection with the tentative seniority list which was circulated earlier The said Notification, inits earlier portion, recites that Respondent No 4 was appointed onJuly 15, 1968 as an Assistant Engineer (Civil) in the Punjab P.W D (IrrigationBranch) and that he was appointed as an Assistant Engineer (Civil) in the Buildings and Roads Branch of Punjab P W D on October 7 1972 through the Public Service Commission and joined on deputationin the Engineering Department ofthe Chandigarh Administration By thesaid order seniority is assigned to Respondent No. 4 with effect from 7.10.1972 which is clearly within the limits laiddown in the proviso to Rule 12(5) of the said Rules In view of this, the order granting him seniority as aforesaid appears ex facie to be in order.
7.   It was urged by learned Counsel for the petitioner that,although public interest hasbeen referred to in the said Notification, it is clear thatthis consideration was not in the mindof the Chandigarh Administration at all but the appointment was made to favour Respondent Nol We are afraid that there is no basis on which such a submission can be founded. Respondent No. 4 was first appointed as an Assistant Engineer through the Public PG NO 804 Service Commission in July 1968 whereas the petitioner was appointed to a similar post as late as on June 24, 1976. Respondent No. 4 was thus holding the post of an Assistant Engineer prior to the petitioner. As far as the qualifications go, it appears prima facie that the qualifications of Respondent No. 4 are better than those of the petitioner and certainly, not lower than those of the petitioner. No oblique motive forgranting a higher seniority to Respondent No. 4 is shown to us. In these circumstances,it is not possible to say that the order assigning seniority to Respondent No. 4 as aforesaid has been passed merely under the guise of public interest. In our view, the Tribunal completely failed tonoticeRule 12(5) of the said Rules and, probably, it was because of this that it fell into the error of coming to the conclusion that it did. This appears clear from the fact that there is no reference to Rule 12(5) at all in the judgment of the Tribunal. In the result, the appeals are allowed, the judgment and order passed by the Tribunal are set aside and validity of the order dated 14.1.1980 fixing seniority of Respondent No 4 is upheld. Looking to the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed
