1.  Pursuant to our order dated April 13, 1989 in the above appeal we have heard the learned advocated for original accused 1 and 7 on the question of sentences. So far as original accused 4 is concerned, none appeared on his behalf before us. We have taken into consideration the submissions made by the learned advocates for accused 1 and 7 and the material placed before us in their behalf. We have also taken into consideration the facts appearing on the record so far as accused 4 is concerned.
2.  The offence was committed on February 20, 1972. The accused were arrested on February 21/22, 1972 and were released on bail after a few days. The offence under Section 392 is punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 years and fine. It must be realised that the offence for which the conviction came to be recorded by us on April 13, 1989 was committed more than 15 years before. In the said 15 years the socio-economic responsibilities of the accused have undergone a considerable change. Accused 1 is maintaining a large family consisting of his mother, wife, four daughters, two sons and an unmarried sister. Accused 7 has also married and besides his wife he has two minor daughters and an unmarried paternal uncle dependent upon him. He has also another uncle aged about 80 years who is also dependent on him
3.  Out of the amount of Rs. 40, 000 an amount of Rs. 39, 170 has been recovered from accused 1, 4 and 7. Thus there is a shortfall of Rs. 830 only. It is true that in the meantime PW 2 has suffered loss of interest on this amount. Taking all these facts into consideration and bearing in mind the fact that the accused persons were in jail for some time, we think that the ends of justice would be met if the accused persons are fined. So far as the gravity of the offence is concerned, the maximum blame can be laid at the door of accused 1, a policeman, next comes accused 7, a neighbour of PWs 1 and 2 and thereafter accused 4 a mere companion. This view can be supported even on the basis of the share of the loot received by each of them. Having regard to various factors such as the passage of time, recovery of almost the entire amount, the time spent in prison before release on bail, etc., we think it is not necessary to send the accused to prison.
4. We, therefore, direct accused 1 to pay a fine of Rs. 7500, in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for three years; accused 7 to pay a fine of Rs. 5000, in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years; and accused 4 to pay a fine of Rs. 3000, in default to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year. The fine to be paid within three months from today, failing which warrants of arrest to issue. Out of the fine amount, if realised, PW 2 will be paid a sum of Rs. 10, 000 to compensate her for the loss of interest suffered by her. The appeal shall stand allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
