Ramraj Singh and Others v State of Madhya Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

16 February 1989
Cr.A. Nos. 674 and 541 of 1981
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Both these appeals arise out of a common judgment rendered by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal Nos. 411 and 478 of 1978. It is beyond dispute that an occurrence which was place at about 6.00 p. m. on March 13, 1977 resulted in PW 1, Netraprakash Sharma and his father, PW 4 Goverdhan Lal Sharma sustaining injuries on their person. According to the prosecution, the appellant Ram Raj Singh used a dharia and the appellants Sarat Singh. Tej Bahadur and Mulchand used lathis to cause injuries to the victims and the appellant Diwan Singh threatened the witnesses with a pistol where the assailants withdrew from the scene after the incident was over. The prosecution rested its case upon the testimony of the injured witnesses PW 1, Netraprakash Sharma and PW 4, Goverdhan Lal Sharma, besides that of PW 6 Pawan Kumar, PW 5 Deoraj and PW 10 Baldeo Singh. As a result of the attack, PW 1 Netraprakash Sharma sustained a simple injury and PW 4. Goverdhanlal Sharma sustained four simple injuries. The trial court accepted the prosecution evidence and convicted the appellants Ram Raj Singh and Diwan Singh under Section 148 IPC and the other appellants under Section 147 IPC.
2.   Besides, the appellant Ram Raj Singh was convicted under Sections 455 and 324 IPC while the other appellants are convicted under Sections 455 and 324 read with Sentence of one year RI under two counts and eighteen months RI under one count besides a fine of Rs. 200, Rs. 200 and Rs. 100 for his convictions, the other accused were sentenced to imprisonment for nine months under two counts and one year under one counts besides fine of Rs. 100 on each count for their convictions. The High Court declined to interfere with the convictions and sentences and hence these appeals by special leave.
3.  The appeals of Ram Raj Singh and Diwan Singh have now become academic because they have served out their sentences and also remitted the fines imposed on them. Insofar as the other three appellants are concerned, they have undergone sentence for two months and they have remitted the fine amounts imposed on them.
4.  Having heard learned counsel for the appellants and the learned counsel for the State, we do not see any ground to differ from the view taken by the Sessions Judge and the High Court as regards the occurrence and culpable acts of the accused resulting in injuries being caused to PW 1, Netraprakash Sharma and PW 4, Goverdhan Lal Sharma.  However, we are of the view that since the initiative for the occurrence was taken solely by the appellant Ram Raj Sing and that the injured witnesses had sustained only simple injuries, the ends of justice would be met by modifying the sentences of fine imposed upon them under the three counts.
5.  It is represented that appellant Tej Bahadur is employed as a Manager in a Cooperative Society. Because of the minor role played by him in the occurrence, we do not think the conviction awarded top him should stand in the way of his continuing in service. we, therefore, make it clear that his conviction in this case should not affect his continuance in employment in any manner.
6.  With the modification in the substantive sentence awarded to the appellants Surjit Singh, Tej Bhadur and Mulchand and the observations made regarding the continuance in service of the appellant Tej Bhadur, the appeals will stand dismissed.
Appeals Dismissed.
