Shri Krishna Enterprises and Others v State of Andhra Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

25 October 1989
W.P. (Civil) No. 169 of 1987 and Review Petition No. 390 of 1988
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard learned counsel for the parties. Seven assessees in this petition under article 32 of the 
 Constitution of India, are running hotels, restaurants and canteens which are eating places within the city of Visakhapatnam in the State of Andhra Pradesh. Until the Forty-sixth amendment of the Constitution because effective, the supplies which have been made by these eating houses to consumers were not treated as sale assessable to tax on account of decisions of this Court.
2. The Forty-sixth amendment brought about a change in the basic position by treating such transactions as assessable for tax by treating them as sales. The Forty-sixth amendment came into force with effect from 2nd February, 1983, and the relevant provisions of section 6, of the amending Act provided:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any supply of the nature referred to therein shall be exempt from the aforesaid tax.
(a) where such supply has been made by any restaurant or eating house (by whatever name called), at any time on or after the 7th day of September, 1978, and before the commencement of this Act, and the aforesaid tax has not been collected on such supply on the ground that no such tax could have been levied or collected at that time; or
(b) ...................
Provided that the burden of proving that the aforesaid tax was not collected on any supply of the nature referred to in clause (a)...shall be on the person claiming he exemption under this sub-section."
3.  On the basis of the said Forty-sixth amendment, the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, was amended and amending provisions came into force on 13th September, 1985, with a corresponding provision as has been extracted from the Forty-sixth amendment of the Constitution. The effect of the said amendment in the State Act, therefore, was that the benefit contemplated by the Forty-sixth amendment was extended up to the date of the State legislation and this position is not disputed before us by learned counsel appearing for the State. As the law stands, the petitioners before us are to satisfy the designated authority that no tax had been collected before the Forty-sixth amendment or for the matter of that prior to the amendment of the State legislation. We find from the record that no such opportunity was extended to the petitioners when tax was levied.The situation can appropriately be met and the interest of justice adequately served if opportunity is given to the petitioners to satisfy the appropriate authority that they came within the exemption of section 6, of the Forty-sixth amendment and the State law. The burden to establish the fact is on the assessees. We set aside the assessments and require the assessing officer to give opportunity to the petitioners to satisfy him that no tax was collected until 13th September, 1985. In the circumstances indicated above no further collection shall be made.  However, the amounts which have been collected need not be refunded till fresh orders are made. In the event of no liability, the whole, or if some liability is found, then the excess, shall be refunded to the petitioners within one month of determination along with interest at 12 per cent from the date of payment till the date of refund. In the event of liability being found to be in excess of what has been collected, the assessing officer is free to collect the same in accordance with the provisions of the law.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly without costs.
[The State thereupon filed a review petition and after hearing the parties the court delivered the following order on October 25, 1989, dismissing the review petition]
ORDER ON REVIEW PETITION
25-10-1989 : We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.  On 23rd March, 1988, the judgment of this Court was delivered which has now been asked to be reviewed at the instance of the State. It is alleged on behalf of the State that the latest amendment of the State Sales Tax Act, had not been placed before this Court at the time of hearing and since the Act, by later amendment has been made effective from a prior date, the demand raised should have been sustained. We have looked into the various aspects involved in the matter and are of the view that the review petition should be dismissed. This is on account of the fact that after the Forty-sixth amendment of the Constitution, State legislation was necessary to give effect to liability of sales tax and the Andhra Pradesh Act, was a prospective legislation.
5.  The incidence of sales tax is ordinarily passed on to the customer and in the event of accepting the retrospective amendment a liability would be created without affording any opportunity to the hoteliers to pass on the incidence of the tax. In these circumstances, we do not think there is any jurisdiction for review. The petition is accordingly dismissed. Petitions ordered accordingly.
Petitions dismissed.
