Bholanath Tripathi v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

6 November 1989
W.P. (Criminal) No. 473 of 1989
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The letter dated June 23, 1989 addressed to the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India by a certain Bholanath Tripathi, a journalist, which has been registered as a writ petition, brings to the notice of this Court the sad plight of Kanchan Devi who is stated to have been held in captivity and forced into prostitution by a certain Janak Dulare Srivastava.
2.  The situation described in Bholanath Tripathi's letter and in that of Kanchan Devi to the former, on the basis of which the present letter petition was presented, if true, are indeed lurid and sordid.
3.   According to the allegations, the said Srivastava is stated to have paid Rs. 45, 000 to Kanchan Devi's father and that under the guise of a marriage the said Srivastava is holding her in confinement and using her to earn money from prostitution.It the grievance of the lady turns out to be genuine, the delay in listing the matter before the court would, indeed be unfortunate. The letter was received in June 1989, and the matter is listed before the court nearly five months thereafter.
4.  Prima facie, the letter petition bears serious scrutiny and investigation. Some urgent interim action is also necessary to save the lady from further indignity and violations of her person.
5.  We asked the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee to nominate a learned counsel to act as a Commissioner in this case. On its suggestion we appoint Shri Mahesh Prasad Saxena as Commissioner of the court, who will proceed immediately to the place of the alleged confinement set out in the letters of Bholanath Tripathi and the letter of Kanchan Devi on the basis of which Shri Bholanath Tripathi sent the letter petition and record the statement of Kanchan Devi to ensure the authenticity of the letter an its allegations.
6.   If the Commissioner is, prima facie, satisfied as to the identity of the lady and the circumstances disclosed in her letter, the Commissioner will take immediate steps to have her removed to a safe place preferably to a Rescue Home and ensure her production before this Court on November 9, 1989. The Commissioner may enlist the help and assistance of Bholanath Tripathi, if he is readily available.
7.  The Superintendent of Police, Azamgarh, , is hereby directed to give the requisite police assistance to the Commissioner in the execution of the Commission by providing the requisite number of police personnel of appropriate rank to assist the Commissioner in the task. All other authorities of the State Government are also directed to afford such assistance to the Commissioner as he may require in the discharge of his duties under this order.
8.   A copy of this order shall be sent to the Home Secretary to the Government of Uttar Pradesh to ensure compliance with its terms. Copies of the letters of Bholanath Tripathi and Kanchan Devi referred to above shall be made available by the Registry to the Commissioner forthwith. Copies of the letters shall also accompany the copy of the order to be sent to the Home Secretary as well.
Call on November 9, 1989.
Order accordingly.
