Chaganlal Gainmull v Collector of Central Excise
Supreme Court of India

8 November 1989
C.A. No. 517 of 1975
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal, by special leave, arises out of and is directed against the judgment dated July 22, 1974, of a Division Bench of the High Court of Madras in Letters Patent Appeal No. 273 of 1972, dismissing, in reversal of the order dated January 5, 1972, of the learned Single Judge of the High Court, the W.P. No. 3387 of 1970, filed by the appellant by which appellant assailed certain adjudication proceedings under the Customs Act, 1962 culminating in an order of confiscation of certain seized goods. The adjudication proceedings were assailed on the ground that the show cause notice contemplated by Section 124(a), had not been issued within six months from the date of the seizure of the goods as envisaged by Section 110(2), of the Act.
2.   The High Court, in the judgment under appeal, was persuaded to the view that the time limit referred to by Section 110(2), pertained to the power to retain the seized goods beyond six months and that the issue of the show cause notice under Section 124(a), beyond six months did not affect or vitiate the power to adjudicate.
3.  We have heard Shri Sharad Javali, learned Senior Advocate for the appellant and Shri V. C. Mahajan, learned Senior Advocate for the Revenue. Support for Shri Javali's proposition that a show cause notice under Section 124(a), cannot be issued after the lapse of six months of the seizure is sought to be drawn entirely from the proviso the sub-section (2), of Section 110. Section 110, deals with the seizure of goods, documents and things. Sub-section (1), of that section says that:
"if the proper officer has reason to believe that any goods are liable to confiscation under this Act, he may seize such goods". Sub-section (2), says that" where any goods are seized under sub-section (1), and no notice in respect thereof is given under clause (a) of Section 124, within six months of the seizure of the goods, shall be returned to the person from whose possession they were seized."
4.  It appears to us that the consequence that flows from the failure to issue a show cause notice under Section 124(a), within the period of six months is limited to what is envisaged in sub-section (2), namely that the goods shall be returned to the person from whose possession they were seized. Section 110(2), does not prescribe a period of limitation within which a show cause notice is to be issued. But if no action by way of issue of a show cause notice is initiated under Section 124(a), within the period of six months, stipulated by Section 110(2), the effect would be that the person from whom the goods were seized would become entitled to their return.
5.  The view that commended itself to the Division Bench of the High Court is supported by the following observation of this Court in Asstt. Collector of Customs v. Charan Das Malhotra1971 Indlaw SC 523
"Section 124, provides that no order confiscating any goods or imposing any penalty on any person shall be made unless the owner of the goods or such person is given a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate the goods or to impose a penalty. The section does not lay down any period within which the notice required by it has to be given. The period laid down in Section 110(2), affects only the seizure of the goods and not the validity of the notice."
6.  The delay beyond six months in the issue of the show cause notice goes to and affects the power to detain the seized goods beyond six months and does not denude the adjudicating authority of the power to initiate proceedings even thereafter.
7.  We find no merit in the appeal which is, accordingly, dismissed; but without an order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
