Northern Corporation v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

6 August 1990
Civil Writ Petition No. 443 of 1988. (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India).
The Judgment was delivered by : Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.
1. This is an application under Article 32 of the Constitution. Northern Corporation is the petitioner in the instant application and the Union ofIndia, the Collector of Customs and the Assistant Collectorof Customs (Bond Department) are the respondents.
2. On 11th May, 1983, the licensing authority issued importlicence No. 2959845 for Rs.20, 12,729 in favour of M/sIndustrial Cable India Ltd., Rajpura. The licence holdertransferred the same in favour of M/s Metalic metal Industries. The transferee licence holder issued a letter of authority in favour of the petitioner for the import of MSCRdefective sheets or coils. The letter of authority wasissued on 21st May, 1984.
3. The petitioner herein placed order on M/s Sayani Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., Singapore for the supply of MSCR defective sheets or coils on 30th May, 1984. The foreign supplier shipped the material in three consignments and the goods arrived at the Bombay Port on 12th June, 1984. The clearing agent of the petitioner filed bills of entry on 30th July,1984 for warehousing under section 59 of the Customs Act.1962 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), and the same was allowed. The goods were bounded on 7th August, 1984. Itmay be mentioned that the rate of duty on the day was 60% +40% + Rs.650 per M.T. and 10% C.V.D. The total duty on the consignment was assessed as Rs.26,20,109.55.
4. On 21th August, 1984, the petitioner's clearing agentfiled six bills of entry for ex bond clearance. However, the bills of entry were returned with the remark that "pleaseobtain no objection from the income tax". This was endorsedon 24th August, 1984. The petitioner states that thereafterhe came to know that the income tax authorities had imposedban under section 132(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961. Thepetitioner asserted that he was ever ready and willing,rather was anxious, to get the material on payment of thethen prevailing customs duty. However, due to circumstancesbeyond the control of the petitioner, that it to say, by theorder of the Income Tax Authorities the goods could not bereleased. This factor was not of the petitioner's making,according to the petitioner. '
5. On 30th March, 1988, the Income Tax Department issuedthe necessary no objection certificate, thus lifting theban. On 4th April, 1988, the petitioner's agent contactedthe customs authority for clearance of the goods. The dutyas is prevalent now is Rs.5,000 per M.T. + addl. duty 45%and C.V.D. at Rs.325 per M.T. The total duty came to a verylarge sum of money. The demand, according to the petitioner,was arbitrary, illegal and unconstitutional.
6. The instant writ was filed under Article 32 of the Constitution on 16th April, 1988 and on 22nd April, 1988,this Court passed the following order:
"Pending notice, there will be limited stay to the extentthat the goods name, "MSCR defective sheets/coils" whichhave arrived at Bombay Port per S.S. "SEA PRIMROSE" will bereleased forthwith on petitioner's paying customs and otherduties as leviable on 21.8.84. In addition to the abovepayment the petitioner will deposit Rs.5 lakhs and for thebalance amount petitioner will furnish surety (which mayconsist of ITC bond but excluding cash/bankguarantee/NSC/FDR) to the satisfaction of the Collector ofCustoms."
7. We directed that the notice should be given to the revenueauthority to appear before us. Learned Attorney General hadappeared pursuant to the notice on behalf of the respondents. It is contended on behalf of the respondents that forthe payment of duty, the liability of the petitioner to paythe duty is the duty at the time of clearance of the goods.Our attention was drawn to section 15(1)(b) of the Act whichpostulates that the rate of duty and tariff valuation, ifany, applicableto any imported goods, shall be the rate and valuation inforce, in case the goods are cleared from a warehouse undersection 68, on the date on which the goods are actuallyremoved from the warehouse. Section 15 of the Act reads asunder:
"S. 15. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariffvaluation of imported goods.
The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to any imported goods, shall be the rate and valuationin force"
(a)in the case of goods entered for home consumption under section 46, on the date on which a bill ofentry in respect of such goods is presented under thatsection;
(b) in the case of goods cleared from a warehouseunder section 68, on the date on which the goods are actually removed from the warehouse;
(c) in the case of any other goods, on the date ofpayment of duty:
8. Provided that if a bill of entry has been presented before the date of entry inwards of the vessel by whichthe goods are imported, the bill of entry shall be deemed tohave been presented on the date of such entry inwards.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to baggage and goods imported by post."Learned Attorney General laid emphasis on the expression"actually removed" in clause (b) of section 15(1) of the Act. Our attention was also drawn to section 16 of the Act which reads as under:"S. 16. Date for determination of rate of duty and tariffvaluation of export goods.
(1) The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any, applicable to any export goods, shall be the rate and valuation inforce
(a) in the case of goods entered for export under626section 50, on the date"on which the proper officer makes anorder permitting clearance and loading of the goods forexportation under section 51;
(b) in the case of any other goods, on the date ofpayment of duty.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply, tobaggage and goods exported by post."
9. It was contended on behalf of the revenue that in view of the aforesaid, it would not be possible for the petitioner to clear the goods on payment of duty on the date whenthe petitioner was actualling expressed willingness to remove the goods. Our attention was drawn to the decision ofthis Court in Prakash Cotton Mills (P) Ltd. v. B. Sen &Ors., [1979] 2 SCR 1142 1979 Indlaw SC 286. In that case,the appellant storedon December 22, 1965 in the Customs warehouse, goods imported by him under a licence, and cleared them on various datesbetween September 1, 1966 and February 20, 1967. Underprotest, they paid customs duty at the enhanced rates inaccordance with the amended provisions.
10. Later, they claimedrebate alleging that since the consignments had been received, stored and assessed to duty much before the promulgation of the Ordinance, they were liable to pay duty at therate prevailing on the date of warehousing. Their appealsand revision were unsuccessful. In appeal to this Court it was contended that the material change in s. 15 being onlythe substitution of the words "the rate of duty" the customsauthorities were not entitled to take into account the newrate of exchange at the appreciated value of currency inrespect of the consignments stored in the warehouse prior tothe coming into force of the Ordinance. Dismissing the appeal, this Court held that the customs authorities wereright intaking the view that the rate of duty applicable to the imported goods should be determined according to the lawprevalent on the date they were actually removed from thewarehouse.
11. Section 15(1)(b) clearly requires that the rate of duty, rate of exchange and tariff applicable to anyimported goods shall be the rate and valuation in force on the date on which goods are actually removed from the warehouse. Under s. 49 and importer may apply to the Assistant Collector of Customs for permission to store the imported goods in a warehouse pending their clearance and he may bepermitted to do so; and s. 68 provides that an importer of any warehoused goods may clear them if the import dutyleviable on them has been paid. In that case, it was foundthat as the goods were removed from the warehouse after theamending Ordinance had comeinto force, the customs authorities and the Central Government were right in taking the view that the rate of dutyapplicable to the imported goods should be determined according the law prevalent on the date these were actuallyremoved from the warehouse.
12. Mr. Garg, appearing for the petitioner, on the other hand contended before us that his client was willing indeed to pay the duty when the goods crossed the customs barrierand were in the process of being cleared, but could not becleared because of the prohibitory orders of the Income TaxDepartment under section 102 of the Customs Act. In that light, it was not possible, Mr. Garg contended, for theIncome Tax Department to claim enhanced duty due to factswhich were not for the fault of the petitioner. In view of the language used in section 15(1)(b) of the Act, it is difficult to accept this contention specially in the light of the expression used 'actually removed'. It must be accepted that the prohibitory orders, arbitrary or not, wouldpostpone the date of clearance and as such would postponethe determination of the duty. Therefore, it is difficult toaccept Mr. Garg's contention. However, there is a far more serious objection in entertaining this application under Article 32 of the Constitution. Article 32 of the Constitution guarantees the right tomove the Supreme Court for enforcement of fundamentalrights. If there is breach of the fundamental rights, thepetitioner can certainly have recourse to Article 32 of the Constitution provided other conditions are satisfied. But wemust, in all such cases, be circumventive of what is theright claimed. In this case, the petitioner as such has nofundamental fight to clear the goods imported except in dueprocess of law. Now in the facts of this case, such clearance can only be made on payment of duty as enjoined by theCustoms Act. In a particular situation whether customs dutyis payable at the rate prevalent on a particular date or nothas to be determined under the four corners of the Customs Act, 1962.
13. The petitioner has no fundamental right as such to clear any goods imported without payment of duties inaccordance with the law. There is procedure provided by lawfor determination of the payment of customs duty. The revenue has proceeded on that basis. The petitioner contendsthat duty at a particular rate prevalent at a particulardate was not payable. The petitioner cannot seek to removethe goods without payment at that rate or without having thematter determined by the procedure envisaged and enjoined bythe law for that determination. The petitioner withoutseeking to take any relief within the procedure envisagedunder the Act had moved this Court for breach of fundamentalright. This is not permissible and should never beentertained. In a matter of this nature where liability of acitizen to pay a particular duty depends on interpretationof law and determination of facts and the provision of aparticular statute for which elaborate procedure is prescribed, it cannot conceivably be contended that enforcing of those provisions of the Act would breach fundamentalright which entitle a citizen to seek recourse to Article 32 of the Constitution.
14. We are, therefore, clearly of the opinion that relief under Article 32 of the Constitution is wholly inappropriate in the facts and the circumstances of this case. It has further to be reiterated that for enforcement of fundamental right which is dependent upon adjudication or determination of questions of law as well as question of fact without taking any resort to the provisions of the Act, it is not permissible to move this Court on the theoretical basis that there is breach of the fundamental right. Whenever a person complains and claims that there is a violation of law, it does not automatically involve breach of fundamental right for the enforcement of which alone Article 32 of the Constitution is attracted. It appears that the facts of this nature require elaborate procedural investigation and this Court should not be moved and should not entertain on these averments of the Article 32 of Constitution. This position is clearly well settled, but sometimes we are persuaded to accept that an allegation of breach of law is an action in breach of fundamental right.In this connection, reference may be made to the decision of this Court in Smt. Ujjam Bai v. State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963] 1 SCR 778 1961 Indlaw SC 465, where this Court observed at p. 842 of thereport as under:
"In my opinion, the correct answer to the two questionswhich have been referred to this larger Bench must be in thenegative. An order of assessment made by an authority undera taxing statute which is intra vires and in the undoubtedexercise of its jurisdiction cannot be challenged on the sole ground that it is ,passed ,on a misconstruction of aprovision of the Act or of a notification issued thereunder.Nor can the validity of such an order be questioned in apetition under Art. 32 of the Constitution. The properremedy for correcting an error in such an order is to proceed by way of appeal, or if the error is an error apparenton the face of the record, they by an application under Art.226 of the Constitution. It is necessary to observe here that Art. 32 of the Constitution does not give this Court anappellate jurisdiction Such. as is given by Arts. 132 to136. Article 32 guarantees the right to a constitutionalremedy and relates only to the enforcement of the rightsconferredby Part 111 of the Constitution. Unless a question of theenforcement of a fundamental right arises, Art. 32 does notapply. There can be no question of the enforcement of afundamental fight if the order challenged is a valid andlegal order, in spite of the allegation that it is erroneous. I have, therefore, come to the conclusion that no question of the enforcement of a fundamental fight arises inthis case and the writ petition is not maintainable."
15. In the aforesaid view of the matter, we are clearly of the opinion that Article 32 of the Constitution should not have been resorted to and this application does not lieunder Article 32 of the Constitution.However, it appears that this Court has passed an orderon 22nd April, as indicated hereinbefore. It is stated thatthe goods have been cleared pursuant to that order. Therevenue would be at liberty to take appropriate action inaccordance with law for the recovery of the dues.This writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition disposed
