Rampal Singh v Rias Ahmad Ansari and Others
Supreme Court of India

30 July 1990
C.A. No. 3743 of 1990 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 1398 of 1990)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard Sri A. K. Srivastava, learned counsel for the appellant and Sri B. R. Sabharwal, learned counsel for the New India Assurance Co.
Special leave granted.
2.  The only question that arises in this appeal brought by the owner of the motor vehicle against the order dated January 4, 1990 of the High Court of Allahabad in F. A. O. No. 257 of 1989 affirming the award dated August 31, 1988 of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal is whether the New India Assurance Company is liable, as insurer of the vehicle, to indemnify the appellant and satisfy the award made against the appellant.
3.  Rais Ahmad Ansari, respondent 1 herein, instituted a Motor Accident Claim No. 15 of 1986 on the file for the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (VI Additional District Judge) Kanpur Dehat, for compensation for the personal injuries suffered by him in an accident that occurred on December 28, 1985 involving appellant's truck UP 2488. The proceedings culminated in an award in the sum of Rs. 30, 000 in favour of the injured Rais Ahmad Ansari. The Tribunal, owing to a lapse on the part of the appellant in producing the requisite documentary evidence to sustain his claim for indemnity from the insurer, declined to make the award against the insurer and confined the award against appellant alone.
4.  The appeal preferred by the appellant in the High Court on the question as to the liability of the insurer was also unsuccessful, the High Court having declined to fasten liability on the insurer for lack of evidence as to the subsistence of the benefit of a policy of insurance covering the risk.
5.  Before this Court, appellant in an effort to improve the fortunes of his case, has sought to produce by way of additional evidence the Policy of Insurance and the other material supporting his claim for indemnity. Sri Sabharwal, learned counsel for the insurer, in all fairness, had the additional documents examined by the insurer and has submitted that upon a consideration the material now furnished by the appellant the insurer accepts its liability to indemnify the appellant.
6. We permit the additional evidence to be tendered in this appeal. The insurer also seeks to tender a bank draft for the sum of Rs. 30, 000, representing the sum awarded by the Tribunal.
7.  We accordingly allow this appeal in part and hold the liability of the insurer co-extensive with that of the appellant under the award and modify the award made by the Tribunal to that extent. The amount of Rs. 30, 000 tendered by the insurer shall be deposited in the Registry of this Court. The Registry will transmit this sum to the credit of the insurer, in Claim No. 15 of 1986 on the file of Motor Vehicle Claims Tribunal (VI Additional District Judge) Kanpur Dehat, for purposes of payment to the said claimant Rais Ahmad Ansari in terms and satisfaction of the award. This shall be done within three weeks from today.
8.  A copy of this order shall be sent to the said Tribunal as well as to Rais Ahmad Ansari. The Tribunal will take steps to pay the amount of Rs. 30, 000 in terms of its award to claimant Rais Ahmad Ansari and report compliance to this Court within 3 months from today.
Appeal disposed of accordingly. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
