Shri Bharuch Coconut Trading Company and Others v Municipal Corporation of The City of Ahmedabad
Supreme Court of India

27 November 1990
C.A. No. 2433 of 1977 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 24 January 1977 of the Gujarat High Court in S.C.A. No. 655 of 1975)
The Judgment was delivered by: K. RAMASWAMY, J.
1.  This Appeal u/art. 136 is against the judgment in S.C.A. No. 655 of 1975 of the Gujarat High Court dated January 24, 1977 wherein the appellants questioned the power to levy octroi on brown coconut (watery coconut) and the High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that the brown coconut is not an exempted green fruit but would attract general Item 55 of Rule 14 of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation Octroi Rules (for short 'the Rules'). The admitted facts are that the appellants import and sell the brown coconut in the city of Ahmedabad as their trading activity. The respondent levied octroi on brown coconuts at the rate of Re 1 per 100 kilograms at the print of import into the octroi limits of the respondent corporation. By an amendment to the rules, with effect from April 16, 1975 the rate of levy was increased to Rs 5 per 100 kilograms.
The appellants challenged its legality contending that the brown coconuts are green fruits within the meaning of Item 10 of Rule 4 of the rules and, therefore, they are exempted articles. It is, thereby, not exigible to octroi. The contention was negated and the writ petition was dismissed as against which this appeal has been filed.
2.  Admittedly the appellants, as a part of their trading activity, import brown coconuts (watery coconuts) from Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu through rail and road to Ahmedabad. Under the rules, whenever goods are carried into or out of the octroi limits of the Municipal Corporation, the articles specified under the rules are liable to octroi, except of course those exempted under Item 10 of Rule 4. Rule 4 contains the list of articles which are exempted from octroi. Item 10 in Rule 4 reads thus:
"(10) Green fruits of all kinds, sugarcane, fennel (green variali), pan and vegetables."
3.  Rule 14 provides that octroi shall be levied at the rates and in the manner stated in schedule 'A'. Item 11 of the schedule specifies dry fruits thus:
"11. Dried fruits and their cakes, dry shingodas, dry cashewnuts and dried grapes. 1-00 ps. Advl
13(b). Dried kernel of coconut. 0-75 pc. Advl
55. All articles and goods not specified elsewhere in the schedule or in the list of exempted articles and goods 1-00 100 Kg."
4.  The question is whether brown coconut (watery coconut) is a green fruit or not ? In Ramavatar Budhaiprasad v. Asstt. STO 1961 Indlaw SC 3511961 Indlaw SC 3511961 Indlaw SC 351 and CST v. S.N. Brothers1972 Indlaw SC 7261972 Indlaw SC 7261972 Indlaw SC 726, this Court held that the expression occurring in schedules to the Sales Tax Acts have to be considered with reference to their meaning in ordinary commercial parlance and should not be considered according to the strict scientific meaning.
In Ramavatar Budhaiprasad case,1961 Indlaw SC 3511961 Indlaw SC 3511961 Indlaw SC 351, this Court held that betel leaves, though vegetable leaves in the strict scientific sense, cannot be considered to be vegetables.
5.  In ordinary commercial language in the common parlance, betel leaves cannot be considered as vegetables. Coconut in the ordinary commercial sense is understood in several forms as tender coconut, watery coconut, dried coconut and copra and all these come under the expression coconut. Tender coconut contains juicy water and the kernel is at the tender stage. The tender coconuts are used generally during summer (autumn) season to drink the watery juice therein after cutting it. A watery coconut is a ripened coconut and enters the market after the removal of the outer cover of its fibre. It is called coconut or watery coconut. For the purpose of the case it is called brown coconut. The water is used as a drink and the kernel for culinary purposes. After the coconut is fully grown it is plucked from the trees and after removing the outer fibre (to reduce weight), it is sent to the market for commercial purposes. As stated earlier it is called coconut or watery coconut (brown coconut). The question, therefore, is whether the brown coconut (watery coconut) is a green fruit. The word green is defined in Chambers Dictionary at page 463 as adjective of the colour usually in leaves between blue and yellow in spectrum... unripe, fresh, undried, raw or colour of green things.
6.  In Webster Comprehensive Dictionary (International Edition), the word 'fruit' has been defined as the edible, pulpy mass covering the seeds of various plants and trees. They are classified as fleshy, as gourds, melons, oranges, apples, pears, berries, etc.; drupaceous as cherries, peaches, plums, apricots, and others containing stones; dry as nuts, capsules, ashenia, follicles, legumes, etc. In flowering plants, the mature seed vessel and its contents, together with such accessory or external parts of the inflorescence seemed to be integral with them. Any vegetable product used as food or otherwise serviceable to man; as grain, cotton, or flax; also such products, collectively : the fruits of the earth. Therefore, in the context of the octroi it could be legitimate to conclude that all kinds of fresh fruits are exempted articles.
7.  In P.A. Thillai Chidambara Nadar v. Addl. Appellate Asstt. Commissioner,1985 Indlaw SC 3981985 Indlaw SC 398, this Court was to consider whether ripened coconut which is none other than watery coconut is an exempted article as vegetable under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act (1 of 1959). This court held that fresh fruits and vegetables being household articles of everyday use for the table, these will have to be construed in the popular sense, meaning the sense in which every householder will understand them. Viewed from this angle, the most apposite test would be an answer to a simple question :
8.  Would a householder when asked to bring home some 'fresh fruits' and some 'vegetables' for the evening meal, bring coconut too ? Obviously the answer is in the negative. Accordingly this Court held that ripened coconut is neither a fresh nor vegetable. The watery coconut is no doubt a ripened coconut used for several purposes like offering to a deity in a Hindu temple being broken or used on auspicious occasions or used in preparation of the daily table food or in confectionery like biscuits or in the extraction of oil when it is fresh or dried kernel. When a person in the commercial market goes and asks for coconut no one will consider brown coconut to be vegetable or fresh fruit, much less a green fruit. No householder would purchase it as a fruit. No doubt in some English dictionary, coconut is called a fruit or nut but it is to be understood in its ordinary commercial parlance.
In Sri Krishna Coconut Co. v. CTO1964 Indlaw AP 341965 Indlaw SC 166, the Andhra Pradesh High Court was to consider whether fully grown coconut with well developed kernel containing water i.e. watery coconut could be called tender or dried coconut.
9.  In that context considering the scope of an explanation to Schedule III of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 which exempted tender coconut from the sales tax under the Act, it was held that in a tender coconut, the kernel is hardly formed or is only in the initial stages of formation. In a dried coconut the kernel is formed and fully developed and further the water inside the coconut has dried up leading to the drying of the kernel also. But a fully grown coconut with a well developed kernel, which contains, water cannot be alleged either a tender or a dried coconut. This is well known that coconut is used for culinary purposes and on auspicious occasions and as part of the offerings in temples. It was held in that case that the watery coconuts are fully developed coconuts and they are exigible to sales tax.
In Kunchi Rajeshwara Sastry & Sons v. Asstt. CCT1975 Indlaw AP 231975 Indlaw AP 23,the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court was to consider whether copra is an oil seed within the meaning of Item (vi) of the list of declared goods mentioned in S. 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.
"Coconut is understood in several forms, namely, tender coconut, watery coconut, dried coconut and copra, and all these come under the expression 'coconut'. Except in the case of tender coconut from which oil cannot be extracted, in all other cases, oil can be extracted and all of them are regarded in common parlance as oil seeds."
10.  In Sri Lakshmi Coconut Industries v. State of Karnataka1980 Indlaw KAR 23,the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court was to consider whether desiccated coconut falls within the entry coconut, which is one of the declared goods under S. 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 
1960 Indlaw KER 38 , the Kerala High Court also took the same view.
In CST v. Ram Kumar Nand Kumar1972 Indlaw ALL 100 : 1972 Indlaw ALL 100, the Allahabad High Court also held that coconut is an oil seed within the definition of Section 3-AA(1)(vi) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
11.  In the light of the above discussion we conclude that the watery coconut (brown coconut) is not a green fruit but is a separate entity by itself. It cannot also be considered to be a dry fruit within the meaning of Entry 11 of Rule 4. Dried fruit is distinct from the coconut. Therefore, the watery coconut (brown coconut) does not fall within the meaning of Item 13-B of Rule 4 of the Rules also. All articles or goods which are not specified elsewhere in the schedule or in the list of exempted articles or goods would fall under Item 55 of Rule 14. Brown coconut is not an exempted article among the list of articles in Item 10 of Rule 4, namely, green fruit (brown coconut) (watery coconut) would fall within Item 55 of Rule 14 of the Rules and is exigible to octroi.
12.  Shri Krishan Kumar, learned counsel for the appellant repeatedly asked this Court to make a reference to the larger bench on the ground that the similar question would frequently arise in various High Courts under the respective Sales Tax Acts, the Central Sales Tax Act and the Octroi Rules of the respective States and after the issue of notice to all the learned Advocate Generals of the States and the Attorney General and the law may be authoritatively laid by a larger bench. In view of the settled legal position, we find no such necessity to make a reference to the larger bench.
13.  Thereby we have no hesitation to hold that the High Court is well justified in coming to its conclusion that watery coconut (brown coconut) is exigible to octroi only under Item 55 of Rule 14 of the Rules. Accordingly we dismiss the appeal with costs quantified at Rs 10,000.
Appeal dismissed.
