Krishna Veersingh Bachhansingh Chauhan v Wasudeo Motiram Kalmegh and Others
Supreme Court of India

6 August 1990
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard Shri.G.L.Sanghi, learned Senior Counsel for the appellants and Smt. Jayshree Wad for the respondents. Special leave granted.
2.  The appeal arises out of certain proceedings initiated under the provisions of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950, concerning the affairs of an institution called the "Vidarbha Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti". The Joint Charity Commissioner, Aurangabad by his order dated 2-9-1987, inter alia directed Wasudeo Motiram Kalmegh and Suresh Mool Chand Agarwal, Respondents 1 and 2 herein, "to hand over the charge of the trust affairs" to the appellant "within a period of 15 days from today" and further directed the said two persons
"to deposit in bank the licence fee or rent recovered from non-applicants 4 to 7 in the name of the Trust"
3.  However, in the Civil Writ Petition 1607 of 1988 filed by the said Wasudeo Motiram Kalmegh and Suresh Moolchand Agarwal before the High Court against the above order of the Joint Charity Commissioner, the High Court by its order dated 21-4-1989 modified the order observing:
" Considering the stalemate, which has arisen, we find that it would be expedient to direct that an ad hoc Managing Committee of five members should be elected by the Categories Nos. 1 to 3 of clause 7 of the Constitution. We would, therefore, direct the Deputy Charity Commissioner, Nagpur, to draw a list of the persons who belong to Categories Nos. 1 to 3 of clause 7 of the Constitution and cause a body of five persons to be elected by them by treating Categories Nos. 1 to 3 as an electoral college, within two months from the date of this order. The petitioners and Respondent 1 shall thereupon hand over the charge of the ad hoc Managing Committee which will manage the affairs of the Vidarbha Rashtrabhasha Prachar Samiti, Nagpur, until the matter is finally decided in suo motu proceedings initiated by the Joint Charity Commissioner, Nagpur, under Section 50-A of the Bombay Public Trusts Act."
This order of the High Court is assailed in this appeal.
4.  Shri. Sanghi would say that the order proceeds on a misconception of the constitution and the scheme of administration of the Trust and the fact that whatever might be the constitution of the Managing Committee, the vestiture of the properties of the Samiti is in the trustees. Shri. Sanghi stated that in the ad hoc Managing Committee which is alleged to have come into existence pursuant to the elections held pursuant to the order of the High Court the very persons who were held to have committed acts of misfeasance by the Joint Charity Commissioner by his orders dated 2-9-1987 and 3-11-1987 respectively have found their way into the ad hoc Committee and that the High Court was in error in interfering with the order of the Joint Charity Commissioner.
5.  The directions issued by the High Court are really interlocutory in nature to be operative, as the order of the High Court itself stipulates till the suo motu proceedings initiated by the Joint Charity Commissioner, Nagpur, are decided. It is now common ground that pursuant to the directions contained in the order of the High Court, an ad hoc Managing Committee consisting of five members has come to be elected on 14-7-1990. Shri. Sanghi says that the election of this body is also assailed by the appellant in certain other proceedings.
6.  Having regard to the circumstance that the body that is brought into being is an ad hoc Managing Committee pending final decision by the Joint Charity Commissioner it appears to us that ends of justice would be met by directing the said ad hoc Managing Committee, which includes the said Wasudeo Motiram and Suresh Moolchand Agarwal to furnish accounts of the rents or licence fee collected from the licensees (who were non-applicants 4 to 7 respondents before the Charity Commissioner) for the period from April 1982 to 31-7-1990. If upon such furnishment of accounts, any funds are found to be in hands of the ad hoc Managing Committee or with Wasudeo Motiram Kalmegh and Suresh Moolchand Agarwal or any of them, as the case may be, such balance shall also be deposited with the Charity Commissioner within two months from today. The ad hoc Managing Committee shall, with effect from 1-8-1990 collect the said licence fee and deposit the same with the Charity Commissioner every month regularly.
7.  This arrangement shall continue till the matter before the Joint Charity Commissioner is finally disposed of as envisaged by the order of the High Court.
8.  Whatever we have said in this order or whatever may be implicit in it, it may not be taken into account in the final disposal of the proceedings now pending or to be taken in future in respect of this Samiti, as this order is intended to operate as an interim arrangement.
Order accordingly
