H. H. Sri Rama Verma v Commissioner of Income Tax, Ernakulam
Supreme Court of India

12 September 1990
C.A. No. 206(NT) of 1976
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by certificate under Section 261 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and under Article 133 of the Constitution is directed against the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala dated April 11, 1975 holding that the appellant was not entitled to benefit of Section 80-G of the Income Tax Act, 1961 in respect of the donations made by him in the previous years.
2.  The appellant is an assessee under the Income Tax Act, he donated equity shares of Nirlon Synthetic Fibres and Chemicals Ltd. having face value of Rs. 12, 50, 000 to each of two trusts, namely, H.H. Maharani Setu Parvati Bayi Trust and H.H. Princess Lakshmi Bayi Trust. The total donation, according to the assessee, amounted to Rs. 25, 00, 000. In the assessment year 1968-69, the assessee claimed exemption under Section 80-G of the Act in respect of the aforesaid donations made by him to Charitable Trusts. The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim. On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner directed the Income Tax Officer to call for the relevant receipts and if satisfied with the admissibility of the deduction claimed to grant the deduction according to law. The revenue preferred appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the expression "sums" occurring in Section 80-G did not include any donation made in kind in the shape of share, it therefore set aside the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. On reference, the High Court agreed with the view taken by the Tribunal. Hence this appeal.
3.  The relevant provisions of Section 80-G, as applicable to the instant case (as it then existed) are as under:
"80-G. Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc. - (1) In computing the total income of an assessee, there shall be deducted, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section, an amount equal to, -(a) where the assessee is a company, 50 per cent; and
(b) in the case of any other assessee, 55 per cent, of the aggregate of the sums specified in sub-section (2)
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely
(a) any sums paid by the assessee in the previous year as donations to,
(i) to (iii) * * *
(iv) any other fund or any institution to which this section applies; or"
4.  The language used in Section 80-G(2)(a) is clear and unambiguous. On a plain reading of the section it is apparent that an assessee is entitled to claim deduction from his income on the amount of money paid by him as donation to the authorities and for the causes specified therein. The use of the expression "any sums paid" contemplates payment of an amount of money. One of the dictionary meanings of the expression "sum" means any indefinite amount money. In the context in which expression "sums paid by the assessee" has been used makes the legislative intent clear that it refers to amount of money paid by the assessee as donation. The Act provides for assessment of tax on the income derived by an assessee during the assessment year, the income relates to the amount of money earned or received by an assessee. Therefore, for purposes of claiming deduction from the income tax under Section 80-G(2)(a) the donation must be sum of money paid by the assessee. The plain meaning of the words used in the section do not contemplate donation in terms of kind.
5. Donations may be made by supplying goods of various kinds including building, vehicles or any other tangible property but such donations though convertible in terms of money do not fall within the scope of Section 80-G(2)(a) entitling an assessee to deduction. Donation of shares of a company does not amount to payment of any sum of amount though the shares on their sale may be converted into money. But the donation so made does not fall within the ambit of the aforesaid section. Since the expression and language used in Section 80-G(2)(a) is plain and clear, it is not open to the courts to enlarge the scope by its interpretative process founded on the basis of the object and purpose underlying the provision for granting relief to an assessee.
6.  There has been conflict of opinion between the various High Courts on the interpretation of Section 80-G(2)(a). In CIT v. Asian Cement Company Ltd. 1967 Indlaw MUM 2638; Addl. CIT v. Abhai Maligai 1977 Indlaw MAD 212 and CIT v. Bangalore Woollen, Cotton and Silk Mills Co. Ltd. 1972 Indlaw MYS 14courts have taken the view that while interpreting Section 80-G(2)(a), the substance of the nature of the transaction should be taken into account and it is not necessary that the donation must be in cash.
7. As against this view other High Courts in CIT v. Amonbolu Rajiah 1973 Indlaw AP 16 ; CIT v. Gopal Krishna Singhania 1978 Indlaw ALL 63  and CIT v. Smt Dhirajben R. Amin  have held that Section 80-G(2)(a) does not contemplate any donation in kind, instead the expression "sums" relates to the cash amount of money which may have been donated by the assessee. On a careful scrutiny of the two opinions, in the aforesaid judgments, we are in agreement with the view taken by the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Allahabad and Gujarat in holding that Section 80-G(2)(a) contemplates cash amount of money as donation, for claiming relief of deduction and it does not refer to any donation made in kind.
8.  It appears that in view of the conflicting opinions expressed by the various High Courts, the Parliament intervened and added Explanation 5 to Section 80-G by the Finance Act, 1976. Explanation 5 reads as under:
"Explanation 5: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no deduction shall be allowed under this section in respect of any donation unless such donation is of a sum of money."
9. After the insertion of the aforesaid Explanation, there cannot be any doubt that for purposes of claiming deduction only cash amount which may have been donated would be taken into account. No doubt this provision is not retrospective in nature nonetheless it indicates the legislative intent behind Section 80-G(2)(a) prior to its amendment.
10.  We, therefore, agree with the view taken by the Kerala High Court. The appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed. There would be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
