Sait Rikhaji Furtarnal and Another v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

31 August 1990
C.As. Nos. 1484 and 1485 of 1981. Appeals by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 26 October 1978, of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in T.R.C. Nos. 79 and 81 of 1978
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The short question involved in these two appeals arises out of the decision of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in regard to exigibility of sales tax in respect of four items being:
(1) sale of jeera, menthi, ajwain, saunf and cardamom;
(2) sale of wet dates;
(3) sale of old newspaper; and
(4) transaction of mustard oil - whether they are first purchases or not ?
2.  We are concerned with the assessment year 1973-74. It is not in dispute that just before the commencement of the year, by amendment of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, oil-seed has been defined in a way different for what existed prior to the amendment.
The High Court found against the assessee on all scores.
3.  Mr. Rangam appearing in support of the appeals contended that there was a circular of Government of India with reference to the provisions of the Central Sales Tax Act as to what would be included within the meaning of oil-seeds and all the five items referred to here were included in the circular as being oil-seeds. It is difficult for us to accept his submission that after the Act has been amended reliance is available to be placed on the circular. On the basis of the test indicated by this Court in State of Tamil Nadu v. Pyare Lal Malhotra 1976 Indlaw SC 88, we must hold that the expression "that is to say" employed in the definition in the statute with reference to oil-seeds is exhaustive and is not illustrative. Since on amendment these five items are no more included in oil-seeds, the appellant is not entitled to claim the benefit.
4.  It has been found that wet dates are not fresh fruits on account of the fact that they are imported from outside the country after necessary processing. The finding is one of fact and we do not propose to interfere with the conclusion. Similarly the finding regarding mustard oil must also be taken to be one of fact. In regard to old newspapers, it is the submission of counsel that even if the newspapers are not of the same date or of a current period, their contents had news value and thus they continued to be the newspapers and the mere fact that they were out of date did not take away the news element therefrom. This Court in a recent judgment held a law journal to come within the meaning of newspaper though not carrying news of contemporary period. On the ratio of that decision the contention of the appellant that old newspapers are also "newspapers" and would be entitled to the exemption provided under the Constitution is acceptable.
5. We accordingly uphold the contention of the appellant and direct that old newspapers when sold as such would be covered by the exemption provided in the Constitution and sale thereof would not be liable to sales tax. The appeals are allowed so far as the sale of old newspaper is concerned and are dismissed with regard to the three other items indicated above. The appropriate modification may be carried out by the assessing authority. No costs.
Appeals allowed in part and dismissed in part.
Appeals partly allowed.
