H. M. Ramaul v State of Himachal Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

29 October 1990
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 57 of 1990 in C.A. No. 6144 of 1983
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. In this complaint of contempt of court, complainant alleges a wilful disobedience by the H.P. Tourism Development Corporation of the directions of this Court made on December 2, 1988, in C.A. No. 6144 of 1983 in that respondents despite the specific directions in the order for restoration of complainant's seniority in service over and above two other offices, viz., N.K. Sharma and H.R. Choudhary, the said Corporation had resorted to hairsplitting technicalities in order to deny to the complainant the benefit of the order of this Court.
2. It is urged that if the complainant's seniority had been so restored in accordance with the order the case of the complainant for promotion to the post of Deputy General Manager would require consideration with effect from May 28, 1982 on which date his admitted juniors had been promoted entitling the Corporation is said to have done is that while it reviewed the promotions with effect from May 28, 1982 and granted the promotion to the complaint, it treated the promotion for the period from 28, 1982 up to September 3, 1986 - on which latter date complainant, even according to the Corporation itself, had become entitled to and had been granted promotion - as a mere notional promotion without any monetary benefits.
3. In our view complainant's grievance is legitimate one. Though there was no specific direction in order of this Court to consider complainant's case for promotion with effect from May 28, 1982 such a relief was implicit in the reasoning of the order. Indeed, the Corporation in convening the DPC and reviewing the promotions and granting the national promotion to the complainant for the period between May 28, 1982 to September 3, 1986, had virtually conceded this position. The withholding of the monetary benefits in respect of this period is inconsistent with what was decided in the judgment and what complainant was clearly entitled to. Since there was no specific direction in this behalf in the order, technically, there may be no case for punishment of contempt; but we make it clear that the promotion for the period from May 28, 1982 to September 3, 1986 should be accompanied by the monetary benefits. If a specific direction is necessary we issued to here and now. The appropriate monetary benefits shall be granted within two months from today.
4. There is yet another fall out from what is decided in the order. It is also appropriate that the further promotions consistent with the seniority as declared by the judgment should also be considered in view of the fact complainant's junior in service had been granted such promotion. Petitioner might have also become eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of and appointment as Additional General Manager in the post that was specially created on May 5, 1987. His case for consideration or promotion shall have to reviewed as on May 5, 1987 on which day his junior, viz., N.K. Sharma had been promoted.
5. It is open to the authorities to put into the scale the question whether complainants possesses the requisite eligibility. Complainant's case shall accordingly be examined for the post of Additional General Manager and if the promotion is granted is shall now necessarily have to be only on a national basis as the post is said to have since been abolished. But such notional promotion if granted shall also be accompanied the monetary benefits up to the date of the abolition of the post. This consideration shall be bestowed within three months from today.
6. The contempt petition is disposed of with foregoing directions.
Petition disposed of.
