Union of India and another v U.P. State Warehousing Corporation
Supreme Court of India

31 October 1990
C.A. No. 455 of 1976
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by certificate is directed against the judgment and order dated November 30, 1973, of the Allahabad High Court at Allahabad in Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 6122 of 1973 whereby the U.P. State Warehousing Corporation, the respondent herein, was granted exemption as envisaged under section 10(29) of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
2.  The U. P. State Warehousing Corporation is a creature of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962. The Income-tax Officer, Lucknow, required the appellant to pay a sum of money as advance tax for the assessment year 1974-75. The view of the Income-tax Officer throughout the previous years was that rental income derived by the assessee from its godowns and warehouses was not exempt from income-tax. The claim of the assessee having repeatedly been rejected, it thought it proper and did file a writ petition in the High Court of Allahabad challenging the notice. The High Court quashed the notice. The view of the High Court has been assailed here by the Revenue.
3.  The claim of the assessee is based on section 10(29) of the Income tax Act, 1961. It provides:
"10. In computing the total income of the previous year of any person, any income falling within any of the following clauses shall not be included-
(29) In the case of an authority constituted under any law for the time being in force for the marketing of commodities, any income derived from the letting of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of commodities."
As is apparent, the assessee would be entitled to exemption if-
(i) it is an authority constituted under any law
(ii) it is an authority constituted for marketing of commodities
(iii) the exemptable income is in respect of letting of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of commodities.
4.  The High Court had no difficulty in coming to the conclusion that the assessee had been established under law, i.e., the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962. The question whether the assessee was an "authority" within the meaning of section 10(29) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, led to a long discussion, as is plain from the judgment. The High Court agreed with the assessee that it was such an authority.
5. Keeping apart the reasoning given by the High Court, a plain reading of sub-section (29) of section 10 makes it evident that the authority must be constituted under any law for the time being in force which, in other words, means that it should be a creature of law. As an artificial person, it should be clothed with a personality ordained by law, The power of the authority, whether it is wide or narrow, as discussed by the High Court, with due respect, appears to us alien for the concept with which we are concerned in clause (29) of section 10. So the ancillary test, we say so unhesitatingly, was also satisfied that the assessee was an authority constituted under the law.
6.  The second test requiring the authority to be constituted for marketing of commodities is also fully satisfied by section 24(d) of the Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962, which enjoins upon a State Warehousing Corporation to act as an agent of the Central Warehousing Corporation of the Government for the purpose of purchase, sale, storage and distribution of agricultural produce, seeds, manures, fertilisers, agricultural implements and individual commodities. These activities of the State Warehousing Corporation as an agent, undoubtedly, would be activities facilitating the marketing of commodities. This reasoning of ours is in addition to the reasoning assigned by the High Court in coming to the conclusion that the activities of the assessee have a business element. We agree with the High Court on that score also.
7.  The third test with regard to the exemptable income being in respect of letting of godowns or warehouses for storage, processing or facilitating the marketing of commodities presents no difficulty because it stands undisputed that the income derived by the assessee was from letting of godowns or warehouses.
8.  The assessee having fulfilled all the tests was rightly entitled to the exemption as claimed. We are fully in agreement with the High Court that the assessee was entitled to relief on these premises. Accordingly, we dismiss this appeal. We should have awarded costs also but since there is no opposition, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
