Shamsunder Sales Corporation and Another v Commissioner of Income Tax and Another
Supreme Court of India

5 November 1990
C.A. No. 5200 of 1990
The Judgment was delivered by: S. RANGANATHAN J.
1.  Special leave granted We propose to dispose of the appeal now itself as it involves a very short point. The appellant had filed an application under section 273A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, before the Commissioner of Income-tax on February 6, 1986. This application was made in pursuance of what has been described as "Amnesty Scheme" promulgated by the Department on January 2, 1986. It is unnecessary to set out the details of the scheme. No orders were passed on the application filed by the appellant.
2. He, therefore, approached the High Court of Karnataka by way of a writ petition. A learned single judge disposed of the writ petition on December 16, 1988, on the ground that the appellant could not take advantage of the Amnesty Scheme because it was in force only till March 31, 1987, and the appellant had not applied in time. The appellant, thereupon, filed a writ appeal before a Division Bench of the High Court which, however, rejected the writ appeal by holding that, since the amnesty application had been filed after criminal proceedings were lodged against the petitioners, the application was not voluntary, and that there was, therefore, no merit in the appeal.
3.  It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that all he is seeking is that his application under section 273A read with the Amnesty Scheme should be considered and disposed of by the Commissioner. The application had been filed before March 31, 1987, which was the last date for the filing of applications under the Scheme. It was, therefore, not belated. The criminal proceedings against the appellant were lodged only in 1988, and, therefore, the appellate Bench does not appear to be correct in saying that the amnesty application was filed after the criminal proceedings were lodged against the petitioner.
4. In these circumstances, we are constrained to set aside the order of the High Court, both of the learned single judge and of the Division Bench. We would like to make it clear that our direction is only that the application filed by the appellant under section 273A should be considered and disposed of in the light of the language of the section. The Commissioner is directed to pass appropriate orders on the application expeditiously, if possible, not later than three months from today.
5.  The appeal is disposed of accordingly. Interim orders, it any, will stand vacated.
6.  It will be open to the appellant to request the Commissioner to hold up the prosecution pending the disposal of the application. If such an application is made, the Commissioner will dispose of it in accordance with law.
With these observations, the appeal is disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
