Commissioner of Income Tax v M. J. Daveda (Dead) By LRs.
Supreme Court of India

31 October 1990
C.A. No. 402, 942, 943 and 944 of 1976
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals have arisen against similar orders of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh  failing to be persuaded, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal beforehand, to refer the following three questions of law to the High Court said to arise from the appellate orders of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Hyderabad. Those questions are taken and reproduced below from one case and in the others they are substantially the same.
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate Tribunal was justified in holding that, by the levy of interest under section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Income-tax Officer must be deemed to have granted time up to the date of filing the return of income?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate Tribunal was correct in holding that even if the return was treated as filed under section 139(4), penalty was not leviable?
(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the penalty leviable within the meaning of section 271 (1) (a) shall be with reference to the net tax remaining due and payable at the date of final assessment after deduction of the tax paid under section 140A/141?"
2.  Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the answer to question No. 1 would be against the Revenue and in favour of the respondent assessee on the ratio of CIT v. M. Chandra Sekhar 1984 Indlaw SC 266  and thus would not be required to be referred.
3. If this is so, as it lids to be, the attempt to have question No. 3 alone referred in isolation of the answer to question No. 1 is a meaningless exercise because, if the Income-tax Officer must be deemed to have granted time from the date of filing the return of income, which power he undoubtedly had, the question of levying any penalty under section 271(1)(a) on the basis of failure to furnish return within time would, in no event, arise under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
4.  In this view of the matter, there is nothing to say further in these appeals which, accordingly, are dismissed. In the circumstances of the cases, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
