P. U. Iqbal v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

20 December 1991
W.P. (Criminal) No. 715 of 1991 (Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
The Judgment was delivered by: S.RATNAVEL PANDIAN, J.
1.  This writ petition is filed by the detenu, P. U. Iqbal u/art. 32 of the Constitution of India Seeking issuance of a writ of habeas corpus quashing the order of detention dated August 21, 1989 passed by respondent 2 in exercise of powers conferred by s. 3(i), (ii), (iii), and (iv) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') with a view to preventing the detenu from abetting the smuggling of goods and direction him to be interned in the Central Prison, Trivandrum in Pursuance of the said mittimus. Following the above, order, respondent 1 (Union of India) by its order dated September 7, 1990 made a declaration u/s. 9(i) of the Act and thereafter passed an order u/s. 10 of the Act that:
"the detention shall continue for the period of 2 years from August 9, 1990."
2.  Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the this inordinate and unreasonable delay between the date of the order of the detention and the date of arrest of the detenu negatives the real and genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority as regards the necessity for detaining the petitioner and therefore, the order impugned here is liable to be set aside on this ground.
3.  As respondent 2 has not offered any satisfactory and the proper explanation for the delay in execution of the detention order by giving necessary materials, on the direction of this Court and additional counter-affidavit was filed by respondent 2 in October 1991 giving the following particulars.
4.  According to respondent 2, this order of detention dated August 21, 1989 was received by the Superintendent of Police, Thrissur on September 1, 1989 who is the turn directed the Circle Inspector of Police, Guruvayur to apprehend the warrantee and that the Circle Inspector of Police reported to the Superintendent of Police, Thrissur on September 16, October 2, November 13, 1989 and January 5, 1990 that the warrantee namely the detenu was reportedly working at Bombay and the chances of his visit to his native place were awaited. Not being satisfied with the reports of the Circle Inspector of Police, the SP by his letter dated November 24, 1989 directed the Circle Inspector of Police to arrange to secure the detenu and execute the detention order at Bombay with the assistance of the local police. Despite the repeated orders of the SP dated January 31, February 12 and 19 and March 14 and 22, 1990 directing the Circle Inspector to send reports about the compliance with his direction in execution the warrant, the Inspector sent a reply on March 30, 1990 to the SP informing that the police officers were being sent to the Bombay to arrest the warrantee (i.e. the detenu).
5. On April 2, 1990, the SP reported to the government that the action was underway to execute the detention order by deputing the officers to Bombay. On April 23, 1990, the SP asked a report about the stage of the matter from the Inspector of Police who thereupon on May 20, 1990 reported to the SP that the police party could not arrest the petitioner and execute the warrant. Then on May 14, 1990. The government issued an order u/s. 7(1) (b) of the Act and requested the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Thrissur to the take action u/s. 7(1)(a) of the Act. While it was so, on August 9, 1990, the Inspector of Police arrested the petitioner from Kandanisseri (to which postal village the petitioner belongs as is evident from the order of detention itself) and reported the fact to the Superintendent of Police who in turn informed the government and the Chief Judicial Magistrate about the execution of the warrant on August 10, 1990.
6.  Even assuming the entire facts as the set out in the counter-affidavit are true, it is very clear that the fact of this subsequent affidavit that from November 24, 1989 to April 23, 1990, no prompt and the continuous effort or serious attempts was made to the secure the detenu and serve the impugned order. It is apparent that the concerned officers particularly, the Circle Inspector of Police to the whom the warrant had been sent for the execution of the order of detention had shown absolute callousness and the they did not seem to the have take any sincere effort with assiduity in executing the warrant. The government has made a request to the Chief Judicial Magistrate to take action u/s. 7(1)(a) only on May 14, 1990 that it after a period of 9 months from the date of the date of the passing of the detention order.
7.  We are at a loss to understand the statement made by respondent in 2 in paragraph 11 of its additional counter affidavit that
".... that there was no delay on the part of the Superintendent of Police, Thrissur in taking action u/s. 7(1) (b) of the COFEPOSA Act, 1974 "which is country to the statement made in paragraph 8 that" on May 14, 1990 government issued order u/s. 7(a)(b) of the COFEPOSA Act and requested the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Thrissur to take action u/s. 7(1)(a) of the Act"
8. Be it noted in this connection that only government is empowered to make a notification u/s. 7(1)(b) and not the police officer as stated in paragraph 11 of the counter-affidavit which statement is inconceivable and the incomprehensible. Leave apart, no copy the notification published in the official gazette as required u/s. 7(1)(b) of the Act is produced before this Court.
9.  Needless to emphasise that the an order of detention is not a curative or reformative or punitive action but a preventive action, the avowed object of which being to prevent the anti-social and subversive elements from imperiling the welfare of the country or the security the of the nation or from disturbing the public tranquillity or from the indulging in the smuggling a activities or from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and the psychotropic substances etc. As it is borne out from the preamble of the COFEPOSA Act under the provision of which the present detention order has been passed, the detention order under this act is made with the an object of the preventing
"the violations of foreign exchange regulations and smuggling activities which are having an increasingly deleterious effect on the national economy"and thereby posing" a serious effect on the security of the country."
10.  There is indeed a plethora of authorities explaining the purpose and avowed object of preventive detention is express and explicit language. We think that all those decisions of this Court on this aspect need not be recapitulated and recited. But it would suffice to refer to the decision of this Court in Ashok Kumar v. Delhi Administration 1982 Indlaw SC 311982 Indlaw SC 31 wherein the following observation is made:
"Preventive detention is devised to afford protection to society. The object is not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept before the he does it and to prevent his from doing."
11.  In view of the above object the preventive detention, it becomes very imperative on the part of the detaining authority as well as the executing authority to be very vigilant and the keep their eyes skinned but not to the turn a blind eye in securing the detenu and executing the detention order because any indifferent attitude on the part of the detaining authority or executing authority will defeat the very purpose of the preventive action and turn the detention order as a dead letter and frustrate the entire proceedings.
12.  Reverting to the case on hand, as we have pointed out, there has been nearly 7 months' delay at the hands of the Circle Inspector in the Inspector in executing the warrant and a total period of one year delay in securing the detenu and serving the order from the date of the passing of the detention order by the detaining authority - Which delay is unreasonable and the stands unexplained. In our opinion, the clearly, apathetic attitude and the oblivious and contumacious conduct of the Inspector in not acting with the greater promptitude in securing the detenu but conspicuously sleeping over the matter well nigh nearly 7 months have rendered the order of the detention invalid. The explanation offered by respondent 2 and the police officers that the detenu was a fugitive eluding the dragnet of the detention order is too incredulous to be swallowed. Further no court will implicit accept this kind of incredible explanation
13.  The adverse effect of delay in arresting a detenu has been examined by this Court in a series of decisions and this Court has laid down the rule in clear terms that an unreasonable and unexplained delay in securing a detenu and detaining him and vitiates the detention order.
14.  In Sk. Nizamuddin v. State W. B. 1974 Indlaw SC 3331974 Indlaw SC 3331974 Indlaw SC 333, this Court while examining the necessity of securing the arrest of the detenu immediately after the order of detention has held thus:
"It would be reasonable to assume that if the District Magistrate was really and genuinely satisfied after proper application of mind to the materials before the him that it was necessary to the detain the petitioner with a view to preventing him from acting in a prejudicial manner, he would have acted with greater promptitude in securing the arrest of the petition immediately after the making of the order of detention, and the petitioner would not have been allowed to remain at large for such a long for such a long period of time to carry on the his nefarious activities. Of course when we say this we must not be understood to mean that the whenever there is delay in arresting the detenu pursuant to the order of detention, the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority must be held to be not genuine or colourable. Each case must depend on its own peculiar facts and circumstances. The detaining authority may have a reasonable explanation for the delay and that the might be sufficient to dispel the inference that it satisfaction was not genuine."
15.  Having held as above, Bhagwati, J. (as the learned Chief justice then was), pointed out that if there is any delay in arresting the detenu pursuant to the order of detaining which is prima facie unreasonable, the State must give reasons explaining the delay.
16.  A similar contention was raised in the Suresh Mahato v. District Magistrate, Burdwan  1974 Indlaw SC 3051974 Indlaw SC 3051974 Indlaw SC 305), on the basis of the dictum laid down in the two decisions of the this Court - namely Sk. Serajul v. State of W. B. ( 1974 Indlaw SC 4751974 Indlaw SC 4751974 Indlaw SC 475) and Sk. Nizamuddin v. State of W. B. ( 1974 Indlaw SC 3331974 Indlaw SC 3331974 Indlaw SC 333 contending that the delay in the arrest of the detenu in that case showed that the detaining authority was not really and genuinely satisfied as regards the necessity for detention of the detenu for otherwise he would have tried to secure the arrest of the detenu promptly and not left him free to carry on his nefarious activities. Bhagwati, J. (as he then was), while dealing with this submission, made the following observation:
"Now there can be no doubt - and the law on this point must be regarded as well settled by these two decisions - that if there is unreasonable delay between the date of the order of detention and the date of arrest of the detenu, such delay, unless satisfactorily explained, would throw considerable doubt on the genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate was not really and genuinely satisfied as regard the necessity for detaining the petitioner."
Chinnappa Reddy, J.
speaking for the bench in Bhawarlal Ganeshmalji v. State of T. N. 1978 Indlaw SC 2031978 Indlaw SC 2031978 Indlaw SC 203 has explained as follows:
"It is further the that there must be a 'live and proximate link' between the grounds of the detention alleged by the detaining authority and the avowed the purpose of detention namely the prevention of the smuggling activities. We may in appropriate cases assume that the link is 'snapped' if there is a long and unexplained delay between the date of the order of detention and the arrest of the detenu. In such a case, we may strike down the on an order of detention unless the grounds indicate a fresh application of the mind of the detaining authority to the new situation and the changed circumstances. But where the delay is not only adequate explained us is found to be the result of the recalcitrant or refractory conduct of the detenu in evading the arrest, there is warrant to consider the 'link' no snapped but strengthened."
17.  Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) in Shafiq Ahmad v. District Magistrate, Meerut 1989 Indlaw SC 4301989 Indlaw SC 430 having the to the fact that there was a delay of two and a half months in detaining the petitioner (detenu) therein, pursuant to the order of detention has concluded that:
"there was undue delay, delay no commensurate with the facts situation in that case and the conduct the respondent authorities betrayed that there was no real and genuine apprehension that the detenu was likely to act in any manner prejudicial to public order. The order, therefore, is bad and must go". However, the learned Judge observed that" Whether the delay was unreasonable depends on the facts and circumstances of each case."
18.  Refer Harnek Singh v. State of Punjab 1981 Indlaw SC 6011981 Indlaw SC 601) and Syed Farooq Mohammad v. Union of India. ( 1990 Indlaw SC 2511990 Indlaw SC 2511990 Indlaw SC 251
19.  It is manifestly clear from a conspectus of the above decisions of the this Court, that the law promulgated on this aspect is that if there is unreasonable delay between, the date of the order of detention and the date of the arrest of the detenu, such delay unless satisfactorily explained throws a considerable doubt on the genuineness of the requisite subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority in passing the detention order and consequently renders the detention order bad and the invalid because the 'live and proximate link' between the grounds of the detention had the purpose of detention is snapped in arresting the detenu. A question whether the delay is unreasonable and stands and unexplained depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
20.  In the present case, the circumstances indicate that the detaining the authority after passing the detention order was indifferent in securing the detenu by not taking proper action with greater promptitude. The police officials have treated the warrant of arrest in a very casual manner and unduly delayed its execution. In particular, the Inspector of Police to the whom the warrant was forwarded for execution, as pointed out ibid, was indolent in spite of the repeated reminders and was giving evasive answers till the detenu was secured in his native place itself. This recalcitrant and refractory conduct of the Inspector has allowed the detenu to remain at large for such a long period and has consequently defeated the very purpose of the impugned order.
For all the aforementioned reasons, we set aside the impugned order of the detention and direct the detenu to be set at liberty forthwith.
Writ the petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.
