Akula Ravinder and Others v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

11 January 1991
Cr.A. No. 350 of 1990
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  It is a case of dowry death. There are three appellants. First appellant is the husband of the deceased wife. The second appellant is his father and third appellant is his mother. All the three were tried for offence punishable under Sections 498-A IPC, 302 IPC and 201 IPC. The trial court convicted all the three under Section 498-A and sentenced each of them to undergo two years' imprisonment. They were also convicted under Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC. First appellant was sentenced for 10 years and other two for seven years. They were acquitted of the charge of the offence under Section 201 IPC. In the appeal the learned Single Judge of the High Court confirmed the conviction but reduced the sentence of A-1 to seven years rigorous imprisonment. Aggrieved by the said judgment this appeal, pursuant to the special leave granted by this court, is before us.
2.   The learned counsel for the appellants submits that the cause of death is not established and therefore all the ingredients of Section 304-B IPC are not made out. It is also submitted that in the absence of charge under Section 304-B the appellants ought not to have been convicted. The last submission of the learned counsel is that there is no evidence to show that the appellants namely A-2 and A-3 were in any manner responsible for the death of the deceased.
3.  To appreciate these submissions it is necessary to state the facts which have given rise to this appeal. The deceased as well as the accused, their parents are closely related. The deceased is A-2's sister's daughter. The marriage took place in the month of April 1984. At the time of the marriage a demand was made out for a dowry of Rs 10,000. But the parents of the deceased PW 1 paid Rs 8,000 and promised to pay the balance amount some time after marriage. But they could not pay. The accused harassed the deceased for the payment of the balance amount. A-1 was working in Army and used to come now and then and used to demand the balance of the dowry from the parents of the deceased and he also used to join with the other two accused in harassing the deceased. The deceased died in the month of April 1987 i.e. within seven years from the date of marriage. The dead body showed some external injuries. The parents were informed. The report was lodged. The case was registered. The dead body was sent for post-mortem. The doctor PW 8 who conducted the post-mortem opined that death was homicidal in nature and was not suicidal. The viscera was not sent for examination since the doctor did not suspect that the death was due to poisoning. The prosecution examined PWs 1, 2, 4 and 7 to probe about the demand of the dowry made out to the deceased.
4.   The trial court however, did not accept the prosecution case that the death was due to asphyxia because it appeared from the investigation that the deceased survived for about 15 minutes even after death as per PW 3 who is the first doctor who examined and gave the first aid to the deceased. However, both the courts below held that alternatively the offence under Section 304-B is made out.
5.  A perusal of the Section 304-B shows that one the of the essential ingredients that has to be established is that death was otherwise than in normal circumstances. In this case no doubt, the other circumstance namely that the death occurred within seven years of the marriage and that before her death they have harassed her for demand of dowry are established. Coming to the other ingredient we find that the prosecution has miserably failed to establish that death was otherwise than in normal circumstances.
6.   The learned counsel appearing for the State, however, submits that the deceased was young and the death was not due to natural cause nor it was due to an accident and the only inference that can be drawn is that it was otherwise than under normal circumstances. In a case of this nature where the prosecution has failed to establish that it was an unnatural death it cannot be surmised that death must be due to unnatural circumstances. In this context the framing of the charge and the circumstances that are put to accused under Section 313 CrPC also assume importance. The charge was under Section 302 IPC and the contents of the charge are to the effect that death was only due to asphyxia. In the examination of Section 313 it was not even indicated that the death could be due to poisoning. In any event in view of the facts and circumstances regarding their death, it has become very difficult, rather impossible, to hold that the death was otherwise than in normal circumstances and consequently we are constrained to hold that this important aspect of Section 304-B is not met out. Consequently the appellants are entitled to acquittal of the said offence.
7.  In this case we do not propose to examine the other submission namely that in the absence of charge under Section 304-B conviction cannot be awarded since we are acquitting the appellants of the charge of the offence punishable under Section 304-B IPC.
8.  So far as offence under Section 498-A is concerned the evidence of PWs 1, 2, 4 and 7 would show beyond a reasonable doubt that the three appellants were harassing the deceased and making the demand for dowry. The evidence would show that the deceased was subjected to cruelty within the meaning of Section 498-A IPC. For the aforesaid reasons the conviction of the appellants under Section 304-B IPC, sentence of 7 years' imprisonment awarded against each of them are set aside. Conviction under Section 498-A IPC and the sentence of 2 years are maintained with default clause. The appeal is partly allowed.
Appeal partly allowed.
