Messrs Rajshila v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 December 1991
C.A. No. 5015 of 1991 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 4149 of 1991)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant, M/S Rajshila, a firm of partners, seeks special leave to appeal to this court from the order dated January 31, 1991 of the Division Bench of High Court of Allahabad made in Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 2250 of 1991. Appellant challenged the award of the exclusive right to collect toll on the bridge across Ganga at Jajmau, Kanpur Division in favour of M/S Munendra Nath Upadhyay and Company, respondent 4 herein, at the auction held in that behalf on November 14, 1990. The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
2.  We have heard Sri Harish Salve, learned counsel for the appellant, Sri R. B. Mishra for the State of Uttar Pradesh; and Sri R. N. Narsimhamoorthy learned senior counsel for respondent 4. Special leave is granted and the appeal taken up for final hearing, heard and disposed of by this judgment.
3.  On September 21, 1990, a public notice was caused to be issued by the authorities concerned inviting tenders from intending bidders for the award of the right to collect toll on the said bridge. The auction was originally fixed to be held on October 30, 1990. Seven persons obtained tender papers but only two, respondent 4 and another by the name Roshan Lal and Company, filed their tender papers in time. The auction which was scheduled to be held on October 30, 1990 was postponed to November 8, 1990 and thereafter to November 14, 1990. At the auction held on November 14, 1990, however, only respondent 4 participated and offered a bid of Rs 75 lakhs per year.
4. Thereafter Roshan Lal and Company aired a grievance that the postponement of the auction from November 8 to November 14, 1990 was done without due publicity, that it had been denied competitive participation and that it would offer a higher bid of Rs 80 lakhs per year. In the light of this development, the authorities appeared to have communicated to respondent 4 that its bid of Rs 75 lakhs per year was inadequate and could not be accepted whereupon respondent 4 communicated its willingness to offer Rs 80.21 lakhs which was found acceptable and was accepted. The said Roshan Lal and Company did not bestir itself to agitate the matter any further.
5.  But the present appellant which did not participate in the auction came up before the High Court with the grievance that it was virtually prevented from participation at the auction. It was alleged that owing to a strike in government offices during the period it had to run from pillar to post to fulfil the precondition of a security deposit which, in view of the involved procedure, was rendered impossible to be fulfilled and that appellant tendered the cash security of Rs 7 lakhs on the date of the auction and sought permission to participate. Upon this request being turned down appellant is said to have given an application on the same date signifying its willingness to offer Rs 86 lakhs per year.
6.  After hearing learned counsel for the parties we are persuaded to the view that ends of justice would be met by a conditional order, directing a re-auction subject to the following conditions.
(a) That appellant shall, with a view to establishing its readiness and willingness to stand by the offer of Rs 86 lakhs per year, deposit a sum of Rs 25 lakhs by a crossed demand draft drawn on any nationalised bank in favour of the
"Executive Engineer, National Highways Construction Division (Bridge), Public Works Department, 12/476, Makrawat Ganj, Kanpur."
7. The draft shall be delivered to the said Executive Engineer on or before January 10, 1992.
(b) If the said sum of Rs 25 lakhs is so deposited the present contract in favour of respondent 4 shall stand set aside. However, with a view to maintaining the continuity of the collection of the toll till the procedural formalities of re-auction are complied with, respondent 4 shall be permitted to continue to operate the contract till March 31, 1992. Its rights and obligations arising out of the earlier contract shall be limited to the period from February 9, 1991 when the operation of the contract is stated to have commenced till March 31, 1992. For this period, respondent 4 shall be liable to pay at the rate of Rs 80.21 lakhs per year and proportionate part thereof for the year, months the days actually covered.
(c) If the appellant fails to deposit the sum of Rs 25 lakhs as aforesaid then the contract in favour of respondent 4 shall run for the whole period of three years from February 9, 1991 but at Rs 86 lakhs per year. The sum of Rs 86 lakhs shall be calculated from the inception, namely, February 9, 1991.
(d) If the appellant makes deposit of Rs 25 lakhs on or before January 10, 1992, the authorities concerned shall take immediate and prompt steps for the conduct of a fresh auction by notifying the calendar of events. The proceedings for the conduct of the re-auction shall be concluded by March 20, 1992 as the outermost date. It is desirable that the proceedings be finalised much earlier. The period of the contract shall be three years to commence from April 1, 1992.
(e) That at the re-auction, appellant shall satisfy all other requirements of eligibility for participation such as necessary and requisite Solvency Certificate, Income Tax Claim Certificate, Character Certificate etc., as required by the rules and as applicable to all other bidders. However, in view of the fact that appellant has been asked to make an earnest deposit of Rs 25 lakhs, it shall not be necessary for the appellant to furnish the cash security of Rs 7 lakhs or such other sum as may be prescribed as such cash security in relation to the re-auction.
(f) At the re-auction the first bid shall be recorded against the appellant at Rs 86 lakhs per year. If appellant, for whatever reasons, does not, or is found ineligible to, participate in the re-auction and it the bids secured thereat fall short of Rs 86 lakhs per year, the difference calculated for the period of three years shall be deducted out of the sum of Rs 25 lakhs deposited by the appellant and the balance alone shall become refundable to the appellant.
8.  The order of the High Court under appeal is set aside and the appellant's writ petition in the High Court disposed of on the aforesaid terms.
Appeal disposed of accordingly. No costs
Appeal disposed of.
