Banta Singh v State of Punjab
Supreme Court of India

14 March 1991
Cr.A. No. 151 of 1981
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant has been convicted under Section 307, IPC for having fired a shot at PW 2 - Harjit Singh and caused him a serious injury. The conviction is based on testimony of two eye-witnesses, the injured PW 2 - Harjit Singh and PW 3 - Ajmer Singh. In addition thereto, reliance has also been placed on the evidence of PW 5 - Daljit Singh, PW 6 - Jiwan Singh and PW 7 - Geja Singh.
The fact that the appellant fired a shot at PW 2 and caused him a serious injury is not in dispute. The defence of the appellant is that he fired the shot in self- defence. This defence had not been accepted by both the courts below. Counsel for the appellant was not able to place any material before us to take a different view.
2. He, however, pointed out that the existence of pellet marks on the door and wall of the liquor vend show that the complainant party was the aggressor. But the High Court has pointed out that the existence of pellet marks is clearly explained by PW 6 - Jiwan Singh. It has not been pointed out to us how the High Court is wrong in its view in this behalf. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the courts below were right in rejecting the theory of self-defence.
3.  Let us now take the question of sentence. Counsel for the appellant submitted that since there was no evidence of prior enmity a lenient view could be taken. He submitted that the imprisonment already undergone should suffice. But we find that the appellant was on bail and it is not shown for how much time he was in jail. In the absence of any such information it is not possible to hold that the sentence should be reduced to that already undergone.
The sentence of five years rigorous imprisonment imposed by the trial court has been reduced to four years on the submission that there was no prior enmity. We, therefore, do not see any reason to interfere.
4.  In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed. The appellant will submit to his bail and serve out the sentence.
Appeal dismissed.
