1. The common question raised in these appeals relates to the validity of Section 16-A of the Kerala Moneylenders Act, 1958. The High Court by the judgment and appeal has struck down the section as ultra vires and unconstitutional, violating Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India.
2. Section 16-A refers to the deposit made under Section 4(2-A) and both the sections are extracted hereunder:
Section 4(2-A) provides:
"4. (2-A) Every licensee specified in column (1) of the Table below shall, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, deposit in the Government Treasury in respect of each license held by him, the amount specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said Table by way of security for the due observance of the conditions of the licence."
Section 16-A reads:
" 16-A. Forfeiture of security. - (1) The licensing authority may, at any time, by order in writing, forfeit to the government the whole or any portion of the security furnished under sub-section (2-A) of Section 4
(a) if the licensee carries on the business of moneylending in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the conditions of the licence; or
(b) if the licensee is convicted of an offence under Section 9 or Section 11 or Section 13; or
(c) if the licensee maintains false accounts."
3. Section 4(2-A) imposes obligation on the moneylender to deposit amount by way of security as specified in the section. The security is intended for the due observance of the conditions of the licence. This security is liable to be forfeited on any of the grounds set out under Section 16-A.
The grounds are:
"(i) if the licensee carries on the business of moneylending in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or the conditions of the licence;
(ii) if the licensee is convicted of an offence under Section 9 or Section 11 or Section 13;
(iii) if the licensee maintains false accounts."
4. In this context reference may be made to Section 11-A. Section 11-A authorises Licensing Authority to determine from the moneylender additional security at any time if in the opinion of such authority there is excess of liabilities over the assets of the moneylender at that time. While determining the excess of liabilities over the assets the security furnished by the moneylender under Section 4(2-A) shall be treated as assets of the moneylender. This additional security is not liable to be forfeited to the Government. It shall be utilised for the payment of liabilities of the moneylender in connection with his business as moneylender at the time of winding up of the business or cancellation of the licence, as the case may be [Section 11-A(5)].
5. The question is whether the power to forfeit the security under Section 16-A is reasonable and whether it is necessary to ensure due observance of the conditions of the licence. The Act provides several measures for compliance with the conditions of the licence. The moneylender is liable to prosecution for contravention of the conditions of the licence (Sections 9, 11 and 13). If the moneylender is convicted of an offence, the court convicting him may cancel his licence [Section 11(2)]. Independently of the conviction, the authority may cancel the licence for contravention of the condition of the licence (Section 14). If the moneylender has failed to keep true and complete accounts of the business, or has acted in contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or the Rules etc. then the Inspector or the Licensing Authority may levy penalty of an amount up to Rs 5000 (Section 18-C). The penalty so levied could be recovered as arrears of land revenue [Section 18-F(2)]. The Act also confers power to levy penalty on the moneylender if he has received interest in excess of the rate of interest prescribed under the Act (Section 18-D).
6. For the purpose of regulation of the moneylending business, and to ensure compliance with the conditions of the licence, the licence fee is collected, the penalty is imposed, the prosecution is ordered and the licence is cancelled etc. Even security is demanded and additional security is called for. All these measures seem to be regulatory in nature. The demand of security and additional security may also be justified in the social interest and to ensure financial stability of the moneylender who is accountable to the public in moneylending transactions. But there seems to be little legitimacy of the power conferred by Section 16-A to forfeit the security deposit made under Section 4(2-A). It has no relation with the need for protection of the public interest or for effectuating the objects sought to be achieved by the Act. Nor it is necessary for the due observance of the conditions of the licence. There are adequate provisions in the Act to ensure compliance with the conditions of the licence. The grounds for forfeiting the security deposit are not different from the grounds available for cancellation of the licence. Section 16-A, in our opinion, is wholly unreasonable and arbitrary.
7. We agree with the view expressed by the High Court and dismiss these appeals. But in the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
