Indore Municipal Corporation v Gujarat Co-Operative Housing Society Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

28 November 1991
C.A. Nos. 2377 and 2378 of 1980 and S.L.P. (C) No. 10376 of 1981 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 2 March 1979 of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Misc. Petition No. 781 of 1974)
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  This order will dispose of C.A. Nos. 2377 and 2378 of 1980 and SLP (C) 10376 of 1981. C.A. Nos. 2377 and 2378 of 1980 have been filed against two separate judgments of the learned Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court dated March 2, 1979 by the Indore Municipal Corporation.
2.  The impugned order in C.A. No. 2377 of 1980 was passed in Civil Miscellaneous Petition No. 781 of 1974 (Gujarati Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. and Another v. The Indore Municipal Corporation and Others) and the impugned order in C.A. No 2378 of 1980 was passed in Miscellaneous Petition No. 253 of 1974 (Madhya Pradesh Awas Samasya Nivaran Sanstha and Another v. The Indore Municipal Corporation and Others).
3.  The SLP (C) No. 10376 of 1981 has been filed by M/s M. T. Cloth Market Merchants Association against the Indore Municipal Corporation and others against the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court dated July 25, 1981 in Miscellaneous Petition No. 172 of 1980. The Division Bench in the impugned judgment approved the decision of the Single Judge which is subject matter of C.A. No. 2378 of 1980 but dissented from the decision of the same learned Single Judge, which is the subject matter of C.A. No. 2377 of 1980.
Heard. Special Leave granted.
4.  In C.A. No. 2377 of 1980 the order impugned, on behalf of the respondents in the writ petition, was a bill dated October 26, 1971 (filed as Annexure J to the writ petition) and a demand notice dated August 14, 1973 (filed as Annexure M to the writ petition) by which a demand for payment of lighting rate and drainage tax had been made by Indore Municipal Corporation from petitioner 2, Gaya Prasad Sahu in the writ petition in respect of house No. 25, Mohalla Vallabh Nagar, Indore for the period commencing from 1971-72. In the aforesaid bill dated October 26, 1971 the demand related to lighting rate and drainage tax for the year 1971-72 (see page 30 of the paper book) and demand notice dated August 14, 1973 inter alia related to lighting rate and drainage tax in respect of arrears and current dues up to March 31, 1974 (see pages 36-37 of the paper book). These taxes have been levied u/s. 132 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). The learned Single Judge quashed the demand on the ground that the basis of the demand was illegal. The demand for lighting rate and drainage tax had been made on the basis of annual letting value of the writ petitioners' property calculated in accordance with the annual letting values prepared by the State Government under the provisions of Madhya Pradesh Sthawar Sampatti Kar Adhiniyam, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as the Adhiniyam) and not in accordance with the mode prescribed in S. 138 of the Act even though those taxes have been imposed u/s. 132 of the act. It was held that the drainage tax and lighting rate under the Act is to be assessed in accordance with the annual letting value determined under S. 138 of the Act and that the assessment of the said rate and tax with reference to the annual value determined under the Adhiniyam was illegal and consequently the bill served on the writ petitioner was liable to be quashed. On this ground the aforesaid demands made in Annexures J and M (as filed in the writ petition) was quashed by the learned Single Judge. On the same basis the impugned order dated March 2, 1979 in C.A. No. 2378, was passed by the learned Single Judge where the writ petition was filed to quash a demand No. 855 dated February 8, 1974 (Annexure H to the writ petition) in relation to general sanitary cess made by the Indore Municipal Corporation from the writ petitioner 2, Laxman Das in respect of house No. 121, Mahatma Gandhi Road, Indore for the period commencing from 1973-74.
5. The general sanitary cess had been levied at the rate of 2 per cent on the annual letting value of the house property u/s. 132(1)(c) of the Act which enabled the Corporation to impose general sanitary cess for the construction and maintenance of public latrines for the removal and disposal of refuse. The annual letting value of the house property was the base for calculation of the cess from the property owner and in this case also the annual letting value on the basis of which the demand was made was in accordance with the provisions of the Adhiniyam and not in accordance with the mode prescribed under S. 138 of the Act even though the cess had been imposed u/s. 132(1)(c) of the Act.
6.  In the impugned order passed by the Division Bench, which is the subject matter of the SLP (C) No. 10376 of 1981 the learned Division Bench was concerned with the legality of the demand for drainage tax and lighting rate, general sanitary cess and the validity of graduated flat rate. The Division Bench found the general sanitary cess in force w.e.f. August 24, 1973 till March 31, 1976 to be illegal. Consequently, the Division Bench quashed the demand for general sanitary cess. The Division Bench, however, upheld the demand for drainage tax and lighting rate as well as graduated flat rate. Consequently, the Division Bench partly allowed the writ petition.
7.  To the extent the Division Bench declined the relief, the petitioners have filed the special leave petition. The petitioners in this special leave petition have challenged the decision relating to drainage tax, lighting rate and graduated flat rate and have relied upon the decision of learned Single Bench which is the subject matter of C.A. No. 2377 of 1980.
8.  For appreciating the points involved in the cases it will be necessary to refer to the relevant provisions of the Act and the bye-laws framed under the Act and the provisions of the Adhiniyam.
9.  We will first notice the factual position about the various bye-laws and the resolutions passed by the Municipal Corporation in relation to these taxes and the cess. The draft bye-laws for the general sanitary cess are called
"the Indore Municipal Corporation General Sanitary Cess (Assessment, Collection and Refund) Bye-laws, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Draft General Sanitary Cess Bye-laws, 1973). They appear at pages 115 to 119 of the paper book of the SLP. The final bye-laws in relation to general sanitary cess, however, came to be published in the prescribed manner only on January 9, 1976. The general sanitary cess had been introduced by the Indore Municipal Corporation w.e.f. April 1, 1973. The relevant bye-law for assessment of general sanitary cess is bye-law 4. The assessment under these bye-laws is to be made on the basis of the annual letting value of any building or land at the rate of 2 per cent prepared in accordance with the provisions of S. 138 of the Act. The Draft General Sanitary Cess Bye-laws, 1973 appear at pages 115 to 119 of the paper book of the SLP but the final bye-laws as published in the gazette on January 9, 1976 are not part of the paper book.
The proposed bye-laws in relation to drainage tax are at pages 97 to 99 but the final bye-laws in relation to drainage tax were not filed with the paper book. The draft bye-laws were called"
"Indore Municipal Corporation Drainage Tax (Assessment, Collection and Refund) Bye-laws, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as the Drainage Bye-laws 1975). Bye-law 4 thereof contemplates that the assessment of drainage tax on the annual letting value of any building or land at the rate of Rs 1.50 per cent or such rate as may from time to time be fixed by the Corporation in accordance with the provisions of S. 138 of the Act and the assessment shall be done in the manner laid down for assessment of property tax in Ss. 139 to 159 of the Act. The drainage tax was, however, levied by the Corporation w.e.f. April 1, 1971.
The bye-laws in relation to lighting rate were published by a Notification dated April 18, 1974 in the Madhya Pradesh Gazette dated May 24, 1974 and came into effect from date of publication. They are called"
10.  The position thus boils down to this that the bye-laws in relation to lighting rate came into force on May 24, 1974, general sanitary cess on January 9, 1976 and drainage tax on February 12, 1976.
11.  It appears that before the aforesaid bye-laws were made effective in relation to drainage tax the resolution No. 925 dated March 10, 1970 was passed by the Corporation proposing to levy drainage tax at a particular rate on a particular basis. This resolution was passed at a special meeting of the Corporation under sub-s. (2) of S. 132 of the Act and the proposal was made effective by the order of the Administrator No. 491 dated October 26, 1970 when the objections received to the proposal were considered and it was decided to impose the drainage tax as per the order of the Corporation vide resolution No. 924 dated March 10, 1970. The proposal had mentioned that the drainage tax shall be levied at the rate of 1 1/2 per cent after deducting 10 per cent as maintenance charges on the basis of annual letting value. The basis for determination of the annual rental value was stated to be the annual property value assessed by the Municipal Corporation or State Government from time to time and the drainage tax shall be imposed on same basis.
12.  Similarly, in relation to lighting rate the Corporation passed the resolution No. 926 dated March 11, 1970 proposing to impose lighting rate at the rate of Re 0.40 on the remaining amount of letting value after deducting 10 per cent maintenance charges from it. The basis of rental value was to be determined from the annual rental value assessed by the Municipal Corporation or State Government from time to time. The lighting tax was directed to be imposed on same basis. This resolution was confirmed by order No. 492 dated October 26, 1970 by the Administrator.
13.  No resolutions giving option of basis for assessment on either annual letting value fixed by the Corporation of State were passed for imposition of general sanitary cess.
14.  It may be mentioned that from 1964 to March 31, 1970 the property tax was levied both by the government and the local bodies such as the Municipal Corporation. The government levied the property tax under the Adhiniyam whereas the Municipal Corporation levied it under the Act. From April 1, 1971 to March 31, 1976 the State alone recovered the property tax as a prohibition for local bodies from imposing property tax was introduced in S. 36 of the Adhiniyam by Act 3 of 1971. By Act 50 of 1976, S. 36 was deleted from the Adhiniyam and the areas within the Municipal Corporation limits were taken out from the operation of the Adhiniyam. So from April 1, 1976 the Municipal Corporations are alone recovering the property tax within their local areas.
15.  The drainage tax and the lighting rate came into force on April 1, 1971. At the time when these taxes were imposed the Corporation was prohibited from imposing property tax and the annual letting value of the building or land was thus not being determined under the Act for levying property tax. This position continued till April 1, 1976 when the Corporation again got the power to impose property tax.
16.  We have already referred to the proposals that were finally approved by the Administrator for imposition of these taxes as well as the rate of such taxes and also the basis being the annual letting value as determined by the Corporation or the State Government for imposition of property tax from time to time. The general sanitary cess was enforced from April 1, 1973 but the bye-laws in relation thereto were finally approved and published only on January 9, 1976. The proposal in relation to imposition of sanitary cess did not give any option to adopt the annual letting value determined under the Adhiniyam if no annual letting value was determined for the imposition of property tax under the Act. There is thus a distinction between general sanitary cess on the one hand and drainage tax and lighting rate on the other. The basis for computing these taxes is given in the bye-laws but the bye-laws become effective only on their publication in the gazette. Thus before the bye-laws became effective the resolutions of the Corporation/Administrator held the field.
17.  We may now examine the provisions of the Act and the Adhiniyam of 1964. As we have noticed earlier that for some time the properties within the Corporation and the municipalities areas were subjected to property tax by two authorities namely the Municipal Corporation and the State Government simultaneously but the power of the municipalities was taken away in view of enactment of S. 36 to the Adhiniyam. The power of the Corporation was restored only w.e.f. April 1, 1976. The property tax was the main tax which was being recovered by the Municipal Corporation and the municipalities and for collection of property tax the municipalities and the Corporations were preparing annual letting value of the properties. But when the power of the municipalities and the Corporation was taken away in view of S. 36 of the Adhiniyam, the Corporation was not maintaining any list of annual letting value determined under the Act.
18. S. 132 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 enumerates the taxes which can be imposed by a Municipal Corporation. The section, insofar as relevant for purposes of this case, reads as follows:
"132. Taxes to be imposed under this act. - (1) For the purpose of this Act, the Corporation shall impose -
(a) a tax payable by the owners of buildings or lands situated within the city with reference to the gross annual letting value of the building or land called the property tax.
(c) a general sanitary cess for the construction and maintenance of public latrines and for removal and disposal of refuse;
(d) a water rate,
Provided that the water tax shall be levied only in respect of the premises -
(a) to which the private water-supply is furnished from, or which are connected by means of communication pipes with any Municipal or Government water-works; or(b) which are situated in a portion of the city in which the Commissioner has given the public notice that the Corporation has arranged to supply water from Municipal and Government water-works by means of private water connections or public stand pots, fountains or by any other means
(2) In addition to the taxes mentioned in sub-s. (1) the Corporation, may, for the purposes of this Act, impose any of the following taxes, namely
(e) a lighting rate where the lighting of public streets, places and buildings is undertaken by the Corporation;
(g) a drainage tax, where a system of drainage has been introduced;
(3) Subject to the provisions of Art. 277 of the Constitution of India any tax which immediately before the commencement of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Law (Extension) Act, 1960 (13 of 1960) was being lawfully levied by the Corporation may, notwithstanding that such tax is not specified in sub-s. (1) or (2), continue to be levied by the Corporation
(4) The imposition of any tax under this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Act and of any other enactment for the time being in force
(5) The Municipal taxes shall be assessed and levied in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder
(6) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, prescribe such maximum and minimum limits with respect to the amount or to the rate or both as may be specified in such notification within which the Corporation may impose taxes mentioned in sub-ss. (1) and (2)."
19.  A perusal of the section quoted above would show that the taxes mentioned in sub-s. (1) are obligatory. In other words, the Corporation must impose these taxes. General sanitary tax and water rate fall under this category. The taxes mentioned in sub-s. (2) are not obligatory but they can also be imposed by the Corporation; lighting rate and drainage tax come under this class. Apart from the taxes which can be imposed under sub-ss. (1) and (2), the Corporation can continue to levy any tax not mentioned therein which immediately before the commencement of the M. P. Municipal Corporation Law (Extension) Act, 1960 was being lawfully levied by the Corporation. The taxes as provided in sub-s. (5) are to be assessed and levied in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder. Sub-s. (6) authorises the government to prescribe maximum and minimum limits of the taxes.
20.  The procedure for imposition of taxes is contained in S. 133 which reads as follows:
"133. Procedure for imposing tax. - (1) The Corporation may at a special meeting bring forward a resolution to propose the imposition of any tax u/s. 132 defining the class of persons or description of property proposed to be taxed, the amount or rate of tax to be imposed and the system of assessment to be adopted.
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed by the Corporation for the imposition of any tax coming u/cl. (o) of sub-s. (2) of S. 132 unless the Government shall have first given their approval to the selection of the tax by the Corporation.
(2) Such resolution shall be published in the Gazette and in such other manner as may be prescribed by bye-laws. Any person residing within the city and objecting to the proposed tax may, within thirty days from the publication of the resolution in the Gazette, submit his objection in writing to the Corporation and the Corporation shall at a special meeting take his objection into consideration.
(2-A) If the Corporation decides to amend its proposals or any of them it shall publish amended proposals, along with a notice indicating that they are in modification of those previously published for objection.
(2-B) Any objections which may be received to the amended proposals within thirty days shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed in sub-section (2-A),
(2-C) The Corporation shall publish its final proposals in the Gazette, and the tax shall then come into force on such date as may be specified in that notification.
(3) A notification of the imposition of a tax under this section shall be conclusive evidence that the tax has been imposed in accordance with the provisions of this Act(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to tax mentioned in cl. (a) of sub-s. (1) of S. 132 which shall be charged and levied in accordance with S. 135."
21.  Briefly stated, the first step is passing of a resolution defining the class of persons, description of property proposed to be taxed, the amounts or rate of tax to be imposed and the system of assessment to be adopted. The resolution is published in the government gazette for inviting objections. Objections filed within thirty days are considered by the Corporation. The Corporation then publishes its final proposals and the tax comes into force on the date as may be specified in the notification. The notification of the imposition of tax is conclusive evidence that the tax has been imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
22.  Property tax is one of the taxes which the Corporation can impose [see S. 132(1)(a)]. The imposition of this tax is regulated by Ss. 135 to 159. The rate of property tax is relatable to annual value which is defined in S. 138. The preparation of assessment list is covered by Ss. 143 to 153. It is also clear from the provisions of S. 133 that the Corporation may by special meeting bring forward resolutions about the system of assessment to be adopted.
23.  The bye-laws are framed u/s. 427 of the Act and S. 431 provides that all bye-laws shall be published in the gazette. The effect of these provisions is that the bye-laws become part of the Act. Thus the Corporation while providing the system of assessment for various taxes can propose a basis but rafter the bye-laws provide the system of assessment, the Corporation has to abide by that system of assessment.
24.  So far as the drainage tax is concerned, there were no bye-laws till February 12, 1976. The resolutions of the Corporation could thus hold the field by providing a method of assessment till February 12, 1976. Similarly, the resolution in relation to general sanitary cess could also hold the field till the publication of bye-laws in relation thereto on January 9, 1976 and similarly for lighting rate till the publication of bye-laws in relation thereto on May 24, 1974. But the resolutions if they come in conflict with the method of assessment then the resolution w.e.f. from which date the bye-laws come into force, will become illegal and ineffective.
25.  So far as the general sanitary cess is concerned, the resolutions of the Corporation provide only one method, namely to assess it in accordance with the annual letting value of the property tax provided under the Act. The option, however, was available to the Corporation in relation to drainage tax and lighting rate. The Corporation could in view of the resolution follow the option of working out these taxes on the basis of annual letting value prepared under the Adhiniyam. Therefore, so far as drainage tax is concerned, it could continue such basis till February 12, 1976 and as far as the lighting rate is concerned till May 24, 1974. After May 24, 1974, in relation to lighting rate, determination of it on the basis of annual letting value prepared under the Adhiniyam will become bad. Therefore, dealing with the matter further we may notice another change which was brought about w.e.f. April 1, 1976. With effect from April 1, 1976 S. 143 was added to the Act which provides as under.
"143. Assessment of annual value and duration of assessment. - (1) The annual value of any land or building situate within the city as determined under the Madhya Pradesh Nagariya Sthawar Sampatti Kar Adhiniyam, 1964 (14 of 1964) or the rules made thereunder, and in force for the purpose of that Act immediately before the first day of April, 1976 shall be deemed to be the annual value for the assessment of property tax on such land or building under this Act, until such time as the Commissioner makes a fresh valuation and determines annual value under this Act of the land and buildings therein and the annual value of such land or buildings shall remain unchanged for a period of one year and may be revised thereafter by the Commissioner at the termination of successive period of one year(2) The Commissioner may, instead of making a new assessment every year, adopt the existing assessment, with such alteration as he thinks fit, as the assessments for each new year, giving to persons affected by such alterations the same notice of the altered valuation and assessment as would have been required if a new assessment had been prepared.
(3) The Commissioner shall arrange for a survey for the purpose of assessment of each part of the city at least once in five years save for the omission, with the previous consent of the Standing Committee, of any small areas which might be more conveniently reassessed in a subsequent year."
26.  By its very wording S. 143 is prospective and it states that the annual value of the building as under the Adhiniyam is to be deemed to be the annual value for the assessment of property tax or land or building under the Act. Until such time as the Commissioner makes a fresh valuation and prepares annual value specifically under the Act, sub-s. (2) thereof gives power to the Commissioner to adopt the existing value of such land after following the procedure. The effect of enactment of S. 143 of the Act w.e.f. April 1, 1976 is that from such date the Corporation could legitimately adopt the annual value prepared under the Adhiniyam as the basis for determination of the aforesaid three taxes.
27.  Until a new list is prepared, the annual value so adopted by S. 143 is deemed to be the annual value under the Act. The annual value so enforced for the purpose of assessment of property tax under the Act could also be used for assessment of drainage tax, lighting rate and general sanitary cess.
28.  We have already mentioned earlier that so far as drainage tax and lighting rate are concerned, their assessment could be made by the Corporation on the basis of the annual value fixed under the Adhiniyam in view of the resolutions passed by the Corporation and the orders made by the Administrator till the bye-laws came into effect in relation thereto and in view of S. 143 their is again no difficulty in assessing general sanitary cess on the basis of annual value adopted by S. 143 for the period from April 1, 1976 onwards.
29.  We may now deal with the decision of the Division Bench in relation to the imposition of water rate known as "graduated flat rate". The tax known by this name is in reality water rate imposed by the Corporation. The Corporation supplies water in the Corporation limits. The Corporation was earlier a Municipality governed by the Indore Municipal Act (Act 4 of 1909). S. 21(x) of this Act authorised the Municipality to impose water rate (where water is supplied by the Municipality). The water rate was imposed under the provisions of the Indore Municipal Act. There were separate rates for houses in which water connection was taken with meters or without meters and different rates for those houses where no water connection was at all taken. The water rate for houses where no water connection was taken was imposed on the theory that the house owners must be taking water from some public tap or stand pot or fountain provided by the Municipality. The water rate imposed on houses where there is no water connection is known as "graduated flat rate". That rate is revised from time to time.
30. It was last revised by the Indore Municipality by a Notification dated December 22, 1940. The graduated flat rate in this notification is on the basis of rental value of the houses. The graduated flat rate at the aforesaid revised rate continued to be in force even after the enforcement of the Act and the constitution of Indore Municipality as a Corporation under this Act. The challenge before the High Court to the assessment of graduated flat rate was with the revision of graduated flat rate by the Administrator's order dated May 18, 1973 passed u/s. 162 of the Act. The petitioners had filed objections to the bill in relation to graduated flat rate (Annexure S to the SLP) which was sent under postal certificate.
31.  It may be noticed that the graduated flat rate is now related to the area of the building and not to the rental value. The argument before the High Court was that it was not open to the Corporation to exercise the power of revision of tax u/s. 162(2) as this was not a tax covered under sub-s. (1) or (2) of S. 132 of the Act. It was admitted before the High Court that before a notification for revising the rate was issued the sanction of the government had been obtained. However, it is clear that the graduated flat rate is covered by the provisions of S. 132(1)(d) and the water tax is leviable in respect of the premises. It is clear from cl. (d) of sub-s. (1) of S. 132 that water tax could be levied in respect of premises not only where premises are connected by means of municipal pipes or government water pots but where the premises were situated in a portion of the city in which the Commissioner has given public notice that the Corporation has arranged to supply water from municipal or government pots by means of providing water connection or public stand pots, fountains or by any other means. No objection was raised before the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Indore that for godowns no water rate could be charged and that they were not subject to water rate for the purposes of Indore Municipal Act. But so far as the Act is concerned, water rate is livable on the premises without distinction as to the nature of the premises or their user.
32.  Before us an argument was put forward that since the premises are made godowns no water supply is provided. We are afraid that what cl. (d) of sub-s. (1) of S. 132 talks about is not in relation to any house, building or godowns but refers to the expression "premises". " Premises" is a very wide word and includes buildings of all types whether residential, commercial or factory, etc. etc. Merely because the premises are godowns, it cannot be urged that the water rate or graduated flat rate could not be imposed. We are also of the view that it is not fair again to permit the petitioner to urge that the water rate is not applicable to the premises in dispute as no such objection was also taken either in the objection petition before the Commissioner referred to earlier, or in the writ petition before the High Court nor in the special leave petition.
33.  The result of the above discussion is that C.A. No. 2378 of 1980 and Civil Appeal, arising out of SLP (C) No. 10376 of 1981 in relation to drainage tax, general sanitary cess and water rate are dismissed. However, in relation to the bill regarding lighting rate impugned in the judgment of the Division Bench, it is held to be partly illegal and unenforceable for the period from May 24, 1974 to March 31, 1976 as basis of assessment was contrary to the relevant Indore Municipal Lighting Rate (Assessment, Collection and Refund) Bye-laws, 1974. But the demand for lighting rate after April 1, 1976 is valid and to that extent, in relation to lighting rate, the impugned order of the Division Bench is confirmed to the aforesaid extent. In regard to C.A. No. 2377 of 1980 where the bill dated October 26, 1971 and the demand notice dated August 14, 1973 in relation to lighting rate and drainage tax are only challenged, the impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside and the appeal is allowed. Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.
