State of Orissa and Another v Radheshyam Nanda
Supreme Court of India

30 April 1991
C.A. No. 1917 of 1982
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. This is an appeal from a decision of the High Court of Orissa which allowed the claim of the respondent for appointment as a Medical Officer in Homeopathic Dispensary.
2. The respondent is a registered Homeopathic practitioner within the meaning of S. 21 of the Orissa Homeopathic Act, 1956
 which is hereinafter referred to as the "State Act". There is also a Central enactment called Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (Act 59 of 1973) on the same subject, which is hereinafter referred to as the "Central Act."
3. The respondent was originally holding the post of Distributor and thereafter he was appointed as Medical Officer in a Homeopathic Dispensary. After coming into force of the Central Act, the respondent was reverted to his original post of Distributor. The reversion was based perhaps on the ground that the respondent was not duly qualified to hold the post of Medical Officer in the dispensary in view of the bar imposed either by the Central Act or by the State Act. The validity of reversion was challenged before the High Court by means of a writ petition u/art. 226 of the Constitution of India, 1950. There were several other petitions filed by the similarly reverted persons. The High Court in those petitions  gave a considered judgment expressing the view that a registered Homeopathic practitioner like the respondent is not ineligible for appointment as Medical Officer in Homeopathic dispensary. In that judgment, the High Court directed the State Government to review the cases of the reverted Medical Officers. Following that judgment the respondent's writ petition was also allowed in terms thereof.
4. The State being aggrieved by the High Court decision has appealed to this Court.
5. The central question for consideration is whether the registered Homeopathic practitioner who has not qualified himself from an institution established or recognised by the Homeopathic Board shall be ineligible either under the State Act or under the Central Act for being appointed as Medical Officer of any State Homeopathic dispensary? S. 21(i) defines registered Homeopathic practitioner to mean a Homeopathic practitioner registered as such u/s. 21. S. 21(1) refers to two categories of Homeopathy practitioners : (i) Registered Homeopathic practitioner; and (ii) Listed Homeopathic practitioner. We are not concerned with the latter category, we are only concerned with the former category. S. 21(2) furnishes the requirements to qualify oneself to become a registered Homeopathic practitioner. It is not in dispute that the respondent is one of such registered Homeopathic practitioners.
6. With these undisputed facts, we may now consider the scope of Ss. 29(b) and 43 of the State Act and S. 15 of the Central Act. S. 29(b) of the State Act reads:
"29. Registered practitioners' certificate. - Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force -
(b) a registered Homeopathic practitioner shall be eligible to hold any appointment as a Medical Officer in any dispensary, hospital, infirmary or lying-in-hospital supported by or receiving a grant from the State Government or any local authority and treating patients according to the Homeopathic system of medicine;"
7. S. 43 of the State Act, so far as relevant provides
" 43. Reservation of certain appointment to registered Homeopathic practitioners who have qualified themselves from institutions established or recognised by the Board. - Except with the special sanction of the State Government no Homeopathic practitioner, other than a registered Homeopathic practitioner who has qualified himself from an institution established or recognised by the Board, shall be competent to hold an appointment as Medical Officer of Health, or as physician or other Medical Officer in a Homeopathic hospital maintained or aided by the State Government or any local authority;"
8. S. 29(b) states that a registered Homeopathic practitioner shall be eligible to hold appointment as medical officer in any dispensary, hospital, infirmary etc. supported by or receiving grant from the State Government or any local authority and treating patients according to the homeopathic system of medicine. The section in other words, states that if one is a registered Homeopathic practitioner, he would be eligible for appointment as a Medical Officer either in any dispensary or hospital. Section 43, however, makes certain reservations of posts of medical officers exclusively for institutionally qualified registered Homeopathic practitioners. It provides that no Homeopathic practitioner other than a registered Homeopathic practitioner who has qualified himself from an institution established or recognised by the Board shall be competent to hold appointment as Medical Officer of Health or Physician in a Homeopathic hospital maintained or aided by the State Government or any local authority. The condition imposed under S. 43 is that the registered Homeopathic practitioner must have qualified himself from an institution established or recognised by the Board and it means he must have undergone the course prescribed by such institution. No such restriction however, is imposed for appointment as Medical Officer of a Homeopathic dispensary. Any registered Homeopathic practitioner could be eligible for an appointment as a Medical Officer in any Homeopathic dispensary. The respondent therefore is not ineligible for appointment as Medical Officer of a Homeopathic dispensary.
9. We will now examine whether the Central Act contains any restraint or provides any additional qualification for appointment as Medical Officer in Homeopathic dispensary. If there is any such provision, the Central Act being a subsequent enactment on the same subject would override the State Act. S. 15(2) of the Central Act provides:
"15. (2) No person, other than a practitioner of Homeopathy who possesses a recognised medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register of Homeopathy -
(a) shall hold office as Homeopathic physician or any other office  in government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority."
10. S. 15(2) states that no person other than a practitioner of Homeopathy who possesses a recognised medical qualification and is enrolled on a State Register or the Central Register shall hold office as Homeopathic Physician or any other office in government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority. Medical qualifications referred to therein are included in the second or the third schedule of the Act. It is clear therefrom that a person who does not possess any such medical qualification cannot be appointed as a medical officer of an dispensary. But S. 15(3)(b) preserves the privileges including the right to practice Homeopathy conferred by or under the State Act. S. 15(3)(b) provides:
"15. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in second or the third schedule to be enrolled.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-s. (2) shall affect -
(b) The privileges (including the right to practise Homeopathy) conferred by or under any law relating to registration of practitioners of Homeopathy for the time being in force in any State, on a practitioner of Homeopathy enrolled on a State Register of Homeopathy."
11. It will be clear from the above provision of the Central Act that the right conferred on a registered Homeopathic practitioner under the State Act is not affected by the conditions under S. 15(2) of the Central Act and indeed such right or privilege has been specifically preserved by S. 15(3)(b) of the Central Act. The State Act as we have seen earlier provides eligibility for the respondent, for appointment as medical officer in a Homeopathic dispensary and that right remains unaffected by the Central Act. This is also the view expressed by the High Court on the construction of the above provisions with which we concur.
12. In this view of the matter we dismiss the appeal without an order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
