Rukmini Amma Saradamma v Kalyani Sulochana and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 December 1992
C.A. No. 5403 of 1992 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 28 May 1991 of the Kerala High Court in C.R.P. No. 1752 of 1990-D)
The Judgment was delivered by: MOHAN, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment dated May 28, 1991 of the High Court of Kerala in C.R.P. No. 1752 of 1990-D.
3. The short facts leading to this appeal are as under:
4. The petition schedule shed and the premises were obtained by the appellant and the second respondent under a partition of the year 1959. The second respondent is the mother of the appellant. In 1969, the premises was let out to the first respondent by the husband of the second respondent on a monthly rent of Rs. 15. On January 24, 1969 a rent deed was executed (Ex. A-1). After the death of the husband of the second respondent the first respondent paid rent up to September 1976. Thereafter she committed default in payment of rent. A notice was issued by the second respondent terminating the tenancy with effect from April 20, 1977 and demanded vacant possession with arrears of rent.
5. On February 14, 1978, the second respondent relinquished her entire right in favour of the appellant. Thereupon, the appellant obtained absolute right over the property. She filed a petition for eviction on two grounds:
(i) the first respondent committed default in payment of rent and
(ii) she will be entitled to recover possession of the petition schedule shed for demolition. By an order dated June 28, 1982 the Rent Controller directed deviation on the ground of arrears of rent. However, the claim for recovery of building for demolition was disallowed.
6. Aggrieved by the order of the Rent Controller, the appellant preferred appeals before the appellate court. By its order dated December 14, 1983 the finding of the trial court was reversed insofar as the bona fide need was concerned and the order of eviction was confirmed on this ground as well.
Thereupon, the first respondent filed a revision u/s. 20 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) before the District Court, Kollam. That was dismissed on June 24, 1985. The first respondent preferred a further revision before the High Court u/s. 115 of the Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as the Code). The High Court by its judgment dated August 21, 1986 set aside the finding of the appellate court and the revisional court and the matter was remitted to the trial court.
7. On remit, the Rent Controller dismissed the petition filed by the appellant. Hence, the appellant filed an appeal to the District Court. By its order dated June 30, 1990 it directed eviction of the first respondent on the ground of bona fide need u/s. 11(3) of the Act. The first respondent aggrieved by the order of eviction preferred a revision. The Division Bench of the High Court set aside the order of eviction holding that the landlady was not successful in proving her case of bona fide need. It is under these circumstances, this appeal by special leave has come to be preferred.
8. Learned counsel for the appellant would urge that the High Court had misconceived the scope of revisional jurisdiction. Having held that u/s. 20 of the Act, a re-appreciation of the evidence as such was not called for, yet the High Court went into the factual details and reappreciated the entire evidence as though it was an appellate court.
9. Notwithstanding the fat that S. 20 of the Act conferring revisional jurisdiction of the High Court is widely worded, such a jurisdiction cannot be converted into an appellate jurisdiction. This Court in Rai Chand Jain v. Chandra Kanta Khosla 1990 Indlaw SC 569 has clearly pointed out the scope of such revisional jurisdiction and has held that it cannot act as a second court of appeal.  Therefore, the impugned order is liable to be set aside. Without prejudice to the above, it is submitted that this Court in Aundal Ammal v. Sadasivan Pillai 1986 Indlaw SC 6051986 Indlaw SC 605has held that no second revision is permissible to the High Court either u/s. 115 of the Code or u/s. 20 of the Act. The District Court has exercised the revisional jurisdiction. Hence, the remit order in C.R.P. NO. 1719 of 1985 is void and is illegal. It that remit order goes, what remains is only the revisional order of the District Court, Kollam, confirming the appellate order directing revision on the ground of bona fide need. Hence, the impugned order calls for interference.
10. In opposition to this, it is urged on behalf of the respondent that the revisional jurisdiction conferred u/s. 20 of the Act is wider in scope in comparison to S. 115 of the Code. Therefore, there is no need to confine oneself to illegality alone. Further, the revisional court could consider the propriety of the order under revision. It is on this score the High Court chose to interfere with the finding of the appellant authority. In exercise of this jurisdiction it has correctly appreciated the evidence and come to the right conclusion.
11. It is too late in the day to urge on behalf of the appellant that the earlier exercise of second revisional jurisdiction by the High Court was wrong. She ought to have raised it then and there. Having taken a chance after remit and pursued the eviction petition, merely because the order of the High Court went adverse to the appellant, it cannot be contended that the order of remit in exercise of second revisional jurisdiction is wrong. Even otherwise, u/s. 115 of the Code the revisional powers could be exercised. Aundal Ammal case has no application to this case having regard to the peculiar circumstances.
12. We shall now proceed to consider the correctness of these submissions.
13. Firstly, as to the scope of revisional jurisdiction u/s. 20 of the Act. S. 20 reads as under:
"20 Revision - (1) In cases where the appellate authority empowered u/s. 18 is a Subordinate Judge, the District Court, and in other cases the High Court may, at any time, on the application of any aggrieved party, call for and examine the records relating to any order passed or proceedings taken under this Act by such authority for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality, regularity or propriety of such order or proceedings and may pass such order in reference thereto as it thinks fit(2) The costs of the and incident to all proceedings before the High Court or District Court under Sub-s. (1) shall be in its discretion."
Revision as seen from Black's Law Dictionary (fifth Edition) at page 1187 denotes:
"A re-examination or careful reading over for correction or improvement."
14. Under S. 115 of the Code the revisional jurisdiction is exercisable by the High Court in the following three cases:
(1) When the Subordinate Court appears to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
(2) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law, or
(3) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
15. Unlike this jurisdiction, in S. 20 power is given to the revisional authority to call for and examine the records relating to any order for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality, regularity or propriety of such order. As to the distinction between these two jurisdictions this Court had occasion to consider in H. V. Mathai v. Subordinate Judge, Kottayam 1969 Indlaw SC 175and held thus: .
"The words of S. 20 however are much wider than those in S. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure. U/s. 20(1) the District Court is empowered to call for and examine the records relating to any order passed or proceedings taken under the Act for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality, regularity or propriety of such order or proceedings, and pass such order in reference thereto as it thinks fit. On the words of this section we cannot hold that a revision is limited to a mere question of jurisdiction."
16. In Rai Chand Jain v. Miss Chandra Kanta Khosla arising under E.P. Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 (3 of 1949), whereunder the revisional jurisdiction was conferred u/s. 15(5) of the said Act. This court held:
"... It is appropriate to note in this connection the relevant provision of S. 15(5) of the Act which specifically conferred jurisdiction on the High Court in an application for revision against the order of the appellate authority to satisfy itself as to the legality or priority of the order made by the appellate authority. On a plain reading of this provision it is clear and transparent that the revisional jurisdiction conferred on the High Court is much wider than the jurisdiction provided u/s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The High Court while exercising this jurisdiction is competent not only to see the irregular or illegal exercise of jurisdiction but also to see to the irregular or illegal exercising this jurisdiction but also to the legality or propriety of the order in question.
Again it was observed:
... The High Court in exercising its power u/s. 15(5) of the said Act is within its jurisdiction to reserve the findings of fact as the same were improper and also illegal. It is appropriate to refer in this connection to the decision in the case of Ram Dass v. Ishwar Chander  1988 Indlaw SC 921 where it has been held that S. 15(5) of the Act enables the High Court to satisfy itself as to the 'legality or propriety' of the order under revision, which is, quite obviously, a much wider jurisdiction. That jurisdiction enables the court or revision, in appropriate cases, to examine the correctness of the findings of facts also, though the revisional court is not 'a second court of first appeal'  Dattonpant Gopalvarao Devakate v. Vithalrao Marutirao Janagaval  1975 Indlaw SC 570."
17. In an earlier ruling, the scope of revisional jurisdiction of the same section i.e. 15(5) of the said Act came up for consideration. In Rajbir Kaur (Smt) v. S. Chokesiri and Co  1988 Indlaw SC 615. The Division Bench to which one of us (Venkatachaliah, J.) was a party held in paragraph 42 at page 37
"The scope of the revisional jurisdiction depends on the language of the statue conferring the revisional jurisdiction. Revisional jurisdiction is only a part of the appellate jurisdiction and cannot be equated with that of a full-fledged appeal. Though the revisional power - depending upon the language of the provision - might be wider than revisional power u/s. 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, yet, a revisional court is not a second or first appeal."
18. As far as the present Act is concerned S. 20 contains the word "propriety" also. As to the meaning of the word "propriety" in Raman and Raman Ltd. v. State of Madras it was held thus:
"The word 'propriety' has nowhere been defined in the Act and is capable of a variety of meanings. In the Oxford English Dictionary (Vol. VIII), it has been stated to mean 'fitness; appropriateness; aptitude; suitability; appropriateness to the circumstances or conditions; conformity with requirements, rule or principle; rightness, correctness, justness, accuracy."
19. Therefore, the question would be whether in the context of this provision the High Court was right in re-appreciating the evidence and coming to a different conclusion ? In the impugned judgment in paragraph 7 the High Court observed.
"Under S. 20 of the act though re-appreciating of the evidence as such is not called for, the pleadings and evidence have to be examine to satisfy the legality, regularity of the order of the lower authorities."
20. We are afraid this approach of the High Court is wrong. Even the wider language of S. 20 of the Act cannot enable the High Court to act as a first or a second court of appeal. Otherwise the distinction between appellate and revisional jurisdiction will get obliterated. Hence, the High Court was not right in re-appreciating the entire evidence both oral or documentary in the light of the Commissioner's report (Exts. C-1 and C-2 Mahazar).
In our considered view, the High Court had travelled far beyond the revisional jurisdiction. Even by the presence of the word "propriety" it cannot mean that there could be a re-appreciation of evidence. Of course, the revisional court can come to a different conclusion but not on a reappreciation of evidence on the contrary, by confining itself to legality, regularity and propriety of the order impugned before it. Therefore, we are unable to agree with the reasoning of the High Court with reference to the exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
21. As to whether a second revision lay to the High Court this Court by the judgment in Aundal Ammal case held that no such revision lay. On this point the High Court referring to this very judgment held that the jurisdiction u/art. 227 of the Constitution is not taken away. Therefore, the earlier order dated August 21, 1986 passed in exercise of revisional jurisdiction u/s. 115 of the Act is not void. We need to pause to consider this because this point ought to have been urged by the appellant immediately after the order of remit was made. Pursuant to the order of remit the appellant took a chance by participation in the proceedings before the Rent Controller, taking up the matter in appeal. Thus, having acquiesced in these proceedings she question the first remit order.
22. For the foregoing reasons, we set aside the judgment of the High Court and remit the matter to the High Court for reconsideration, confining itself to the revisional jurisdictions pointed out above. Accordingly, the civil appeal will stand allowed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
