Sher Singh and Another v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

15 September 1992
Cr.A. No. 577 of 1980
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  There are two appellants. They along with one Dalbir Singh were tried for offence punishable under S. 302 read ordinary course of nature to cause death. The ASI arrested three accused and effected some recoveries and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was laid.
2.  The accused when examined under S. 313, Cr.P.C., denied prosecution version and pleaded nor guilty. The trial Court accepted the evidence of PW 2 but acquitted Dalbir Singh on the ground that no lathi injuries were found on the deceased. So far as the two appellants are concerned, the trial Court held that the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 established infliction of multiple injuries on the deceased. The High Court accepted all these findings of the trial Court and dismissed the appeal filed by them.
3.  In this appeal, the learned counsel for the appellants submits that PWs 2 and 3 are interested witnesses and they have not witnessed occurrence and have implicated the two appellants falsely. We find PWs 2 and 3 to be natural witnesses whose presence at the tubewell near the field cannot be doubted. If they really wanted to give false version could have figured as eye-witnesses. They said that they heard the cries of the deceased and also saw the appellants running away. Learned counsel urged that their testimony is in conflict with medical evidence. Learned counsel further submits that the doctor found stomach of the deceased injured containing only clotted blood. That being so, the occurrence must have been taken place some time in the night and not at 6.00 a.m. This submission is based on the assumption that the deceased would not have taken anything before 8 or 9 a.m. At any rate, we find in the medical evidence that the stomach was empty.
4.  Merely because PWs 2 and 3 are related to the deceased, that by itself is not a ground to reject their evidence. As a matter of fact PW 2 would be the last person to implicate somebody falsely. It is to be noted that he went to the village, informed his parents and rushed to the police station which is 19 kilometres away and gave the report without any delay.
5.  There is no merit in this appeal. The appeal is dismissed. The appellants are on bail. They should surrender immediately.
Appeal dismissed.
