Puttan Alias Kamal Prasad v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

19 February 1992
Cr.A. No. 304 of 1981 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 9 October 1980 of the Allahabad of High Court in Cr. Appeal No. 1308 of 1977
The Judgment was delivered by: KULDIP SINGH, J.
1.  Puttan, along with Hari Om and Badshah Singh, was charged under Section 394 read with Section 397 Indian Penal Code. The trial court convicted him of the said offences and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years. The High Court at Allahabad upheld the conviction and sentence awarded by the trial court. Hence this appeal by Puttan.
2.  According to the prosecution Hari Om along with Badshah Singh and Puttan came on a motor cycle to the petrol pump owned by Jugal Behari Lal Gupta. They took 10 liters of petrol and 1/2 litre moboil. They did not pay the price of the petrol and instead assaulted Jugal Behari Lal Gupta. Hari Om was armed with a danda and the other two with a revolver and a knife. Hari Om snatched Rs.1000 from the drawer kept at the petrol pump and thereafter all the three drove away on the motor cycle.
3.  The trial of Hari Om was separated as he was detained under MISA at the relevant time. The trial court did not believe the identification evidence in respect of Badshah Singh and acquitted him. Puttan was, however, convicted on the basis of the testimony of Jugal Behari Lal Gupta and his employee Habib.
4.  In a separate trial accused Hari Om was also acquitted. Trial court rejected the testimony of Habib as he had turned hostile. The court came to the conclusion that it was not safe to convict Hari Om on the sole testimony of Jugal Behari Lal Gupta.
5.  The alleged occurrence took place on December 4, 1973. The appellant was arrested on January 23, 1974. Identification parade was held more than six months thereafter on July 29, 1974. There is no plausible explanation regarding the inordinate delay in holding the identification parade.
6. We are of the view that the courts below erred in relying on the identification evidence. Even otherwise Hari Om and Badshah Singh having been acquitted on the same evidence there is no justification to sustain the appellant's conviction.
7.  We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellant and acquit him. The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds are discharged.
Appeal allowed.
