State of Jammu and Kashmir v Vijay Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

2 September 1992
S.L.P. Nos. 12026, 12025 and 8099 of 1992 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 30 October 1991, 6 November 1991 and 29 May 1992 of the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir in SW.P. Nos. 992 of 1990, 796 and 167 of 1991)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
1.  The present special leave petitions are directed against interim orders passed by different learned Single Judges of the High Court. State of Jammu & Kashmir has preferred letters patent appeal against those orders. The letters patent appeals are not set down for hearing or even for interim orders because we are told that one Judge or the other has passed similar orders. Counsel for the respondents, however, states that the learned Chief Justice and Kaul, J. have not passed any such order. Council for the petitioners also states that the letters patent appeals are fixed before a Division Bench comprising Justice B. K. Gupta and B. A. Khan and he was no objection if they hear the matters.
2.  We would request the learned Chief Justice of the High Court to constitute a Bench, if necessary, by directing one of the Judges to move from Jammu to Srinagar or vice versa to hear the appeals, if for any other reason the learned Judges, who have passed similar orders, are reluctant to hear the appeals. We are told that the doctrine of necessity may have to be invoked in a given case, but we leave the matter to the learned Chief Justice.
3.   We feel that the mattes require early hearing and the learned Chief Justice would like appropriate decision at an early date in regard to constitution of a Bench for hearing the matters. In the meantime, till the matters are heard by a Division Bench the impugned orders will remain in abeyance unless already implemented by payment of the amount to the employees. In that case proper orders may be made in appeal. The special leave petitions are disposed of accordingly.
Petitions disposed of.
