Anil Kumar Singh v Union of India and Another
Supreme Court of India

8 September 1992
C.A. No. 3574 of 1992 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 18271 of 1991)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted. Heard counsel on both sides.
1.  One of the cases pointed out on behalf of the appellant and accepted by the Union of India is of a constable Surat Singh who was suffering from hernia at the time of recruitment. He was, however, enrolled after he got himself operated and cured of the aliment. We find that there is no justification for giving a differential treatment to the appellant whose case is slightly better. He developed hernia after recruitment and during the training period.
2.   In the facts and circumstances of the case, therefore, we direct that if the appellant gets himself operated and thereafter is found to have been cured of the ailment and fit to resume service, he should be reinstated in service. If and when he is so reinstated, he would get the benefit of the lost period for the purpose of his seniority and all other benefits, except the back wages.
3.  We are informed at the Bar that the appellant has been visiting All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi ['AIIMS' for short] for the purpose of treatment of his ailment. Since this is a case where urgent treatment is necessary to enable the appellant to resume the services, we direct Director, AIIMS to treat the appellant's case on a priority basis. If he finds that surgery can cure the ailment, he may also arrange to get the surgery done, of course, with the consent of the appellant, as early as possible. After the surgery, if any, and as and when the appellant is fit to resume, he may report to the authorities concerned for being medically examined for the purpose of ensuring that he is fit to be retained in service as a constable.
4.  The Director, AIIMS will treat the appellant for all purposes including surgery as a person on Government roll.
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
