State of Punjab and Gurmej Singh v Jit Singh and Another
Supreme Court of India

29 January 1992
Cr.A. Nos. 234 and 235 of 1980
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These two appeals are pursuant to the leave granted under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, 1950. The State as well as the complainant have filed these appeals. Mr. Jit Singh, the sole respondent was convicted for an offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. The prosecution examined the tow eye-witnesses. The Section Court relying on the evidence convicted the respondent under section 304, I.P.C. but the High Court allowed the appeal and acquitted him.
2.  As against the order of the High Court these appeals are filed. We have heard the respective counsel elaborately. The case rests mainly on the evidence of the tow eye-witnesses P.W. 2 Gurmej Singh, son of the deceased and P.W. 3 Who is a member of the Panchayat. Admittedly there was an enmity between the deceased family and the accused family. At about 10.15 p.m. the deceased present at his tubewell for keeping watch over the cattle during night. The witnesses submit that the accused and one stranger gave the lathi the blows on the head of the deceased. The stranger could not be recognised as he was not of the head of the deceased. The stranger could not be recognised as he was not of the same village. P.Ws 2 and 3 raised a lalkara and thereupon both the culprits ran away, then they took Mehar Singh to the Hospital in a car where he died.
3. Accordingly Ranjit Singh P.W. 7 recorded statement of Exhibit PC of Gurmej Singh in respect of the occurrence at 3.15 a.m. on the same date and sent the Police Station where on the basis of which First Information Report was registered and completed at 3.30 a.m. and the same was sent to the Magistrate at 6.30 a.m. on the same day.
4.  The Division Bench of the High Court having examined the evidence of the two eye-witnesses, came to the conclusion that they were highly interested witnesses and whether their presence can be accepted and whether their presence can be accepted at all, is the question. P.W. 3 is in no way related to the deceased or to the P.W. 2. He gave an explanation for his visit to the tubewell along with P.W. 2 before the Police Station was to irrigate the land of PW 2 whereas in the present deposition he prevaricating and deposed that he went to the tubewell of the deceased to inform him about the collection of meagre amount of money for presenting and the same to the contesting candidate. The High Court noticed that this prevaricated shows that he has deliberately improved his version from stage to stage. When interested witnesses are examined it is well settled that the evidence has to the pervious statements and the surrounding circumstances.
5. We are satisfied that their evidence does not inspire any confidence. In the F.I.R. it is stated that P.W. Nos. 2 and 3 went to irrigate the field from that tubewell water but while giving statements at the trial they deposed that only P.W. 2 was to irrigate the field by working the tubewell while P.W. 3 had accompanied to the tubewell to meet the deceased as mentioned above. Their presence thus becomes doubtful from the fact that they have not come forward with a proper explanation for giving tow versions. In these circumstances we cannot say that the High Court went wrong in ordering acquittal. These appeals are dismissed accordingly.
Appeals dismissed.
