Khazan Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

15 January 1992
W.P. (Criminal) No. 1322 of 1991
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Admittedly the detenu submitted his representation to the State Government as well as to the Central Government on August 21, 1991. The State Government has filed an affidavit explaining that the representation filed by the detenu was considered expeditiously and was rejected. The rejection was communicated to the detenu in the jail. We have examined the said affidavit and we are satisfied that the representation of the detenu was considered and disposed of by the State Government in accordance with law.
2.  The representation addressed to the Central Government was received by the Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs on August 26, 1991. It has been stated in the affidavit filed by Sh. S.C. Aggarwal, Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs that para-wise comments on the representation were received from the State Government on September 9, 1991. After processing the representation it was found that some further information was needed to be obtained from the State Government. A wireless message was sent on September 10, 1991 but the required information was received from the State Government on January 2, 1992. The representation was considered and rejected on January 9, 1992 and the same was communicated to the detenu on January 10, 1992.
3.   Mr.  Yogeshwar Prasad, learned counsel appearing for the State of Uttar Pradesh, states that the State Government had expeditiously replied to all the correspondence addressed to the State Government by the Central Government and the State Government cannot be blamed. This is a matter between the State Government and the Central Government but the fact remains that the representation of the detenu received by the Central Government on August 26, 1991 was decided on January 9, 1992. Patently there is gross delay on the part of the Central Government in deciding detenu's representation resulting in denial of his fundamental right guaranteed under the Constitution.
4.  On this short ground we allow the petition and set aside the detention order dated August 12, 1991 and direct that the detenu be released forthwith.
Petition allowed.
