Venu v State of Tamil Nadu
Supreme Court of India

4 September 1992
Cr.A. No. 79 of 1980
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The sole appellant figured as accused No. 1 before the trial Court. He was tried for offence punishable under sections 302 and 307, I.P.C. Three others were also tried along with him for offences punishable under S. 302 read with Sections 34, 323 and 307, I.P.C. The trial Court convicted A1 under S. 302, I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life. He was further convicted under S. 324, I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years. Both the sentences were directed to run concurrently. A2 and A4 were convicted under S. 323, I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year each and A3 was convicted under S. 324, I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years. All of them have preferred appeals before the High Court. The Appellate Court confirmed the convictions and sentences awarded by the trial Court. A1 is the appellant before us pursuant to the special leave granted by this Court.
2.  The prosecution case is that A1's father owned a theatre at the Trivandrum-Nagercoil Road. A3 and A4 are employed in that theatre. A2 is said to be the friend of A1. On 11-7-1977 P.Ws.1 and 2 and the deceased went to the theatre for the second show. They purchased chair tickets but took their seats in the higher class. A3 objected to the changing of their seats. This led to an altercation between P.Ws.1 and 2 and the deceased on the one hand and accused No. 3 on the other. It is alleged that P.W.1 slapped accused No. 3 A1, intervened and asked them not to create a row inside the theatre. After the show was over, P.Ws.1 and 2 and the deceased then proceeded towards the west and on there way home followed by P.W. 4. At that time P.Ws. 3 and 5 were going along the road. It is alleged that all the four accused were seen standing in the road challenging the deceased and others attacked them. A1 took out a katari M.O.1 from his waist and stabbed the deceased with it on his left flank and the deceased fell down. A3 went to stab P.W.2 and P.W.2 received an injury on the left hand. When P.W.1 tried to wrest M.O.1 from A1, P.W.1 also received injuries at the hands of A1. After the occurrence the accused ran away. The injured deceased was shifted to the Hospital but he died. A report was given and the investigation was commenced. The inquest was held and the dead body was sent for post-mortem.
"The doctor found a wound over the back of the left side 2, below the tip of the scapula and on an internal examination he found that the injury had penetrated the skin muscles, bone , the pleural cavity and penetrating deep into the lungs for about 2 inches. It also penetrated the diaphragm and entered the visceral cavity, punctured the spleen to a depth of 2 and severing the spleenic artery."
3. The injury had penetrated through the hylem of the spleen. The injury was found to be sufficient in the ordinary course of the nature to cause death. The doctor examined P.W.1 also for the injury. The accused were arrested and after completion of the investigation the chargesheet was laid.
4.  The case rested mainly on the evidence of the eye-witnesses P.Ws.1 to 5 who in one voice deposed that A1 stabbed the deceased. This evidence has been accepted by both the Courts below.
5.  Shri K. Rajendra Chowdhary the learned counsel for the appellant submits that the accused also had some injuries and his plea was that the deceased and others attacked him and the prosecution has not explained his injury properly and, therefore, the case of the prosecution becomes doubtful. From the record it appears that the accused seems to have received some minor injuries during scuffle but we are concerned with the incident in which the deceased received the fatal injuries. With regard to this incident the five eye-witness have given a consistent version.
6.  The next submission of the learned counsel is that only one injury was found on the deceased and in the circumstances of the case it is difficult to hold that the offence amounted to murder. We are unable to agree. This inquiry would have been relevant if the appellant happened to inflict injury during the fight and without any intention to cause that particular injury. But this is a case where the prosecution evidence is to the effect that the accused were waiting on the road and thereafter they accosted the deceased and A1 inflicted the fatal injury.
7. Therefore, the only inference that the intention to cause the death of the deceased attract clause I of S.300, I.P.C. In the result, we see no ground to interfere. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
