K. Rajan v C. K. Rajan and others
Supreme Court of India

26 March 1993
S.L.P. (C) No.... of 1993 and CC No. 20040
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  We have heard Mr.G.Ramaswamy and Mr.K.K.Venugopal, learned Senior Advocates, in support of the application for seeking permission to file the special leave petition. We have also heard Mr.Reddy, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the State Government. Mr.Krishnamurthy Iyer has also assisted us on behalf of the respondents. We are not inclined to interfere with the public interest litigation undertaken by the High Court on the complaint filed by one C.K.Rajan. The public interest litigation concerns the famous Sree Krishna Temple, Guruvayoor. The High Court decided to examine the public interest matter, inter alia, on the following reasoning:
"We are satisfied that in public interest urgent action, on the above aspects, is necessary. It appears that 'all is not well' in the set-up. The administration of a well-known institution should not be under any cloud and it is in the interests of all concerned, that the matter is enquired into, and if found necessary, remedial action is taken."
2.  We see no ground to interfere at this stage with the High Court proceedings. We dismiss this application for grant of permission to file the special leave petition. Keeping in view the importance of the religious institution and also in the interest of justice, we commend the following guidelines for the consideration of the High Court:
"(i) It is not disputed that the management of the Guruvayoor Temple is governed by the Guruvayoor Devaswom Act,1978. There may be other State legislations governing the functioning of religious institutions in the State. The High Court shall take into consideration the relevant provisions of these enactments.
(ii) The Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee and the State of Kerala are necessary parties in this public interest litigation. The High Court shall take into consideration the objections, including of preliminary nature raised/to be raised by these parties.
(iii) The appointment, tenure of office and other conditions of service of the Administrator and other officers connected with the Guruvayoor Temple, as are provided by law shall be kept in view while passing any orders concerning these officers."
The High Court is requested to conclude the proceedings expeditiously and if possible, within six months from today.
Order accordingly.
