Malkiat Singh Alias Mita v State of Punjab
Supreme Court of India

27 July 1993
Cr.A. No. 192 of 1992
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  One Malkiat Singh alias Mita is the appellant. He, along with 21 others were charge-sheeted for committing offence punishable under S. 148, 302/149, 307/149, Penal Code.
2.  The case relates to an occurrence which took place at Jullundur outside the Court of the Executive Magistrate at 11.50 a.m. on 21-10-75. In that occurrence six persons lost their lives, in addition, six persons also received injuries. Out of the 22 persons charge-sheeted, only 16 were put up for trial. Two of them died and the rest were absconding. The trial Court acquitted four of them and convicted twelve and two of the accused-appellant as well as one Surinder Singh were sentenced to death. The cases filed by the appellant as well as by the other accused were heard by the High Court. The High Court acquitted 10 out of 12 convicted persons and reduced the death sentence to one of life imprisonment. The two convicted accused, viz, the appellant before us and Surinder Singh filed separate appeals. Since Surinder died during the pendency of the appeal, his appeal stands abated. Thus, we are left with the present appeal.
3.  It is submitted that subsequently two of the absconding accused were put up for trial and they were also acquitted. It can, thus, be seen that out of 22 charge-sheeted, the only one that remains, is the convicted appellant before us. Admittedly, the case of the appellant rests on the evidence of P.Ws. 2 and 3. It is also submitted that the evidence of P.W. 3 which was material value in the present case died subsequently and his deposition was marked and treated as evidence in the subsequent trial against the two absconding accused and that evidence also not relied upon. We are only mentioning this as a subsequent happening. The High Court while considering the case gave a finding in the first instance that the F.I.R. in the case was a doubtful document and it loses much of corroboration. So far as the two appellants are concerned, the High Court held that the evidence of P.W. 3 - an injured witness, can be relied upon as the same was corroborated by the evidence of Charan Singh (P.W. 8). It can thus be seen for the purpose of this appeal that we are concerned with the evidence of P.Ws. 3 and 8?
4.  P.W. 3 was the brother of one of the deceased Harbhajan Singh and brother-in-law of another deceased Roshan Singh. He deposed about the previous occurrence which took place between the tow parties. This part of his evidence was that there was a bitter enmity between the two factions. Then, coming to the occurrence, the witness stated that the firing started at 10.45 a.m. Harbhajan Singh at that time sitting on a bench and he (P.W. 3) and others were sitting on the ground nearby. The constable was also nearby holding Bhajan Singh in hand-cuffs. He further deposed that the accused came and raised a lulkara. Out of the five accused, he identified these five and among the five, he mentioned the names of the appellant and Surinder Singh, in particular, who subsequently died. In a general way, the witness stated that all the five started firing. He also added that all the five persons went on the G.T. Road from the southern side of Amrit Bhaba and got into a green colour car, driven by a driver. P.W. 5 also deposed that as long as he remained on that spot, no officer or any police official came to the spot. In the cross-examination he has admitted that a number of incidents took place between the two factions.
5. Thereafter, he was cross-examined with reference to his earlier statements and a number of contradictions have been marked. He did not state before the police that the applicant and the two others jumped over the dilapidated wall and came near the other accused. Likewise, he did not state in his earlier statement that he, along with P.W. 5 went to civil hospital. However, he was further cross-examined and several discrepancies were pointed out. We may mention at this stage that P.W. 8 ultimately remained as the sole witness on whose evidence we have to rely upon to confirm the conviction. It may also be mentioned that the other version given by the witness in the F.I.R. has not been acted upon by the Courts below. That apart, there was a clear enormous delay in giving the F.I.R. Thus, there are many infirmities and we are not satisfied with the evidence of P.W. 5 and the only evidence of P.W. 8 which is also not conclusive. In the circumstances, we are constrained to allow this appeal.
6.  Therefore, the conviction and sentence awarded against the appellant are set aside and he is acquitted of all the charges. If the appellant is on bail, he need not surrender. The appeal is, therefore, allowed.
Appeal allowed.
