Ram Bilas and Another v Jagat Narain Shrivastava (Dead) By Lrs
Supreme Court of India

25 February 1993
C.A. Nos. 1263 and 1264 of 1976
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. This appeal is preferred against the judgment of the Madras High Court answering the question referred to it, at the instance of the Revenue, against the Revenue. The question referred is :
"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in law in holding that the assessee's share in the partnership firm of M/s Erode Service constituted a separate and individual property and not the property of the joint family consisting of himself and his five sons?"
2. One Angappa Mudaliar had five sons including the assessee. There was a complete partition among Angappa Mudaliar and his five sons in the year 1943. The said partition was also accepted and recorded by the Income Tax Department under Section 25-A of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922. Angappa Mudaliar died on January 25, 1962 leaving behind him certain assets. The question is whether the share obtained by the assessee in his father's assets in his separate property? The High Court has answered it saying that it is governed by Section 8 of Hindu Succession Act and therefore the said share is his separate property. This question has since been concluded by the decision of this Court in CWT v. Chander Sen (1986) 3 SCC 567: 1986 SCC (Tax) 641: (1986) 161 ITR 370 1986 Indlaw SC 172 which has also been followed in CIT v. P.L Karuppan Chettiar 1993 Supp (1) SCC 580: (1992) 197 ITR 646 1992 Indlaw SC 705. It is held that in such circumstances the share obtained by the son is governed by Section 8 of Hindu Succession Act and therefore his separate property. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
3. These appeals by special leave are against the judgment of the High Court dated March 19, 1974 in Second Appeal No. 370 of 1971 and the order dated March 18, 1976, rejecting the review application against the main order. The High Court allowed the defendant's second appeal by the main order, after the defendant had failed in the trial court as well as in the first appellate court.
4. The suit property is a house in Faizabad. The defendant-respondent, now substituted by his LRs, was a tenant in the suit house when the house was purchased by the appellants on February 8, 1968 for a sum of Rs 3750, the sale deed being executed by Smt Chinta Devi, wife of Ram Shanker Lal, and their children, Lava Shanker and Smt Shail Bala. The house belonged originally to Ramjas Lai, father of Ram Shanker Lai who died in 1944. The whereabouts of Ram Shanker Lai were unknown and he was not heard by even his wife and children for a long time prior to execution of the sale deed in appellant's favour on February 8, 1968. The exact date from which Ram Shanker Lai was not heard of or seen by any of his close relations is not clear.
However, in the sale deed itself, it was mentioned by his wife and children that the said Ram Shanker Lai had not been heard of or seen by any one of them for more than seven years prior to the date of execution of that sale deed. It may also be mentioned that the statement of the defendant, Jagat Narain, forming part of the record, made before the Nazul Officer, Faizabad on July 8, 1958 contains his admission that his maternal uncle Ramjas Lai had died 15 years earlier and the whereabouts of his son, Ram Shanker Lai were not known from the lifetime of his father, and that Ram Shanker Lai had most probably died. This would indicate that even according to the defendant's statement recorded in the year 1958, Ram Shanker Lai was presumed to have been dead at that time.
5. The appellant after purchasing the suit house in the above manner instituted a suit for ejectment of the defendant-respondent also claiming therein arrears of rent in view of the fact that the defendant had admittedly not paid any rent to him. The defendant contested the suit on a vague plea. The defendant contended that a loan of Rs 1500 was taken by Ramjas Lai from him which he did not repay and after the death of Ramjas Lai, his son Ram Shanker Lai had agreed that in lieu of the loan the defendant could obtain a sale deed. The defendant further pleaded that to honour that statement, the defendant was also given possession. It is sufficient to say that the pleading of the defendant did not amount to setting up acquisition of title by him in any manner prescribed by law.
6. The trial court decreed the suit and the defendant's first appeal was dismissed.
Thereafter, the second appeal by the defendant has been allowed by the High Court giving rise to the present appeals. The High Court has noticed the fact that even though the precise date of death of Ram Shanker Lal was not proved, yet the fact that he was not seen or heard of since 1944 was conceded by the defendant.
However, after noticing this fact, the High Court proceeded to say that "Ram Shanker Lal can be presumed to be dead. There can be no presumption that Ram Shanker Lal did on February 7, 1968, with the result that his heirs and vendors could transfer valid title to the petitioner". It is difficult to appreciate much less accept this conclusion of the High Court which has been treated as an essential condition to uphold the validity of the sate made by the wife and children of Ram Shanker Lal in favour of the appellant. All that was necessary to be seen was whether Ram Shanker Lal was alive on the date of execution of the sale deed in 1968 so that in the absence of his joining in execution of the sale deed, the sale deed could be treated as ineffective to transfer his share in the ancestral property. From the conclusion reached by the High Court itself, Ram Shanker Lal had to be presumed to have died much prior to the execution of the sale deed in 1968 since it was conceded that he was neither seen nor heard of since 1944 even by his wife or his children. This being so, the only persons who were required to execute the sale deed for effecting a valid transfer of the property in favour of the appellant on February 8, 1968 when the sale deed was executed in the appellant's favour were the wife, son and daughter of Ram Shanker Lal, who admittedly have executed the sale deed in appellant's favour under which the appellant claims title. There was thus no ground available in the second appeal, for the High Court to set aside the decree passed in the plaintiff's favour.
7. Consequently, Civil Appeal No. 1263 of 1976 is allowed and the impugned judgment dated March 19, 1974 by which Second Appeal No. 370 of 1971 was allowed is set aside resulting in restoration of the decree passed in plaintiff's favour by the trial court as affirmed in first appeal.
In view of this result, the order of the High Court dismissing the review petition is ineffective and the Civil Appeal No. 1264 of 1976 is, therefore, allowed on this basis. The appellant will get the cost throughout from the respondent.
Appeal allowed.
