T. V. Eachara Warrier v T. O. Kunchiraman Nambiar and Others
Supreme Court of India

27 July 1993
Cr.A. Nos. 490, 490-A and 490-E of 1983 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 19 November 1981 of the Madras High Court in Cr. A. Nos. 713, 758 and 778 of 1978)
The Judgment was delivered by: K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J.
1.  All these appeals are connected and arise out of the judgment of a Division Bench of the Madras High Court. The appellant was the father of one Rajan who is alleged to have been murdered. The case was originally on the file of Sessions Judge, Kozhikode, Kerala State but on account of furor raised by the public against the accused and political overtones given to the case, the Supreme Court in order to ensure a fair trial, transferred the case to the file of Sessions Judge, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu State. Seven persons were arrayed as accused in the trial and the learned Sessions Judge acquitted accused 1, 2, 4 and 7 and convicted accused 3, 5 and 6 under Sections 348/34, 330/109 and 201 IPC sentenced each of them of undergo RI for six months, one year and four months respectively. The sentences were directed to run concurrently. The three convicted accused filed three separate appeals and the State filed an appeal challenging the acquittal of all the seven accused of the major charges and it also filed another appeal for enhancement of the sentence awarded to accused 3, 5 and 6. The Division Bench dismissed the appeals filed by the State and allowed the appeals filed by the three convicted accused.
2.   Aggrieved by the same, the appellant has filed these appeals challenging the acquittal of accused 3, 5 and 6 in respect of the offences for which they were convicted by the trial court. Neither the State of Kerala nor the State of Tamil Nadu has filed any appeal challenging the judgment of the High Court. Consequently there are only three respondents namely accused 3, 5 and 6 before us and the question is whether their convictions as ordered by the trial court should be restored
3.  The gravamen of the case was that all the seven accused persons, who were police officials, entered into a criminal conspiracy to investigate, by illegal means, a case relating to the attack on Kayanna Police Station by Naxalites in the early hours of February 28, 1976 which was registered as a crime and in pursuance of the said conspiracy wrongfully arrested among others, the deceased Rajan and PW 1 and took them to a torture camp at Kakkayam and wrongfully confined them and tortured them. Unfortunately it is alleged that Rajan died and the accused persons caused the disappearance of his dead body in order to conceal the evidence of murder and screen themselves from punishment for their wrongful acts.
4.   The charges were framed against the accused under Sections 348, 331, 326, 302, 201, 120-B and 109 IPC but as already stated, the learned Sessions Judge convicted only accused 3, 5 and 6 and acquitted the others
5.  It may be mentioned at this stage that the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court of Kerala seeking a writ of habeas corpus causing the production of his son. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and other concerned officers, who figured as respondents, filed counter-affidavits and set up a plea that Rajan had not been taken into custody. The High Court, however, taking the view that Rajan had been taken into custody, directed the respondents to produce him in the court.
6.   Thereupon the Inspector General of Police directed that a case be registered against some of the accused persons and in that backdrop of events the case came to be investigated by a special team of officers headed by a Deputy Inspector General of Police, PW 59 and others and ultimately the charge-sheet was laid against the seven accused. To prove its case, the prosecution examined PWs 1 to 59 and filed several documents.
The sum and substance of evidence is as under:
7.   There is a Regional Engineering College at Chathamangalam, about 30 Kilometers away from Kozhikode. PW 11 was the Principal of the College and PWs 10, 13 and three others were Lecturers. Among the students studying in the College were Rajan, the deceased, son of PW 52 the appellant, PWs 1, 5, 8, 9 and 14. It is alleged that Kozhikode and its neighbouring areas including Chathamangalam were infested with a large number of Naxalites who believed in terrorist who believed in terrorist activities. As part of their activities, they made an attack on the police station at Kayanna on February 28, 1976 at about 3.30 a. m. as result of which some policemen received injuries and firearms were stolen. Superior Police Officers were contacted and in order to trace the suspected culprits and to recover the weapons, police personnel were sent to all the nearby places on search duty. It is alleged that an investigation camp was set up at Kakkayam because of privacy and seclusion. The further case is that the deceased was arrested on February 29, 1976 along with PW 1 and they were taken to the camp and both of them were tortured by applying third-degree methods. The victims were made to sit in a room and their hands were thrown behind their heads and were tied and they were caned and pestle was rolled on the thighs of the victims with great pressure.
8.   According to the prosecution while this was being done, the first accused used to stand in the torture room and accused 2 to 4 used to periodically make their appearance in the torture room. Because of this torture Rajan is alleged to have died and thereafter his body was not traced and according to the prosecution, these accused caused the disappearance of the same. The first question considered by the High Court was whether Rajan and PW 1 were arrested as alleged. On this aspect the prosecution mainly relied on the evidence of PW 1, 5, 6, 8 and 25. The evidence of each of these witnesses has been considered in detail and is found to be highly discrepant, contradictory and unsatisfactory
9.  PW 25 claims to have stayed in the Engineering College and that he was unemployed and became friendly with Rajan and PW 1. According to him he went with a party of students to Faroke and returned on the night of February 29, 1976 from Faroke to Chathamangalam. Thereafter he and Rajan proceeded towards the lodge and en route they saw a van. Then it so happened that the police officials accompanied with a person handcuffed came and a college student who was there pointed towards Rajan and he was taken into custody. PW 6 was a sweeper. He deposed that he saw a police van parked near the State Bank and inside the van, he found Rajan and another person sitting. PW 8, who is a student of the Engineering College has also gone to Faroke along with Rajan and other students of the party.
10.   He mainly speaks about the presence of PW 25 and Rajan going along with him. Then we have the evidence of PW 1 who has given a lengthy version. He deposed that when he returned to his room in the morning of March 1, 1976 he found police officials in that room and he was taken into custody and they also enquired about Rajan and he was also taken into custody and they also enquired about Rajan and he was also taken into custody.
11.  The High Court has rightly pointed out that PW 25 could not have been a friend of Rajan because he was neither a student nor in any way connected with him. His credentials were rightly doubted. Now coming to the evidence of PWs 5 and 8, the High Court has pointed out a number of discrepancies. So far as the evidence of PW 1 is concerned, the High Court has rightly pointed out that his evidence is at variance with that of PW 9 to whose room he is said to have gone before the arrest. The court examined CW 1 who was working as a watchman in the engineering college to speak about the arrest. The High Court has considered many admissions made by him and rightly pointed out that even as regards taking into custody of PW 1, there are several versions and they are mutually destructive.
12.  Likewise, the High Court has also considered the evidence of other witness in detail and has confirmed the findings of the trial court in many respects.
However, in the instant case, we are concerned only with the acquittal of accused 3, 5 and 6. The learned trial Judge having rejected the prosecution case to a large extent, however convicted these three accused on the selfsame evidence. The infirmities in their evidence equally enure to the benefit of these three accused also. The trial court convicted these three accused for the minor offences mainly on the ground that they were incharge of the investigation and the torture must have been done to their knowledge and that the arrest and wrongful confinement of Rajan and PW 1 must have been known to them. In that view of the matter the trial court convicted them for those minor offences. But the High Court has rightly help that their convictions cannot be sustained.
13.   We can understand the feelings of the appellant at the disappearance of his son and the same causes distress to us also. But unfortunately the prosecution has not proved its case beyond all reasonable doubt by adequate and credible evidence. It is true that the three than on the basis of that circumstance alone in the absence of reliable evidence connecting them with the minor offences for which they were convicted by the trial court, the said convictions and sentences cannot be sustained. At any rate in these appeals before us we cannot interfere with the concurrent findings regarding the credibility of many of the material witnesses.
14.  The evidence regarding culpability of these three respondents has also been found highly unsatisfactory by the High Court after a detailed discussion and after giving cogent and convincing reasons. We see no grounds to take a different view. Consequently all the appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.
