Manorma Verma Smt v State of Bihar and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 January 1993
C.A. No. 197 of 1993 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 18077 of 1991)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
Special Leave granted.
1.  We have beard counsel for the parties. The High Court came to the conclusion that the termination of service of the appellant was illegal and unsustainable. An attempt was made by Mr B. B. Singh, learned counsel for the State of Bihar to satisfy us that the initial appointment of the appellant was invalid and illegal and, therefore, she was not entitled to the benefit of back wages. We find from the order of the High Court against which the State has not appealed that the High Court came to the conclusion that,
"nothing has been brought on the record nor argued that the petitioner's appointment as house-keeper was illegal or made by an authority who had no jurisdiction to make the appointment."
2.   On the other hand High Court noted that her appointment was made against a sanctioned post. Mr. B. B. Singh submitted that this conclusion of the High Court was on account of the State Government having not filed a counter to the petition filed by the appellant. Even if that contention is valid, the point is concluded by the High Court unless reversed in appeal. This Court cannot permit counsel to urge the point across the bar by referring to the files.
3.  We do not see any justification for the High Court not allowing the appellant back wages after it came to the conclusion that the termination was illegal. Ordinarily, the consequential order of grant of back wages must follow, unless there are reasons on record which would justify a departure from the normal order. We do not see any reasons on record to come to the conclusion that the appellant was not entitled to back wages. There is also nothing on record to show that during the period she was out of service, she was gainfully employed elsewhere.
4.   In the circumstances we allow this appeal and set aside that part of the High Court's order by which the appellant was denied back wages and award her back wages from the date of termination of service till she was reinstated in service under the impugned order of the High Court. The appellant will be paid her back wages within three months from today. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
