Uttam Kumar v U. P. Higher Education Service Commission, Allahabad and Others
Supreme Court of India

4 August 1993
C.A. No. 4895 of 1989
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant joined service as a Lecturer with the College - Respondent 3 on 8-11-1979. Initially he was appointed on ad hoc basis but later on he was placed on probation. He was confirmed as a Lecturer by the College by order dated 15-12-1982. Meanwhile the State Legislature promulgated the U. P. Higher Education Service Commission Act, 1982 (the Act). The State Government refused to grant approval regarding the appointment of the appellant.
2. Learned counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh has contended that since there was no clear vacancy available in the College, the Management was not justified in appointing the appellant. He further states that the appointment was without prior approval of the State Government and as such was violative of the Act.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the appellant continued to work as a Lecturer in the service of the College from the year 1979. According to him having put in about 15 years of service it would be wholly arbitrary for the respondents to throw the appellant out of service at this stage of his career. Learned counsel for the State is not in a position to deny that the appellant is working for the last about 15 years. We are satisfied from the material on the record that the appellant is in fact working as Lecturer in the service of the College since 8-11-1979. It would be a travesty of justice if we dismiss the appeal and throw the appellant out of service after he has served for about 15 years.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, we direct the respondents to treat the appellant in regular service of the College - Respondent 3 and he be treated as a confirmed employee. We further direct the State Government to grant approval to the appointment of the appellant as a regular employee of the College from the date when he completed his probation period. The appellant shall be entitled to all the arrears of his pay, if not already paid. We set aside the order of the High Court and allow the appeal in the above terms. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
