A. K. Dass Gupta v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

3 November 1993
Cr.A. No. 176 of 1986
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Appellant has been found guilty under the provisions of Sections 18-A read with Sections 26, 18-C read with Section 27(a)(ii) and Rules 65(17) and 65(18) of the Drugs and fine of Rs.5000/- in default to undergo RI for six months. The appeal preferred by him was dismissed by the Sessions Court and a further revision was also dismissed by the High Court.
2.  The appellant had not licence for selling or distributing the allopathic medicines under the Act. On September 5, 1979, PW 1, the Drugs INspector followed by PW 2, another Drugs Inspector and PW 3, a Deputy State Drugs Controller visited the premises of the appellant. They found the appellant giving medicines to some of the patients who were sitting the medicines. The Officers disclosed their identity and made a search and they recorded some items of medicines (Ex.P-2) and some other items (Ex.P-3) and the list was prepared under prescribed Form 16.
3.   A complainant was lodged thereafter. The accused denied the offence and stated that the case was foisted on him. PWs 1 to 3 deposed that they found number of medicines in the almirah and in respect of some items, the date has expired and after seizure of the medicines, copies of the seizure and they reports were sent to the Judicial Magistrate. The evidence of all the three witnesses has been believed by all the courts below.
4.  Learned counsel for the appellant submits that what was seized was only some quantity and from such seizure alone it cannot be inferred that the appellant was selling the medicines or they were meant for sale and, therefore the ingredients of the penal sections are not attracted. We see no force in this submission. The two seizure lists themselves go to show that there were different kinds of allopathic drugs in his possession and without having any licence and as rightly held by the courts below, they were not meant for personal use particularly in view of the fact that number of patients were also sitting at the time of premises being searched.
5.   This evidence proves beyond all reasonable doubts that the appellant was not only practising as medical practitioner without any registration but also distributing the medicines without having any licence. Therefore, all the ingredients of the penal sections are made out.
6.  Shri.Mahabir Singh, learned counsel for the appellant submits that the medicines seized are of small quantity and because of this conviction, the appellant cannot earn his livelihood. Therefore, for the said reasons, the sentence should be reduced. Having regard to the fact that the offence is said to have been committed in 1979, and also the fact that the medicines seized were of small quantity, we think that ends of justice would be met if the sentence is reduced to four months RI. If the appellant has not served out the sentence of four months, he shall surrender and serve out the remaining part of his sentence. The sentence of fine with default clause is, however, confirmed.
Subject to this modification of sentence, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
