Gore Lal Shakya v Maharaj Singh Yadav and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 August 1993
C.A. No. 5952 of 1990
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. This appeal under Section 116-A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (for short 'the Act') is against the order dated 10-8-1990 passed by the High Court of Allahabad in Civil Miscellaneous Application No. Nil of 1990 in Election Petition No. 17 of 1990.
2. The brief facts which have given rise of this appeal are thus:
3. The general election in respect of 306 Bardana U.P. Assembly Constituency was held in 1989. The appellant herein was a candidate of the Indian National Congress opposed by the first respondent who was a candidate from Janata Dal. There were in all 11 contesting candidates including the appellant. Respondent 1 was declared elected. The election of the first respondent was challenged by the appellant under Sections 80-A and 81 of the Act on various grounds, praying to set aside the election of Respondent 1 and also to declare that he be declared elected from that constituency. All the contesting candidates were made parties to that petition.
The first respondent filed an application praying inter alia for dismissal of the election petition on account of non-compliance of the mandatory provisions of S. 82 of the Act and the rules framed thereunder. The main ground taken in that application in paragraph 12 reads as follows:
"That the petition is also liable to be thrown out on the ground that Respondent 10 who has been shown as Sanjay Kumar, which is wrong. In fact, the real and correct name of Respondent 10 is Sanjeev Kumar and as such there is no proper service on account of wrong description of the name of Respondent 10."
4. The High Court went into that question and passed the following order:
"The petition being liable to be dismissed on the ground of non-joining of Shri Sanjiv Kumar, a contesting candidate as a respondent there is no need to go into the other objection as raised by Respondent 1 in the Miscellaneous Application dated 16-4-1990 nor the remaining objection has been urged before me by Shri Tripathi. Therefore, I do not consider it necessary to dilate upon thatFor the reasons, the application is partly allowed on one of the contentions as contained in paragraph 12 of the application and the petition is dismissed under sub-s. (1) of S. 86 for non-compliance with the provisions of cl. (a) of S. 82 of the Act, 1951 ...."
5. Now this order is impugned before us. The only question that arises for our consideration in the present appeal is whether the High Court was correct and justified in dismissing the election petition for the alleged non-compliance of the provisions of cl. (a) of S. 82 of the Act in that the name of Respondent 10 has not been correctly shown.
The learned counsel for the appellant, Ms Sandhya Goswamy, contended that there was no mistake in mentioning the name of Respondent 10 and that in fact the reading of entire election petition discloses that the name of the 10th respondent has been correctly mentioned and that a small typographical mistake committed in the spelling of the name only in the portion of the array of parties is very insignificant and that typographical mistake does not warrant invocation of S. 81. It was brought to our notice that the order of the High Court made on 14-3-1990 which reads:
"Notice sent by post has been served on Respondents 3 and 10 ...."
clearly indicates that S. 82 has been materially complied with.
6. It is seen from the appeal records that the appellant filed an application dated 19-7-1990 seeking an amendment or correction of the alias name of the 10th respondent as Sanjiv Kumar. In that application the following averments are made.
"In the petition correct spelling of the name of Respondent 10 is written Sanjiv Kumar ..."
In paragraph 5 of the said petition it is stated" That in the body of the petition at one place name of Respondent 10 is given as Sanjiv Kumar in Hindi vide Annexure 4-A page 148 and at the other place his name is given as Sanjiv Kumar in English vide page No. 5 of the petition and his alias name is given on page No. 2 as Sanjai Kumar with his correct postal address."
Again in paragraph 7 of the said petition it is stated:
That on page No. 2 of the petition name of Respondent 10 ought to have been typed by the spelling of Sanjiv Kumar but in dictation typist has typed his alias name with the spelling of Sanjai Kumar and this mistake occurred due to pronunciation of his name. Mistake is clerical and in typing."
7. Nothing has been brought to our notice as to whether any counter-affidavit has been filed before the High Court refuting the statement made in the application filed by the appellant stating that the name of 10th respondent is correctly mentioned in the body of the petition Sanjiv Kumar; but by typographical mistake the spelling of the name of Sanjiv Kumar has been mentioned as Sanjai Kumar. The High Court has made much about nothing and also made a mountain out of a mole hill.
It is very surprising that the first respondent himself has committed the same typographical mistake in his application taken up before the High Court seeking dismissal of the election petition mentioning the name of "Sanjiv Kumar" at one place as "Sanjai Kumar" and when counsel for the respondent was confronted with this mistake in his application, he states that it is a typographical mistake. In our considered opinion nothing can adversely be inferred against the appellant since it is now demonstrably shown that the mistake is committed only in the array of parties that too by a typographical error.
8. Learned counsel for Respondent 1 in support of his submission that the averments in the election petition should be in strict compliance of S. 86(1) of the Act, relied upon the decision in Rajendra Singh v. Usha Rani  1984 Indlaw SC 1141984 Indlaw SC 114. But in the same decision the learned Judges have observed :
"The mandate contained in S. 81(3) enjoins that there should be no difference of any kind whatsoever barring some typographical or insignificant omissions between the petitions filed and the copy served on the respondent."
9. In the present case we are of the firm view that the mentioning of the name of the 10th respondent as "Sanjai Kumar" in the array of parties is nothing but only a typographical error which is insignificant. Under these circumstances we are unable to agree with the High Court that this typographical error has invalidated the election petition under S. 86(1) of the Act.
10. For the above reasons we allow the appeal by setting aside the judgment of the High Court and dismissing the application filed under S. 86 of the Act by Respondent 1 with costs. Cost is quantified at Rs 500.
Appeal allowed.
