Krishnabai and Others v Raghunath Nemichand Nagar, and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 October 1993
C.A. No. 2939 of 1980
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The controversy in this appeal needs to be dealt with in the backdrop of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948. The established fact situation is that the appellant was a tenant over certain lands which on the appointed day, i.e. on April 1, 1957, were in his possession. The statute permitted him to purchase those lands on payment of a concessional price, but he opted not to purchase them. Thereupon, under the compulsion of Section 32-P of the Act he let the landlord resume possession thereof. It is noteworthy that the tenant on his own volition can otherwise also end his tenancy and deliver possession of the tenanted land to his landlord by having recourse to the provisions of Section of 15 of Act. The landlord has also been given the right under Section 31 to terminate tenancy for personal cultivation and obtain possession. In that events he is statutorily bound to personally cultivate the and obtain possession.
2.  In that event he is statutorily bound to personally cultivate the area failing which right has been reserved in favour of the tenant to resume possession. Instantly we have a case in which the tenant by his conduct in not purchasing the area was compelled under the thrust of Section 32-P to let landlord take over possession. Such assumption of possession by the landlord was not and could not be saddled with any obligation to personally cultivate the area for it was not resumption under Section 31. Rather, as go the facts the landlord transferred those lands by way of sale to Respondents 7 and 8.
3.   On this fact alone the tenant claimed that since his landlord had parted possession of the disputed land in favour of others that gave him the right to resume possession in assertion of his tenancy rights. On questioning, all the courts below found that the sale in favour of Respondents 7 and 8 was valid. If the sale was valid and beforehand the landlord had assumed possession under Section 32-P we see no reason to conclude that the holding was burdened with the obligation to accommodate the tenant on his landlord transferring possession thereof by way of sale.
4.  Section 37 employed by the appellant to seek restoration of possession is of no assistance to him because it covers situations of termination of tenancy under Section 31, 33-B or Section 34 of the Act. As is obvious the landlord had got possession of the disputed lands under Section 32-P and not under Section 31. Section 37 on its terms is not applicable to the fact situation. Similarly on this understanding no aid can be sough from the provision of Section 84-C when the transfer has been held to be valid. From whatever angle the case is viewed the contention of the appellant lacks merit. The view taken by the High Court in the facts and circumstances appears to us to be unexceptional. Accordingly finding no merit in the appeal we dismiss the same. No costs.
Appeal Dismissed.
