1.  The appellant Smt. Nirmala Devi, who is the sole accused in the case, has been found guilty under Section 302, R.P.C. of J. and K. and sentenced to imprisonment for life for the offence of committing the murder of her husband by administering poison. The appeal filed by her was dismissed by the High Court. Hence the present appeal.
2.  The appellant was married to the deceased Girdhari Lal about 17 or 18 years prior to the occurrence. For 11 or 12 years they lived together. Later the appellant went to her parental house without the consent of the husband. Thereafter she never returned to the house of the husband. It is alleged that in her parental house she started leading an adulterous life which was resented by the deceased. About 13 or 14 months prior to the occurrence she joined training course of midwifery in a hospital at Jammu and she continued her activities of indulging into immoral acts. About 15 or 16 days before the date of the occurrence, the appellant gave birth to an illegitimate daughter in the Jammu Hospital.
3. After that she went to her parental house in Village Siote only 6 or 7 days before the occurrence. During the wedlock the appellant gave birth to two sons and a daughter and the deceased husband had great affection for those children. When the accused came to her parental house, the deceased went to see his children in the house of his in-laws on June 16, 1975. Only the accused and the children were present in the house.
4.  During that visit the appellant, however, behaved well with her husband and showed great love for him. She prepared pakoras and tea and served the same to the deceased. The deceased after eating the pakoras and drinking the tea left for his house. On the way he felt pain in his abdomen and burning sensation in his throat causing restlessness. He reached the home with great difficulty and rested on the bed. After some time he vomited and he asked his younger brother, P.W. 3 with gestures to bring a paper and a pen and in the note-book given, the deceased could hardly write "one cup two cups tea half Pao Pakora" and became unconscious. His family members took him to the hospital where he expired on the same night. The Medical Officer, Dr. Surendra Singh who treated the deceased, was examined in the committal Court but could not be examined in the Sessions Court as he was transferred. He informed the police as he suspected some foul play. S.I., P.W. 25 took over the investigation. Inquest was held and the post-mortem was conducted and the viscera was sent to the Chemical Examiner. The report of the Chemical Examiner showed that a heavy concentration of arsenic was found in the viscera. A case under S. 302, R.P.C. was registered and thereafter the witnesses were examined.
5. After completion of the investigation, the charge-sheet was laid. When examined under S. 342, Cr.P.C. the appellant admitted that she had been staying in her parental house for the last 4 or 5 years and since he found it difficult to make both ends meet she went to her parental house and she denied having indulged in immoral acts. The rest of the case was denied by her. The prosecution mainly relied on the evidence of P.Ws. 6, 7 and 8 and also on the evidence of P.W. 3, the brother of the deceased who gave the note-book on which the deceased scribbled about two cups of tea and pakoras. The said note-book was marked as Ex. PB. The learned Sessions Judge relying on the evidence of P.Ws. 6, 7 and 8 who spoke about the serving of the tea and pakoras and the immediate movements of the deceased, convicted the accused.
6.  The High Court again has discussed their evidence in great detail and held that these witnesses are independent witnesses and their statements are natural and cogent and accordingly confirmed the conviction.
7.  Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the witnesses were examined at a belated stage nearly after a month or so and that the Courts below erred in relying on Ex. PB namely the writing of the deceased in the note-book and that no report was given immediately when the deceased came to his house and informed his mother about the discomfort in the stomach. His further submission is that the presence of arsenic is not enough to connect the accused with the alleged administration of poison.
8. As noted by both the courts below, P.Ws. 6, 7 and 8 are independent witnesses. P.W. 6 deposed that he was coming from the water mill with a bag full of flour and on the way he met the deceased. He found him to be feeling very uneasy and on being asked, the deceased told him that he had gone to his wife who had come from Jammu and she served tea and pakoras and immediately after taking the tea and pakoras he developed pain in the stomach and that the tea also tasted bitter. P.W. 7 deposed that he knew the deceased and on that day he went around the village to purchase a goat and as he was feeling thirsty went near the water spring. Then on the way he went in front of the house where he saw the accused and the deceased. The deceased enquired him as to where from he came and he saw the accused serving tea along with pakoras to the deceased and after taking the tea the deceased left the house. P.W. 7 also deposed that while taking the tea, the deceased remarked that the tea was tasting bitter. He came to know that the deceased was dead and that he informed the father of the deceased that he has seen on that day the deceased taking tea and eating pakoras in the house of his in-laws. P.W. 8 was also known to the deceased and the accused.
9.  On the day of occurrence he went to Subedar Nanak Chand to have some consultation in connection with the construction of a temple and when he was passing through the village at about 7.40 a.m. he saw the deceased going towards the house of his in-laws. P.W. 8 after finishing his talks with Subedar came back at 9 a.m. and again met the deceased at a distance of 150 yards from his in-laws house. The deceased called him by gestures and told him that he had been to his in-laws house and there his wife namely the accused served tea and pakoras and after taking them, he was feeling burning sensation in his throat and he was also holding his abdomen with his hands and was unable to walk. These three witnesses have been cross-examined at length and nothing significant has been elicited which affects their evidence. Both the Courts below have discussed their evidence in great detail and have given good reasons for accepting their evidence. P.W. 2 is the mother of the deceased. She deposed that on that day the deceased went to his in-laws house and came back at about 11.30 a.m. and immediately after coming he laid himself on the cot and could not speak. She saw the deceased beating his chest and he made gestures to P.W. 3 his brother to give a pen and a paper and he scribbled on the note-book given to him. She also deposed about the adulterous life led by the accused. From their evidence it can be seen that the deceased immediately after eating pakoras and taking tea fell ill. Then we have the evidence of other witnesses to the effect that the deceased was taken to the hospital where he was treated but he died.
10. This evidence establishes that the deceased fell ill immediately after eating pakoras and drinking tea served by the accused. Therefore the prosecution has firmly established that the tea and pakoras served by the accused caused illness. Then we have the evidence of the Doctor who suspected foul play and informed the police and the viscera was sent and the Chemical Examiner found heavy concentration of arsenic in the viscera. Therefore all the connecting links are complete to form a chain which conclusively incriminate the accused.
11.  The criticism that there was delay in registering the case in these circumstances, is not at all material. It was only after the Chemical Examiner's report that it was firmly established that the deceased died due to arsenic poison. Consequently if there was any delay in examining the witnesses that is also not material. The question of registration of a case also would not have arisen because nobody could at that stage predict that the illness was due to poisoning. Yet another submission of the learned counsel is that the prosecution has not established as to how the appellant came into possession of arsenic poison. We are of the view that this by itself does not affect the prosecution case when the other evidence is clinching. The accused was earlier working as a nurse and it is quite possible that she could have easily procured the arsenic.
12. Learned counsel further submitted that the Courts below ought not to have placed any reliance on Ex. PB, the scribbling made by the deceased to come to the conclusion that it was the accused who served the tea and pakoras. We have seen the judgments of both the Courts below. It is only observed that Ex. PB supports the evidence of P.Ws. 6, 7 and 8. Even without Ex. PB their evidence is wholly sufficient to bring home the guilt to the accused. For all these reasons, we see no merits in this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed. The appellant, who is on bail, shall surrender and serve out the sentence.
Appeal dismissed.
