Andhra University Through Its Registrar v M. Sivaram and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 August 1993
C.A. No. 3971 of 1993 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 6431 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The respondents were serving the Institute of Coastal and Offshore Research (INCOR) in different capacities. In the year 1989, the INCOR as a department was wound up and all the posts therein were abolished. The respondents sought a writ in the nature of mandamus from the Andhra Pradesh High Court seeking a direction that INCOR being a part of the Andhra University, the respondents were entitled to be absorbed in the University on equivalent posts.
2.   A learned Single Judge of the High Court rejected the contention of the respondents that INCOR was a unit of the University. The learned Single Judge, however, directed the University to frame a scheme to absorb the respondents in the service of the University in the existing and future vacancies. The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition in the following terms
"To my mind it will neither be just nor proper to draw an inference for the aforesaid material that INCOR was a wing of the University. More so when the petitioners have not filed their appointment letters and their recruitment was not made as contemplated by the statutory provisions of the University. The Syndicate had indicated that it was not accepting any financial liability while approving this. Apparently the petitioners were aware that they were recruited by it otherwise they would have protested at the time of their being appointed as employees of INCOR. The circumstance that the Vice-Chancellor and the University were members of the Board of Government of INCOR along with other persons does not mean that INCOR itself has become a part of the University. I am, therefore, not able to agree with such a contention and the cases cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners refer to a situation among different employees under the same employer. As it is found that the Andhra University is not the employer of the petitioners it is difficult to apply the ratio of the said cases. It is not possible to hold that either the petitioners were employees of the Andhra University or INCOR was a wing of the Andhra University. ... The petitioners are not entitled to be treated as the employees of the University. They have been working in an institution which had been in some association with the University. It will be fair for the University to consider and absorb many employees of the INCOR as are eligible and willing to come in the service of the University in suitable posts and the existing vacancies or the vacancies which may arise at the foreseeable future. I am not suggesting that direct recruitment by University should be totally banned for this purpose. The University may evolve a suitable scheme for screening and employing suitable former staff of INCOR. It is brought to my notice that many of the petitioners have already become age barred in accordance with the existing rules of the University. The University may consider giving suitable relaxation in the matter of age in respect of the former employees of INCOR. By virtue of the interlocutory orders the petitioners have been receiving their salaries which were only in the nature of consolidated amount paid by the INCOR. It will be appropriate if the University takes an early decision about these matters be that the problem of these persons can be resolved to the extent possible. The authorities of the University will take a decision regarding the employees of INCOR within a period of four months from the date of receipt of this order. It is also appropriate that the petitioners are paid their existing salaries up to the end of July 1991 and it is hoped that a decision will be taken before that date."
3.  Pursuant to the directions of the learned Judge, the University framed the scheme called INCOR Judgment Scheme. The scheme came into operation with effect from 1-8-1991. We have been taken through the scheme. We are of the view that the scheme is fair and equitable and has been framed with the objective of absorbing the respondents in the service of the University in due course of time. We also commend the efforts of the University in trying to solve the human problem created by the winding up of the INCOR.
4.  The respondents challenged the judgment of the learned Single Judge by way of appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court. The Division Bench upheld the findings of the learned Single Judge to the effect that INCOR was not the unit of the Andhra University. The Division Bench observed as under
"It cannot be stated that INCOR is the wing of Andhra University and we confirm the finding of the learned Single Judge that the INCOR is not part of Andhra University.
As the INCOR was disbanded, the question of regularisation of service of the petitioners does not arise. When the Institute of the INCOR is a separate entity, the employees of the same cannot claim that they should be paid the same salary that is being paid to their counterparts in Andhra University."
5.  The Division Bench, however, modified the scheme thereby increasing the number of vacancies to be filled by the respondents. The Division Bench further directed that while absorbing the respondents, the communal GO should not be taken into consideration. We are of the view that the Division Bench of the High Court was not justified in modifying the scheme which was prepared under the directions of the learned Single Judge of the High Court, especially so when the Division Bench was agreeing with the findings of the learned Single Judge on the merits of the controversy.
6.  We allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court and restore the judgment of the learned Single Judge. The respondents shall be absorbed in the service of the University in accordance with the scheme framed by the University pursuant to the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
7.  So far as Respondent 32 is concerned, the Division Bench of the High Court observed as under
"The second appellant worked as Director, INCOR. He is not qualified for the post of Director or Professor in Andhra University. Hence the question of absorption of the 2nd appellant does not arise."
8.  The learned counsel appearing for Respondent 32 states that his client be considered for absorption. Respondent 32 can only be considered in accordance with the scheme which we have upheld. We have no doubt that Respondent 32 shall be considered for any lower post for which he is qualified and eligible in accordance with the scheme.
The appeal is allowed in the above terms. No costs
Appeal allowed.
