Gramophone Company of India Limited v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

15 September 1993
C.A. No. 1940 of 1975 with W.P. (C) No. 584 of 1974
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Civil Appeal No. 1940 of 1975
1.  This appeal is preferred against the judgment of the Government of India in a revision under Section 129 of the Customs Act, as it then stood. The revision filed by the appellant was dismissed.
2.  The appellant is a manufacturer of gramophone records in India. For the said purpose, it says, it used to import Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) LP Biscuit material. We are herein concerned with nine consignments imported from Yugoslavia between 22-9-1970 to 23-10-1971, the total CIF value whereof exceeded Rs 13 lakhs. The Customs authorities treated the said imported goods as modified resins and levied customs duty at the rate of 100% under Item 82(3) of the Indian Customs Tariff. The authorities also levied countervailing duty under Entry 15(1)(a)(ii) of the Central Excise Tariff. The countervailing duty levied upon the appellant was in a sum of Rs 94, 274.35. The appellant's case was that the material imported by him was not modified resins but pure resins. He submitted that inasmuch as the said goods were imported from Yugoslavia, he is entitled to 50% rebate in the customs duty under the Exemption Notification No. 69 dated 15-6-1968.
3.  By Notification No. 69 dated 15-6-1968, the Government of India exempted resins imported from UAR or Yugoslavia from 50% of the duty payable. Resins were dutiable under Item 82(3) of the Indian Customs Tariff, which read as follows at the relevant time:
"(a) Artificial or synthetic resins and plastic 100% ad valorem materials in any form whether solid, liquid or pasty or as powder granules or flakes or in the form of moulding powders.
(b) Articles made of plastics, the following 100% ad valorem"
4.  According to then Revenue, the material imported by the appellant was modified resins and not resins falling under Item 82(3). The said view has been affirmed in revision.
5.  Shri Dholakia, learned counsel for the appellant, did not question the finding of the authorities under the Act regarding the nature of the goods imported. His arguments is this : if the goods imported by him is not resins but modified resins, the levy of countervailing duty under Entry/Item 15-A is impermissible. He refers to and relies upon Public Notice No. 85 dated 20-3-1972, which reads thus:
"'Polyvinyl Chloride' assessment of additional (countervailing duty) under Item 15-A(1)(ii) of CET classification regarding. It is notified for information of the trade and all other concerned that the Board has observed after consultation with the Ministry of Law that 'Polyvinyl Chloride' falling under Item 15-A(1)(ii) of CET would continue to refer only to 'PVC resins' in their pure and straight form and that modified forms of PVC resins not being covered by Item 15-A(1)(ii) of CET, will not be liable to pay additional (countervailing) duty equal to that specified under the subject sub-item."
6.  Shri Dholakia says that in terms of the said public notice, additional duty is not leviable on modified resins. He says that it is not open to the Government to deny the benefits of the said public notice and thus levy both the customs duty as well as the countervailing duty. The learned counsel submits that he raised this submission even before the appellate authority and the Government but that they erroneously refused to permit him to raise the said question.
7.  We are not satisfied that the Government or the appellate authority exercised their discretion arbitrarily in refusing to permit the appellant to raise the said alternative ground relating to countervailing duty. The appellant's case before the first authority was that the material imported by him is resins and that he is entitled to the benefit of the Notification No. 69 aforesaid. He raised no other contention before the first authority. Indeed, the public notice relied upon by the appellant was issued only in March 1972 whereas the import in question took place during the period September 1970 and October 1971. We cannot say, in these circumstances that the appellate authority and the Government exercised their discretion in an arbitrary or unreasonable manner in declining to permit the appellant to raise the said alternate plea based on a public notice issued long after the import in question. We see no error in the order under appeal. The appeal accordingly is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
8. It is, however, made clear that it is open to the appellant to raise the said alternate plea, if he is so advised, before the appropriate authorities in accordance with law.
Writ Petition No. 584 of 1974
9.  It is stated by Shri A. Subba Rao, learned counsel for the Union of India that the appellant has also filed a writ petition (being Writ Petition No. 584 of 1974) with respect to this very subject-matter. Shri Dholakia says, he has no information on that score. List Writ Petition No. 584 of 1974 for orders on 21-9-1993.
Order accordingly.
