Urmila Rani Smt v Raj Kishan Gupta
Supreme Court of India

4 August 1993
C.A. No. 3059 of 1982 with CMP No. 30607 of 1982
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is preferred by Smt Urmila Rani, who was the respondent in HMA Case No. 27 of 1980 on the file of the Additional District Judge, Delhi. The respondent herein, namely, Shri Raj Kishan Gupta filed a divorce petition under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
2.  The learned counsel appearing for the appellant drew our attention to Section 27 of the Act which states that the appellant has got a legal right to file an application in any proceeding under the Hindu Marriage Act and accordingly she has done so and, therefore, it is just and proper that the Court gives a verdict on her application in respect of the properties listed in Annexure 'A' to this appeal, which properties she claims to be as stridhan.
3.  Mr Harish N. Salve, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, states that this application had been filed just to prolong the proceedings that too at the end of the trial of the end of the trial of the divorce petition; that section gives only a discretion to the Court to pass any order and that the appellant could have claimed these properties in the civil suit; she had already filed for alimony. None of the parties is in a position to state whether the appellant had made any claim over the properties in the civil suit filed claiming alimony. The judgment impugned herein shows that the civil suit was only in respect of the alimony and not otherwise.
4.  In our opinion, the trial court ought to have entertained the application of the appellant filed under Section 27 of the Act and disposed of the matter along with the divorce petition.
5. It is very unfortunate that the matter is pending before this Court for almost a period of 11 years and the parties also have grown by 11 years by this time since the filing of this appeal.
6.  Under these circumstances, we are inclined to allow this appeal and accordingly allow the appeal and direct the Court below, before which the divorce petition is pending, to take up the application filed by the appellant under Section 27 of the Act and dispose of the same at the time of the passing of the decree in the divorce petition. No costs. CMP No. 30607 of 1982 is allowed.
Appeal allowed.
