Phool Chand and Others v State of Rajasthan
Supreme Court of India

5 October 1993
Cr.A. No. 93 of 1982
The Judgment was delivered by: K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J.
1.  This is regular appeal under S. 379, Cr.P.C. read with S. 2 of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act. The three appellants. Phool Chand, Mool Chand and Narain along with eight others were tried for offences punishable under sections 302/149 and 147 etc. The trial Court acquitted all of them except Narain, the third appellant herein. He was convicted under S. 324 and sentenced to undergo three years' R.I. He preferred an appeal to the High Court and the State and the State also preferred an appeal against all the accused including Narain in respect of their acquittal of the charge of murder. The High Court while confirming the acquittal of eight other, convicted the three appellants herein under S. 302/34, I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to undergo imprisonment for life. Hence the present appeal.
The prosecution case is as follows:
2. In Village Chisan, at a certain time, which was in the 'Muafi' of Baldev Singh, fields of some of the accused persons and of decease Baldev Singh are situated. There was some dispute between Ramlal and the accused on the one hand and the deceased on the other, relating to a piece of land. A few days prior to the present occurrence, the accused party wanted to harvest the crop but the deceased Baldev Singh did not allow them to do so. On 1-12-72 at about 11 a.m. the accused party and the labourers were harvesting the crop in the disputed land. Second deceased Narender Singh son of Baldev Singh arrived with a gun. He asked the accused persons and the labourers not to harvest the crop. Then Narain, one of the appellants herein snatched away the gun from Narender Singh and when he and the other accused persons were taking Narender Singh and his gun to Police Station Sultanpur, it is alleged that near milestone at mile No. 24, Narain and the other accused were waiting for a bus and at the time the fit deceased Baldev Singh, father of Narender Singh, the second deceased came on a motor cycle. Seeing him Narender Singh ran towards him and Narain, who was armed with a gun, shot twice at him. When Baldev Singh intervened, he too was beaten by all he accused. The accused gave indiscriminate beating to both the deceased and indiscriminate beating to both the deceased and they were dragged to a near filed and when they died as a result of the injuries, the accused made good their escape. P.Ws. 2 and 14 saw the incident of the gun being snatched away by Narain.
3. The actual occurrence was witnessed by P.W. 11, the real brother of first deceased Baldev Singh and uncle of the second deceased Narender Singh while going to his fields along with P.W. 13. When the accused went away, P.W. 11 went to the Police Station, Sultanpur, 14 miles away and lodged a report. The case was registered and since S.H.O. was not there, a police constable reached the place where dead bodies were lying nd after holding the inquest the dead bodies were sent for post-mortem. P.W. 15, the Doctor came on the spot and conducted the autopsy. He found a number of injuries on vital organs on the body of the first deceased Baldev Singh and he also found that skull was fractured and brain matter also was lacerated. Similarly on Narender Singh, the second accused he found a number of injuries and also gun-shot injuries. The accused were arrested. On Narain, the same Doctor found three lacerated wounds on the right eyebrow, forehead an frontal bone. At the instance of the accused, various weapons were recovered. The accused were put up of identification parade and some of the witnesses identified them. In their statement under S. 313, Cr.P.C. the accused denied the offence. Narain, however, pleaded that when he was cutting the harvest, the second deceased Narender Singh came with a gun and also shot at him. But he managed to escape and snatched away the gun from him and he went and produced there gun in the police station. He also stated that Baldev Singh struck stone on his head by which he received injuries. This version was not accepted by the courts below.
4.  P.W. 11, the brother of the first deceased who gave the F.I.R. also gave evidence but the courts below were not prepared to place reliance on his evidence. The High Court, however, mainly relied on the evidence of P.W. 6, Bhanwarlal. The High Court after discussing the evidence of P.W. 6 pointed that there are no material infirmities in his statement and that the dead bodies were found in the fields of Khema Lashkari, who was the grand-father of P.W. 6. The High Court also pointed out that his evidence is corroborated by P.Ws. 2 and 14.
5.  We have perused the evidence of P.W. 6 carefully. He deposed that at the time of occurrence he was collection and bundling heaps of harvest and was working along with his father and others. His presence appears to be more natural at the scene of occurrence. He further deposed on hearing the sound of gun-shot, he saw towards that direction and he heard the sound of another gun-shot and saw that the same was fired by Narain at Narender Singh who received gun-shot injury. He also stated that Phool Chand, appellant No. 1, hit Narender Singh with a Gandasi on his head and Mool Chand, appellant No. 2 stuck Baldev Singh with a Barchhi on his head. Thereafter all the accused assaulted the two deceased persons. He was cross-examined at length. Nothing significant has been elicited. The criticism against the evidence of this witness is that he was examined on the third day. As already noted, the occurrence happened on the way and P.W. 6 does not appear to have any association with the deceased nor he has any enmity with the accused. Another criticism levelled against the evidence of this witness is that his name was not mentioned in the First Information Report and that there are contradictions in his statement when compared to the statements of other witnesses. The High Court also did not take into consideration the evidence of other eyewitnesses but so far as P.W. 6 is concerned, the High Court took the view that he must have been present and witnessed the occurrence. The High Court also pointed out that the contradictions in respect of number of injuries and part played by each of the accused are not at all Material, since he witnessed the occurrence from a distance of 200 feet and that in the position he would not have noted all the details as to on which parts of the body, the blows landed. P.W. 6 has clearly stated that these three persons attacked and deceased in the manner as mentioned above and in respect of this attack by the three accused, we do not find any improvements.
6. Further P.Ws. 2 and 14 have also spoken about the presence of these appellants while the gun being snatched by Narain from Narendra Singh, second deceased. To that extent. P.W. 6's evidence also finds corroboration. We agree with the High Court that the view taken by the sessions Court highly unsound in acquitting all the all the accused. So far these three appellants are concerned, the High Court has rightly held that their participation has been consistently spoken to by P.W. 6 and since specific overt acts are attributed to him, they ought not to have been acquitted since medical evidence also corroborates the evidence of P.W. 6. The view taken by the High Court is most reasonable and the appellants have been rightly convicted. There are no merits in this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
