Nagindra Bahadur Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

27 July 1993
Cr.A. No. 126 of 1982
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant has been convicted under section 120-B, IPC and sentenced to three years and six months' R.I. and under S. 109 read with with S. 420, IPC sentenced to three years and six months' R.I. and to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- or default of payment of which to further undergo R.I. for six months and under section 3 of the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) Act, 1966 and under section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with S. 5(2) sentenced to two years and three years' Rigorous imprisonment respectively. Sentences were directed to run concurrently.
2.  The appellant was a Parcel Clerk in the Northern Railway. The prosecution case is that the Telecommunication Engineer, Moradabad, Northern Railway had placed a demand for three steel almirahs. Thereafter supply order with respect to the aforesaid almirahs was placed by the Senior Signal and Telecommunication Engineer with a firm. These three steel almirahs after usual inspection were dispatched to Moradabad. Out of these three steel almirahs, two were directed to be sent to the Telecommunication Engineer, Lucknow and they were dispatched on 28-11-1970. The prosecution story is that on the basis of the forged Railway Receipt these two steel almirahs were got dispatched from Lucknow Northern Railway Station to Badshahnagar Railway Station, from where there were detrained and were illegally taken delivery on the basis of the forged receipts.
3. The case was registered and ultimately the investigation showed that the appellant was responsible on the basis of the materials placed. Charges were framed and several witnesses were examined and both the courts below accepted their evidence.
4.  Learned counsel for the appellant, however, submits that there is some discrepancy regarding the there is some discrepancy regarding the actual number but this has been explained by the courts below. What is more the prosecution has established that the almirahs recovered belong to the Railway and the possession was unlawful. We see no ground to interfere with the convictions.
5.  Now coming to the question of sentence, we think that the ends of justice would be met if the sentences of three years and six months, three years and six months and three years under sections 120-B, IPC, 109 read with 420, IPC and 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act read with S. 5(2) respectively are reduced to two years' rigorous imprisonment under each count. The other sentences are directed to run concurrently. Sentence of fine along with default clause is, however, confirmed. Subject to modification of sentences, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
