Government Of A.P.& Anr. v Y. Sagareswara Rao
Supreme Court of India

5 September 1994
C. A. No. 6865 of 1994 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 13 September 1993 of the Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal in O.A. No. 38256 of 1991) in S.L.P. (C) No. 8966 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Leave granted.
Consequential to the reorganisation of the Panchayat Raj System under the A.P. Mandal Parishads &Zilla Praja Parishads and Zilla Pranalika, Abhivrudhi Mandais Act,1986 (Act No. 31 of 1986) (for short the 'Act') the Governor exercising the powerunder proviso to Art.309 of the Constitution read with Sec. 28 (c) of the Act made theA.P. MandalDevelopment Officer in A.P. PanchayatRaj service (executive branch ) Ad hoc Rules inG.O.Ms. No.3 dated January 3,1989 whereunder Rule 2 prescribed the method of appointment, namely appointment to the post of Mandal Development Officers shall be made by transfer from the categories, namely, Superintendents working in Zilla Praja Parishad offices, Divisional Panchayat officers and Extension officers working in the erstwhile Panchayat Samithies, under G.O.Ms. No.4 dated January 3,1989 Panchayati Raj & Rural Development, a committee offive members was constituted toselectthe candidates by conducting special qualifying tests and prescribed the marks for the written examination and alsoviva voce. Consequently number of persons came to be appointed, alist of which was attached to SLP paper book for Zone III. The list has been mentioned-in the light of the orders issued by the Government in G.O.Ms. No.3 dated January 3,1989 panchayati Raj and Rural Development dated April 30,1989 there in the respondent's seniority was determined.
1. The respondents filed O.A. in the Tribunal contending that his scale of pay as an Veterinary Asstt.Surgeons (Extension officers) was. a gazetted post on par with the Block development officer in the erstwhile Panchayat Samithies. This scale of pay was also the same.He was also in the gazetted cadre and that, therefore, when the block development officers were absorbed and given the previous service the respondents also should have given thesame benefit to him under Rule (for shortthe 'Rules').That contention was found favour with the Tribunal and it allowed the O.A.No. 38356/91 on October 1, 1993, Calling that order in question the present appeal was filed.
It is contended for the Statethat the Extension Officers were subordinate to the Block Development Officer and that, therefore when the recruitment was made in terms of G.OMs. No. dated January 3,1989 and the Committee had assigned the order of seniority on the basis of merit, the respondent cannot be given seniority tagging his previous service and that, therefore, Rule 37(e) has noapplication. Initially the contention appealed but after looking to the orders passed as regards Veterinary Asstt. Surgeons wefind that there is no force in the contention. The respondent admittedly stands on different footing. In GOMs. No. 2/9 Panchayati Raj Department dated June 17, 1972 they made an amendment to the Rule and taken out the asstt. Veterinary Surgeons from the purview of the Extensions Officers. In G.O.Ms. No. 169 Panchayati Raj dated July 3,1973 the posts of Asstt. Veterinary Surgeons had been made Gazetted and consequently they have been taken out from the purview of the administrative control of the Block Development Officers. In consequence the Veterinary AsstSurgeons no longerremained to be subordinate to the Block Development Officer. He had thepay scale at par with the Block Development Officers. Under those circumstances the respondent isentitled to tag his previous service since admittedly the B.D.Os. were given their benefit and the appointment is by transfer though by process of selection, Rule 33(c) of the Rule stands attrActed.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed. The benefit of this order cannot go to the other subordinate Extension Officers who continued to be subordinates to the erstwhile Block Development Officers.
Appeal dismissed
