Renu Verma and Another v Principal, Government Medical College and Another
Supreme Court of India

28 March 1994
S.L.P. (Civil) Nos. 9886-87 of 1993 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 13 May 1993 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in C.W.P. Nos. 4846 and 4844 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The High Court was called upon to interpret Ordinance 13 relating to MBBS examination of the Punjab University, Patiala. The Ordinance was amended on 17-5-1982. The amended Ordinance and the earlier unamended Ordinance are reproduced hereunder:
"EXISTING PROVISIONS AMENDMENT PROPOSED
13. No candidate shall be No candidate shall be promoted promoted to the next higher class to the second professional unless he has passed the first course unless he has passed professional examination. However, the first professional candidates failing in January examination in full in all the examination for the first time subjects may be allowed to attend the next higher class till May next. The concession will not be given to the candidates failing in May or any other examination."
2.  The High Court came to the conclusion that the students who failed to pass all the subjects in the first professional examination, were not entitled to join the second professional course. The High Court further examined the earlier decisions of the Punjab High Court on the interpretation of Ordinance 13. The reasoning of the High Court in the impugned order is as under:
"Such being the situation, there can be no manner of doubt that the petitioners are not entitled to the relief claimed, namely, provisional permission to attend the 2nd professional course without having cleared in full all subjects of the first professional course. Faced with this situation, counsel for the petitioner sought to press in aid the judgment of this Court in Harvinder Singh v. Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot , where a similar prayer had been made and allowed on the reasoning that, no doubt according to the Ordinance 13, 'a candidate cannot be promoted to the second professional course unless he has cleared all the subjects of first professional, however, this does not debar a candidate to be provisionally admitted to the second professional course subject to the clearing all the papers of the first professional course and in case a candidate fails to clear the reappear papers in the supplementary examination, then he may not be allowed to continue studies in the second professional course'. Reference was next made to the judgment of the Division Bench in CWP 8432/92  decided on 27-8-1992, which reads as under."
3.  By the interim order of 19-6-1992, the petitioners were permitted to join classes of the second professional MBBS course. Keeping in view the judgment of this Court in Harvinder Singh v. Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, we direct the respondent University to permit the petitioners to continue attending these classes until the declaration of their result in the reappear papers.
4.   If they are successful in clearing these papers, they shall be deemed to be regular students of the 2nd professional MBBS course. If, on the other hand, they do not clear the reappear papers, they shall not be allowed to continue to attend the classes of this course any further. This writ petition is disposed of in these terms.
5.  It will be seen that the judgment of the Division Bench in Amrik Singh case, is founded upon and follows the earlier judgment of the Single Judge in Harvinder Singh case.
6.  In the context of the factual background as narrated earlier, we are with respect constrained to hold that Harvinder Singh case does not lay down correct law and has thus to be overruled, as also Amrik Singh case,  which was decided on the basis thereof. It is apparent that the recommendations of the Medical Council of India leading to the amendment in Ordinance 13 as also the judgment in Anita Virdi case were not brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Judges. Had this been done, a different ruling would, undoubtedly, have been followed.
7.  We, consequently, hold that unless and until all the subjects of the 1st professional MBBS examination have been cleared, no student is entitled to be promoted or to attend the 2nd professional course even provisionally."
8.  We see no ground to interfere with the reasoning and the conclusions reached by the High Court. Special leave petitions are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.
