Dalpat Raj Bhandari, Advocate v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 March 1994
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 6 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioner-in-person, who is an advocate is not present though the date was fixed in his presence. The petitioner's application dated 29-3-1994 is rejected.
In the petitioner's absence, we have gone through his writ petition.
2.  The constitutional validity of the transfer policy was judicially upheld in S. P. Gupta case (S. P. Gupta v. Union of India, 1981 Indlaw SC 5991981 Indlaw SC 599.
3. In the Judges' case II (Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Assn. v. Union of India, 1993 Indlaw SC 494 it was so held that judicial review in the matter of transfer of Judges was not excluded but the area of justiciability was limited. It is clear from that judgment that it was held with a view to prevent any transferred Judge being exposed to any litigation involving him except when he chose to resort to it himself, in the available limited area of justiciability.
4. The parameters of the area of justiciability in the sphere of judicial review have been clarified further in K. Ashok Reddy v. Government of India 1994 Indlaw SC 3521994 Indlaw SC 352. Three Judges' Bench in Ashok Reddy case 1994 Indlaw SC 3521994 Indlaw SC 352 said;
"We consider it sufficient to observe that the limited area of justiciability in this sphere being clearly declared in the Judges' case-II and also herein while making it clear that no one other than the transferred Judge himself can question the validity of a transfer...."
It was also emphasised in the said judgment:
"It is time that the men at the apex level of the Indian judiciary are permitted to manage the affairs of the judicial family and look after its welfare and interest instead of permitting repeated intrusions by some in the guise of 'public interest' thereby rendering the Judges vulnerable to avoidable controversy involving them. We are constrained to observe that the Allahabad case before us is of that kind."
5.  The present case is another one of the type of the 'Allahabad case' referred to above.
6.  In view of the pronouncements aforementioned, this petition is misconceived and has no merits. It is dismissed as such.
Petition Dismissed.
