State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v Onkar Yadav and Another
Supreme Court of India

7 February 1994
C.A. No. 728 of 1994 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 3929 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
Special leave granted.
1.  Onkar Yadav and Ram Narayan Yadav respondents in the appeal herein, were selected and appointed as Deputy Superintendents of Police in the State of Uttar Pradesh. While they were undergoing training at the Police Training College, Moradabad, their services were terminated on 31-7-1981. The orders of termination were passed during the period of probation without assigning any reason. The respondents challenged the orders of termination by way of a writ petition before the Allahabad High Court. The High Court allowed the petition and set aside the orders of termination.
2.  We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We have been taken through the judgment of the High Court. The High Court, on the basis of the attendant circumstances and admitted facts came to the conclusion that the termination of services of the respondents was as a measure of punishment. Since no opportunity was afforded to the respondents, the High Court set aside the orders of termination. We are of the view that the High Court judgment, on the question of law, is unexceptionable.
3.   We are, however, not inclined to permit the respondents to join the police force after a lapse of about 13 years. The services of the respondents were terminated on 31-7-1981 and as such it would not be in the interest of the disciplined force to permit the respondents to join the police force in a responsible position after such a long time. It is not disputed before us that respondent Onkar Yadav is working as Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies in the State of Uttar Pradesh. Similarly, respondent Ram Narayan Yadav is working as a Sales Tax Officer. Since these respondents are working in responsible positions, they would not suffer any prejudice in their careers.
4.  We, therefore, allow the appeal and direct that the High Court judgment be not implemented in the interest of justice. The appeal is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
