Gopuram Gram Mill Company and Otehrs v State of Andhra Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

23 August 1994
C.A. Nos. 4114-15 of 1982 with Nos. 2953-58 of 1982
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Special leave has been granted in this batch of appeals limited to the question whether Entry 147 of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957 relating to fried or parched gram dal, is valid or not. The said entry prescribes tax at the rate of 5 paise in the rupee for parched and fried Bengal gram or dal other than that obtained from gram or dal that has met tax under the said State Act, whereon tax is prescribed at the rate of 1 paisa in the rupee.
2.  The contention of the appellant was that the provision in the said entry was contrary to the restriction contained in S. 14 read with S. 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. The Andhra Pradesh High Court, in the judgment under appeal, disagreed with the view so taken by a Single Judge of the Madras High Court, finding no discussion in his judgment as to the meaning of the expressions concerned. The judgment under appeal noted that S. 15(d) of the Central Act, while taking care to mention that pulses, whole or separated, with husks or dehusked, should be treated as a single commodity, did not mention fried dal.
3.  The contention of learned counsel for the appellants before us is that gram is gram, parched or fried.
4. S. 14 of the Central Act declares the goods therein mentioned to be goods of special importance in inter-State trade or commerce. Item (vi-a) thereof refers to "pulses, that is to say - (i) gram or gulab gram (Cicerarietinum L.)". S. 15 states that every sales tax law of a State shall, insofar as it imposes or authorises the imposition of a tax on the sale or purchase of declared goods, be subject to the restrictions and conditions therein mentioned, which include, in clause (d), this:
"Each of the pulses referred to in clause (vi-a) of Section 14, whether whole or separate, and whether with or without husk shall be treated as a single commodity for the purposes of levy of tax under that law."
5.  Our attention was invited by learned counsel for the appellants to the judgment of a learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court in S. K. Nataraja Mudaliar and Co. v. State of TN. 1980 Indlaw MAD 42. The learned Single Judge held, on the basis of the dictionary meaning of gram as meaning pulses generally, that the term pulses and gram used in the Central Act must be taken to cover pulses of all kinds and grams of all kinds, for even parched gram or fried gram in common parlance was still known as gram or dal. Reference was also made by counsel to the Division Bench judgment of the Madras High Court in R. Shanmugam Pillai and Co. v. State of TN 1989 Indlaw MAD 88 where the judgment aforementioned was approved but no separate reasoning was given.
6.  Item (vi-a) of S. 14 of the Central Act refers to "pulses, that is to say, ...." and that the expression "that is to say" has been held by this Court in Rajasthan Roller Flour Mills' Assn. v. State of Rajasthan 1993 Indlaw SC 14071993 Indlaw SC 1407 to mean
"to make clear and fix the meaning of what is used as a rule to amplify the meaning and in the context of a single point sales tax they exhaustively enumerate the kind of goods in a given list.
That judgment also holds that the provisions of Ss. 14 and 15 of the Central Act, being restrictions upon the plenary powers of State Legislatures to levy tax on the sale or purchase of goods, must be construed strictly. In other words, the restriction must be limited to the goods expressly mentioned and nothing more must be read into it except what is clearly stated.
Sub-item (i) of item (vi-a) of S. 14 refers to"
7.  Before we close, we may mention that learned counsel for the appellants relied upon this Court's judgment in Telangana Steel Industries v. State of A.P. 1994 Indlaw SC 21061994 Indlaw SC 2106, but we find it to be of no assistance here
8.  In the result the appeals are dismissed. No order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
