State of Maharashtra v Nav Bharat Builders
Supreme Court of India

4 February 1994
C.A. No. 853 of 1994 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 5628 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted. Heard learned counsel.
1.  The respondent - M/s. Nav Bharat Builders entered into an agreement on 24-7-1978 to construct masonry dam across river Ghod in Ambegaon District of State of Maharashtra. The period for completion of the contract was 72 calendar months from 24-7-1978, but was extended from time to time. In its execution, there arose a dispute relating to labour escalation charges and other items of dispute. The respondent had given notice for reference to an arbitration. Since the appellant did not agree either for the enhancement as claimed for or for reference to the arbitration, the respondent laid the suit under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1940 for filing the agreement so as to refer the dispute to the arbitrator. Pending suit, he submitted a letter to the Government on 8-9-1986 and pursuant to this and further correspondence the Government constituted a sub-committee to go into the question for labour escalation claimed by the respondent.
2. The sub- committee in its report had submitted to the Government for acceptance of the claim of the respondent subject to the terms mentioned in paragraph 8.0 of its report. Pursuant thereto, when it was addressed to the respondent, the respondent in his letter dated 3-3-1989 had agreed to receive the amount of the price escalation on account of labour component worked out by the committee, stating that:
"I further agree to accept the payment as decided by the Government till completion of the work."
3.  Thereafter, the recommended amount was tendered to the respondent and he had accepted the payment in his letter dated 7-5-1990 thus:
"In continuation of our above letter as instructed by you we will withdraw from our special suit No. 134, claim in respect of labour escalation."
4.  Thereafter, the respondent had disputed the correctness of the amount quantified contending that it was obtained by coercion and therefore, he is not bound by it. When an objection was raised, the trial Judge accepted the same. On appeal, the High Court held that it is an arbitrable dispute and arbitrator would decide the same. Accordingly, the claim of the Government was negatived by its order dated 5-3-1993.  Thus this appeal by special leave.
5.  This Court in P. K. Ramaiah & Co. v. Chairman and Managing Director, NTPC considered the ambit of accord and satisfaction by the parties voluntarily entered into and disputation raised thereunder. This Court after considering the entire controversy held that:
"Admittedly the full and final satisfaction was acknowledged by a receipt in writing and the amount was received unconditionally. Thus there is accord and satisfaction by final settlement of the claims. The subsequent allegation of coercion is an afterthought and a devise to get over the settlement of the dispute, acceptance of the payment and receipt voluntarily given... Having acknowledged the settlement and also accepted measurements and having received the amount in full and final settlement of the claim, there is accord and satisfaction. There is no existing arbitrable dispute for reference to the arbitration."
6. Therein similar to the facts in this case the appellant admittedly accepted the amount in full and final settlement and given the receipt. Later it disputed, its correctness on the ground that it was obtained by coercion. When proceedings were laid for reference to arbitration the trial court upheld the contention and referred the matter for arbitration. On appeal, the High Court set aside the order. When the appeal was filed in this Court, this Court concluded in the above findings and upheld that there was no arbitrable dispute.
7.  It is seen that as regards the escalation of labour claims are concerned, the report of the sub-committee constituted by the Government expressly mentioned thus:
"This decision is also subject to the following conditions:
(i) The contractor shall furnish to Government a letter of acceptance in the prescribed form to the effect that the contractor agrees to accept the amount offered to him in full and final settlement of the said claim and by way of mutual arrangement between the contractor and Government on the terms and conditions herein contained.
(ii) The letter of acceptance shall form part and shall always be deemed to have formed part of the contract.
(iii) Irrespective of the fact whether the contractor accepts this offer of Government or not, in no event the contractor, shall be entitled to claim or take a plea in any dispute that the contractor may raise before the arbitrator, court or any authority in respect of the said claim to the effect that the sum offered by the Government under this letter is the one agreed to be paid by the Government to the contractor or to treat that sum as basis for adjudicating the claim by the said arbitrator, court or authority.
(iv) The offer shall be open for acceptance by the contractor till 10- 3-1989. If the contractor fails to communicate acceptance or rejection of offer by him in writing to the Secretary (I) I. D., Government of Maharashtra on or before 10-3-1989 then the same shall automatically lapse on the aforesaid date and shall not be binding on Government vis-a-vis the contractor thereafter.
(v) The final amount to be paid to the contractor shall be arrived at only after actual calculations to be made on the basis of the principles enunciated in para above. The amount that would be payable to the contractor in future shall also be regulated accordingly(9) You are requested to consider the offer and communicate your decision regarding acceptance or otherwise of the offer to the Secretary (I) Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtra on or before the aforesaid date in the prescribed form annexed hereto. As soon as your acceptance letter is received by Government, payment will be made after calculation of the actual amount of claim as aforesaid."
8.  Pursuant thereto, when an option was given to the respondent to consider the offer and communicate his decision regarding acceptance or otherwise of the offer, in his letter dated 3- 3-1989, he specifically stated that:
"I agree to receive such amount for the price escalation on account of labour component as would be worked out on the principles as offered under the aforesaid Government letter as and by way of full and final settlement of my claim submitted by me under my letter No. NBB/Dimbhe/1013/322/864, dated 18-9-1986 for the payment of the price escalation towards the labour component based on minimum wages. I further agree to accept the payment as decided by Government till completion of the work."
9. Thereafter the amount was paid and he acknowledged the receipt of the amount and also stated as earlier that unconditionally he was withdrawing his claim in the suit in respect of labour escalation. Thus we hold that there is full and final settlement of the claim and the respondent has accepted the accord and satisfaction, thereby there is no arbitrable dispute in respect of labour escalation.
10.  Shri Salve, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent contended that the appellant had accepted the principle on which the escalation charges are to be paid but in its working the amount was not calculated correctly and he expressly referred the same in his letter of acceptance and that, therefore, it is open to the respondent to contend before the arbitrator that in working the principle on which the amount offered by the Government the arbitrator has to decide as to what amount had been arrived at and if the working in principle is not acceptable any alternative principle would be applicable. If the arbitrator finds that the respondent is entitled to any claim, it is still an arbitrable dispute. We find no substance in the contention. Whatever be the principle or method or manner of working it out, a particular figure was arrived at by the Government. The respondent was then asked to consider its willingness to accept the offer and having accepted the same and received the amount, it is no longer open to the respondent to dispute the claim on any count or ground. The dispute was concluded and the respondent fully and finally accepted the claim and thereafter received the amount.  Thus there is accord and satisfaction of the claim relating to labour escalation charges. Thereby there is no further arbitrable dispute in that behalf.
11.  Shri Madhava Reddy, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contended that in view of the letter dated 3-3-1989 the respondent had accepted to withdraw the entire claim in respect of Item 1 and that therefore there is no arbitrable dispute in that behalf. We find no substance in the contention. In all the letters the respondent had specifically referred at various stages that his acceptance was only in respect of labour escalation.
12. Therefore, any other claims which the respondent made in the suit, the court is to consider whether arbitrable disputes arose under the contract for reference to arbitration and if so whether the respondent is entitled to any amount so claimed. These are the matters to be gone into. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in part as stated earlier, but in the circumstances, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Appeal partly allowed.
