Murugesan and Another v Ramalingam Pillai (Dead) and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 April 1994
C.A. No. 4063 of 1994 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 284 of 1994)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The appellants before us are landlords. They filed an eviction application under the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 (the Act) on the ground that the same was required for bona fide personal use of one of the landlords in the sense that his son was to start business in the said shop. The respondent-tenant (since dead and represented through his legal representatives) opposed the application on various grounds. The Rent Controller allowed the application and ordered the ejectment of the tenant. The Lower Appellate Court dismissed the appeal filed by the tenant.
2.   The High Court, however, reversed the finding of the two courts on the short ground that there was no pleading to the effect that the son of the landlord did not own any non-residential premises of his own in terms of Section 10(3) (a) (iii) of the Act.
3.  We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We are of the view that in the facts and circumstances of this case the absence of pleadings on the point has not caused any prejudice to the respondents. The son of the appellants-landlord appeared before the Rent Controller as PW 1. In his examination-in-chief, he stated as under:
"I do not have any other place excepting the shop mentioned in the petition. Now I am working under a third party for salary. We demanded the respondent to vacate the petition mentioned property at the time of the expiry of the agreement. the shop mentioned in the petition is required for my own use."
4.  It is thus obvious that there was clear evidence before the Rent Controller to the effect that the landlords did not have any other shop except the shop in dispute. The tenant, therefore, fully knew the case set up by the appellants and which he was to meet by producing evidence in support of his defence.
5.   Even otherwise the question raised and decided in favour of the respondents was not raised either before the Rent Controller or before the Lower Appellants Court. We are of the view that the High Court was not justified in raking up the question by looking into the pleadings and reappreciating the evidence. In the facts of this case the High Court fell into patent error in reversing the findings reached by the two courts below.
6.  We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and restore that of the courts below. We, however, allow time to the respondent-tenants up to 31-3-1995 to vacate the premises in dispute on their filing usual undertaking in this Court within 8 weeks from today. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
