State of Orissa and Others v Prajnaparamita Samanta and Others
Supreme Court of India

11 August 1994
C.As. No. 732 of 1993 with Nos. 733 to 760 of 1993 and W.Ps. (C) Nos. 283 of 1993, 847 of 1992 and 301 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  An entrance examination was held for the medical courses for the academic year 1991-92. The students who failed in the examination approached the High Court by various writ petitions. The contention of the students was that there were 38 questions which were:
(a) either outside syllabus, or
(b) were such for which key answers given were wrong while the correct answers were available in the alternative answers given against the said questions, or
(c) for which the alternative answers given were all wrong, or
(d) such for which more than one alternative answers provided were correct.
2.  Normally, the courts do not examine such grievances and sit in appeal over the decision of the examining bodies. However, the High Court took pains and examined the said grievances of the students and ultimately came to the conclusion that according to it, there were nine questions for which the answers could be more than one. On this conclusion, the High Court direct the MBBS/BDS Selection Board to re-evaluate the answer books of those of the examinees who had secured a minimum of 105 marks, and after re-evaluation of the none questions concerned, give admission to those of the examinees who would secure a minimum of 114 marks. The High Court further made it clear that the benefit of its order would be available only to those who had approached the High Court till 27-3-1992 which was the date of its decision. Against the said decision, the present writ petitions and appeals have been filed.
CAs Nos. 732 and 745-54 of 1993
3.  In these appeals, the State has made a grievance that the High Court ought not to have given the direction in question and in giving the said direction, the High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction. By our order of 19-2-1993, we had directed that while there will be no order of stay of the direction given by the High Court except to the extent that out of the candidates who had become eligible for admission pursuant to the High Court's order, only those who qualified for admission on the basis of re-evaluation of seven of the nine questions, the key answers respecting which were held to be incorrect, shall be entitled to be so admitted and that the admission shall be provided in the then current year, viz., 1992-93 without reducing the quota of the said year. Pursuant to this order, 53 examinees were admitted and they have been pursuing their studies since then.
4.  Subsequently, by our order dated 30-9-1993, we directed the experts of the Delhi University in the subjects of Chemistry, Bombay and Zoology to give their opinion with regard to six of the seven key answers and the stand of the students in respect of the said answers which found favour with the High Court. The experts were to indicate whether:
(a) the key answers or the answers which according to the students were correct, were most appropriately the correct answers, and
(b) whether both or either were wholly incorrect and if so which of them.
5.  We have since received the report of the experts. From the said report, it is found that four of the answers which according to the students were correct have been certificate as such by the experts whereas two of the key answers given by the Board were found to be correct. We had undertaken this exercise only to satisfy ourselves as to whether there was truth in the grievance of the students or in the stand taken by the Board that the key answers provided by them were the most correct answers. We are satisfied on the basis of the opinion of the experts that there was much to be said in favour of the stand of the students. It may be mentioned here that we had sent only six answers for examination to the experts out of the seven as indicated in the earlier order, because we had found that the answer to the seventh question canvassed by the students was to obviously correct that it needed no examination at the hands of the experts. The report of the experts also validities the order of the High Court which had directed re-evaluation of the answer books of the examinees on the basis of the answers suggested by it to the nine questions.
6. In the circumstances, taking a broad view of the entire matter, we are satisfied that it cannot be said that the impugned judgment of the High Court suffered from any infirmity. We, therefore, find no merit in the grievance of the State and dismiss the State's appeals being CA Nos. 732 and 745-54 of 1993.
Application for impleadment is rejected.
CA No. 744 of 1993
7.  Since the appellant had already been admitted to the medical course during the relevant academic year 1991-92, the appeal is not passed and is dismissed.
CA No. 760 of 1993
Civil appeal is dismissed as having become infructuous.
CAs Nos. 733-42, 743 and 758-59 of 1993
8.  In the aforesaid appeals, the grievance made, as stated earlier, it that the High Court ought to have examined or got examined all the 38 questions. We are of the view that the High Court has taken pains to go through all the relevant questions and answers, and by an elaborate exercise has come to the conclusion that the grievance with regard to only 9 of the questions and their answers was worth taking not of. We do not think we will be justified in repeating the said exercise or asking the High Court again to go through the exercise or refer the matter to the Experts' Committee at this stage when no less than three further academic years have elapsed. Any such direction at this stage will be a fruitless exercise since the examinees cannot now be accommodated in the course even assuming that they get the requisite marks on re-evaluation of the answer books. It should not be forgotten in this connection that the other examinees had qualified for entrance on the basis of the very same question paper. The civil appeals are dismissed.
9. WPs Nos. 301 and 238 of 1993, 847 of 1992 and CAs Nos. 755-57 of 1993
10.  Admittedly, the petitioners and the appellants in question had approached either the High Court or this Court after the decision of the High Court on 27-3-1992. The High Court has rightly set down the said date as a cut-off limit and directed consideration of the answer books only of those examinees who had approached the High Court till that date. It is only those who are diligent and approach the court in time who can be given such relief. The academic year cannot be extended for any length of time for the benefit of those who choose to approach the court at their sweet will. The consideration on the basis of which relief is granted in such cases is always circumscribed by the tenure of the academic year(s) concerned. We, therefore, do not see anything wrong if the High Court has laid down the said date as the cut-off date for the purpose.
11. In the circumstances, there is no merit in these writ petitions and the civil appeals, and they are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
