Karnataka Public Service Commission v T. Bissegowda and Another
Supreme Court of India

5  May  1994
C.As. Nos. 4413-14 of 1994 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 2091-22 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The respondents had applied for the direct recruitment posts of Assistant Executive Engineers. They admittedly belonged to reserved 'B' category of backward classes. When they applied for direct recruitment as in-service candidates, as per government order in vogue, at the relevant time, income limit was Rs. 10, 000 from all sources including the income drawn by the respondents. Since the applicants' parents were also in service, their income from all sources and of the applicants exceeded Rs. 10,000.
2.   But on 12-12-1986, Government issued another GO, realising that imposition of the condition relating to income from all sources to in-service candidates belonging to backward classes would, in fact, amount to depriving them to the right to apply for direct recruitment posts. Consequently, they issued the order deleting the pay and allowances drawn by an in-service candidate, in computation of annual income of Rs. 10,000. Consequently, the respondents became eligible to be considered for recruitment as reserved 'B' candidates.
3.  At the time of interview of the candidates, they were called upon to submit their revised statement of income pursuant to which the respondents submitted their revised family income certificates together with self-attested copies of certificates of income as provided for in the Rules. The Public Service Commission rejected their claims as backwards class 'B' on the ground of defective attestation as that the attestation not being in accordance with the Rules. Respondents challenged their non-inclusion in the list as reserved candidates.
Tribunal found that the exclusion of candidates on a technical ground was illegal and there was, in fact, substantial compliance of the requirement of attestation. The Tribunal in its own Full Bench judgment dated 29-3-1993 allowed such application. Thus this appeal by special leave.
4.  Though the learned counsel for the appellant contended that the respondents had not submitted their revised statements within the time along with the application, we find no merit in the contention. It is seen that after the respondents submitted their application according to Rules amendment was made by the Order No. SWL 43 BC(A) 84 dated 6-8-1985 in which the salary and allowances of the candidates appearing as in-service candidates shall not be excluded in computing family income. If that be so, the respondents were within income limit prescribed under the Rules and thereby they became eligible to be considered as reserved 'B' candidates of backward classes.
5.  It is true that the respondents themselves had certified by self-attestation as Gazetted Officers. In fact, the Order No. GAD 41 SCR 74 dated 23-12-1975 empowers them to effect such an attention and that therefore, as per the Rules in vogue, it was done. Though they would have been well-advised not to attest their own certificates, that could not have been a valid ground to reject their claims. Hence, we do not find any justification in rejecting their claims as backward class 'B' or necessary appropriate group.
However, it was contended that the direction issued by the Tribunal to place the respondents at the appropriate place as per the ranking given by the Public Service Commission was illegal. We find no justification for denying them the benefit. The Tribunal found thus:
"We only direct in the light of the discussions that the names of the applicants in Appeals Nos. 3830 and 4117 of 1991 may be included in the appropriate places in the select list on merit according to the claims they have made for consideration under the reserved category and that select list as amended will be forwarded to the Government and it is open to the Government to do what it wishes to do in accordance with law."
6.  Obviously, at the time when they were interviewed the certificates were produced which would have been sufficient compliance and they were denied of their legitimate right. No fault, therefore could be attributed to respondents. Under those circumstances, their entitlement to the proper placement as per ranking on the merit list prepared by the Public Service Commission cannot be denied.
Thus, we find no ground warranting interference. The appeals are accordingly dismissed, but in the circumstances without costs.
Appeals dismissed.
