Neeraj Bala Goswami v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 November 1994
W.P.er (C) No. 488 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. After hearing the parties, we are of the view that Respondent 3 Shri Surender Mohan had acted with gross impropriety and in violation of norms of the office by addressing letter dated 10-8-1993 to the Executive Director of Indian Oil Corporation and letter dated 5-5-1994 to the Principal Secretary, Home Department of the State when his wife and other near relations were involved in the matter. We strongly disapprove of his conduct.
2. It is stated in paragraph 44 of the counter-affidavit filed by Shri Vikram Singh, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Meerut Range that Circle Officer, Shri A.K. Gupta was suspended on two grounds, one of them being that he got FIR lodged against Shri Surender Mohon, Respondent 3 which was not substantiated by his earlier report.
1. The learned Advocate General who appears for the State to let the Court know about:
(i) the steps taken against the said officer, namely A.K. Gupta.
(ii) the Enquiry Report which was submitted by him earlier which is alleged not to have substantiated the charge and
(iii) the stage at which the enquiry against Shri A.K. Gupta is pending at present. The matter is adjourned for this purpose by two weeks from today.
3. We are not inclined to go into the various allegations and counter allegations made by the parties against each other in these proceedings. It appears that the family dispute which has given rise to these allegations and counter-allegations is at present pending in the civil court. The law will take its own course in the said proceedings.
4. The order passed by this Court on 23-9-1994 is modified as follows:
2.  Respondent 6, the Director General of Police, Lucknow, will continue to give adequate protection to the petitioner herein as directed earlier. The State/Police is not prevented from adapting criminal prosecution against the petitioner for offence, if any, committed by her. It has become necessary to state so because by our earlier order we had restrained the State/Police from taking any criminal proceedings against her.
Order accordingly.
