State of Orissa and Others v Brahamarbar Senapathi
Supreme Court of India

3 January 1994
C.A. No. ....... of 1994 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 14868 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties. Special leave granted.
1.  This appeal arises against the order of the Orissa Administrative Tribunal, Bhubaneswar in OA No. 858 of 1989 dated June 22, 1992. The respondent joined the service as a Cook in CDMO Cuttack on February 9, 1962.
Thereafter he was promoted as Disinfector and Senior Helper. He attained the age of superannuation on May 31, 1989. Before his retirement when the notice of retirement was given, he filed an application on April 24, 1989 stating that his correct date of birth is June 27, 1934 and therefore he cannot be retired. Since his representation was not accepted, he filed OA No. 858 of 1989 before the tribunal. The tribunal observed that his correct date of birth is June 27, 1934 and not May 18, 1929 as entered in the service register and therefore the respondent is entitled to be in service till the age of 60 years.
Thus this appeal by special leave.
Rule 65 of the Orissa General Financial Rules provides thus:
"Every person on entering government service shall declare his/her date of birth which shall not differ from any such declaration expressed or implied for any public purpose before entering service. The date of birth shall be supported by documentary evidence such as Matriculation Certificate, Municipal Birth Certificate and entered in his/her service record. No alteration of the date of birth of government servant shall be made except in case of clerical error without prior approval of the State Government. An application for effecting a change in the date of birth shall be summarily rejected if:
(a) filed after give years of entry into government service.
(b) the change would so lower the applicant's age that he/she would have been ineligible to appear in any of the academic or recruitment examinations in which he/she had appeared or for considerations for appointment to any service or post under the Government."
2.  A reading of these rules clearly shows that every person on entering government service shall declare his/her date of birth which shall not differ from any such declaration expressed or implied for any public purpose before entering service. The date of birth shall be supported by documentary evidence such as Matriculation Certificate, Municipal Birth Certificate and entered in his/her service record. No alteration of the date of birth of government servant shall be made except in case of clerical error without prior approval of the State Government.
3. An application for effecting a change in the date of birth shall be summarily rejected if filed after five years of entry into government service, etc. From what has been stated in paragraph 7 of the order of the tribunal, it would appear that the respondent became aware of the entry in the service register in the year 1970.
Admittedly, no action has been taken within five years thereafter. Under those circumstances, Rule 65 as referred to above is clear that his claim for alteration shall be summarily rejected without any further inquiry. Now the respondent sought to place reliance on School Certificate in which the date of birth was entered as June 27, 1934. Obviously, he must have had the knowledge of the School Certificate but he failed to produce it when he entered into the service or had knowledge of the entry made in the service register as May 18, 1929 as early as 1970.
4.  Under these circumstances, the tribunal committed a manifest error in correcting the date of birth. Rule 65 is mandatory and the tribunal has not given due consideration to it. The appeal is allowed. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
