Messrs Industrial Minerals and Metals and Another v Sales Tax Officer and Another
Supreme Court of India

18 July 1994
C.A. No. 654 of 1991
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellants challenged the validity of Section 5(2) (A) (a) (iii) of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 (the OST Act) as amended by Section 2(c) of the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1978 by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the 
 Constitution of India before the Orissa High Court. The order of the Sales Tax Officer, Cuttack III Circle pertaining to the assessment year 1982-83 was also sought to be quashed in the writ petition. The challenge to the validity of Section 5(2) (A) (a) (ii) of the OST Act was on the following grounds:
"(i) that it is beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature to enact the provision since the tax relates to inter-State sale/export sale in respect of which Parliament has the exclusive competence to legislate. In this connection reliance is placed on Article 286 of the Constitution 
 and Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution;
(ii) that the provision is repugnant to Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the CST Act and hence it is hit by Articles 254 and 269 of the Constitution;
(iii) that the levy of tax is discriminatory and therefore hit by Article 14 of the Constitution; and
(iv) that it affects the petitioners' right of freedom of trade and commerce embodied in Article 19(1) (g)."
2. In addition to the above grounds it was also contended that while selling the goods in the course of inter-State sale the appellants/petitioners did not contravene the declaration inasmuch as the sale took place within the State of Orissa and, as such, could not be exigible to tax under the OST Act but for the supervening circumstance of the constitutional bar as provided under the Central Sales Tax Act. The High Court by its well-reasoned judgment dated 30-7-1990 dismissed the writ petition. This appeal by way of special leave is against the judgment of the High Court.
3.  We have been taken through the judgment of the High Court wherein all the points raised by the appellants/petitioners have been dealt with by giving detailed reasons in respect of each of the points. We see no ground to interfere with the judgment of the High Court. We agree with the reasoning and the conclusions reached therein
4.  We have today pronounced judgments in State of Orissa v. Minerals and Metals Trading Corpn. of India Ltd. and also in Industrial Minerals and Metals v. Sales Tax Officer.
5. Even on the force of the reasoning and conclusions in these judgments, this appeal has to be dismissed. We, therefore, dismiss the appeal with costs. We quantify the costs as Rs.5000.
Appeal dismissed.
