Supreme Court Bar Association and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

15 September 1994
W.P. (C) No. 553 of 1994 with T.P. (C) No. ... of 1994.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Transfer Petition (C) No. ... of 1994
1.  By this petition the petitioners pray that certain pending proceedings similar to present petition initiated both in Allahabad and Lucknow Benches of the High Court, be withdrawn to this Court.
2.  Issue notice to the respondents who were petitioners in the respective proceedings before the High Court. In the meanwhile all further contempt proceedings in respect of the same incident now pending in Allahabad and Lucknow Benches of the High Court shall remain stayed. List after service of notice.
WP (C) No. 533 of 1994
3.  Heard Shri K. K. Venugopal, learned Senior Advocate for the Supreme Court Bar Association, Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned Senior appearing for the Bar Association of India which seeks to intervene. We grant the prayer and permit the Bar Association of India to intervene and assist the Court. We have heard Shri Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel for the State of Uttar Pradesh and its officers. Shri Yogeshwar Prasad, learned Advocate General for the State of U.P. is presenting Court. We have also heard learned Attorney General for Union of India.
4.  Affidavits have been filed by the Chief Secretary, State of U.P., Director General of Police, State of U.P. and the Home Secretary on behalf of the State of U.P.
5.  It appears to us that before further steps are initiated on the prayers made in the writ petition, it is necessary to have a prompt investigation and inquiry into the happenings at premises of the High Court of Allahabad on 13-9-1994. We place on record the letter of the Chief Justice of the High Court and the report of the High Court made to this Court, both received on 13-9-1994. They shall form part of the record. Copies of this shall be furnished to Shri Ashok Desai.
6.  We thought for the and put to Shri Desai - whether it would not be appropriate to have an independent and impartial enquiry and investigation into the events by the Director of CBI who in respect of the conduct of the inquiry shall act as a Commissioner of this Court. Mr. Ashok Desai, in all fairness, stated that this is an appropriate course and all the facts would be before this Court in the form of the report of the Director.
7.  We accordingly direct Shri Vijay Rama Rao, Director, CBI to inquire into and investigate into the events that occurred on 13-9-1994 at the High Court which led to the incidents referred to by the learned Chief Justice of the High Court in his letter and in the report of the High Court. The Director, CBI, Shri Vijay Rama Rao shall also inquire into the background events of 12-9-1994.
8.  A set of papers including the copy of the memorandum, writ petition, counter-affidavits filed so far as well as copy of the letter of the Chief Justice received on 13-9-1994 shall be furnished to the Director, CBI forthwith. We request the Director, CBI to commence the inquiry forthwith and make his report to this Court within seven days from today.
9.  All authorities of the State shall afford every assistance to Shri Vijay Rama Rao Director CBI in discharge of this Commission. Shri Yogeshwar Prasad, Advocate General present in Court assures such full assistance to him on behalf of the State Government and all its authorities. Needless to add that the Registrar of the High Court shall also furnish such assistance as may be necessary.
List it on 22-9-1994.
Order accordingly.
