D. C. Aggarwal v State Bank of India and others
Supreme Court of India

13  May  1994
IA No. ... of 1994 in C.A. No. 1609 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Though the petitioner is seeking in IA four reliefs, we do not consider it expedient to make any order in that behalf. IA No. 3 of 1994 is taken on board. In this application the respondents have sought for clarification or modification of the order dated 11-3-1994 ,D.C. Aggarwal v. State Bank of India,  1994 Indlaw SC 523 and for extention of time for compliance with the order dated 11-3-1994. It is stated in the petition that the Chairman and the Managing Director is the Appellate Authority and as a consequence he cannot deal with the matter sitting as a member of the Committee to consider the case of the appellant.
2. It is further stated that as regards Mr N.G. Pillai and Mr R. Sinha, Deputy Managing Director (Personnel) and Deputy Managing Director (Corporate Operations and Services) respectively, they having dealt with the matter, the appellant has some reservation about them. Under those circumstances, they are unable to be nominated as members of the Committee as directed earlier by this Court.
3.  We appreciate the stand taken by the Bank. Since this Court has directed that the Managing Director of the Bank would be the member of the Committee, instead of Dr. M.K. Sinha of the Bank, we direct the respondent State Bank of India to nominate any of the Managing Directors of any other nationalised bank as a Chairman/member. In the petition, they have given the names of six persons, two of them may be nominated as members of the Committee. For that the petitioner has no objection for appointment of Mr Kathuria, Deputy Managing Director (Treasury and Investments Management).
4. Since it is desirable that a Committee of three would be feasible to decide the matter, we direct that Mr R. Vishwanathan, Deputy Managing Director (Commercial Banking) be nominated as third member. This three-member Committee would consider and decide the claim of the appellant for extension of the term in the light of the directions issued by this Court's order dated 11-3-1994 according to rules. It is made clear that it is not open to the parties to challenge the constitution of the Committee as per the directions of this Court in any of the proceedings hereafter. Three weeks' time is granted to constitute the Committee for consideration of the claim for extension. Thereafter, two weeks' time is granted to the competent authority to take the decision. IAs are disposed of accordingly.
Applications disposed of.
