Mallappa and Others v State of Karnataka
Supreme Court of India

20 January 1994
Cr.A. No. 222 of 1984
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is an appeal under Section 2-A of the Supreme Court (Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act. The 13 appellants, original accused 2 to 14, along with one Narasappa, original accused 1 were tried by the learned Additional Sessions Judge Gulbarga for offences punishable under Sections 148, 302 and 302/149 IPC and they were acquitted.
2. The State preferred an appeal and a Division Bench of the High Court reversed the order of acquittal and convicted all the 14 accused. Thereafter Narasappa, original accused 1 died. During the pendency of this appeal in this Court, it is reported that Mookappa alias Sabanna son of Shivrappa, appellant 8, original accused 9 died. The prosecution case is as follows:

There are three deceased persons in this case. Doida Galib Patel, Marappa, Bheemanna, the deceased persons and the material witnesses PWs 1, 2, 3 and 4 belong to Village Mundergi within the limits of Yadgiri Police Station. The 14 accused also belong to the same village. There had been long-standing enmity between PW 1 and some of the accused. On the day of occurrence namely, 7-5-1980, PW 1 went to Yadgiri to purchase some groundnut seeds along with D-l. They reached Yadgiri at about noon time. They were told that the shop owner Chammallappa was not there and his son-in-law was present who told them to come after two days. As it was hot they took rest for some time. Both of them then started to walk to their village at about 5 p. m. as they could not get the bus and they wanted to go by walk as their village was not far away. Deceased 2 and deceased 3 also joined them. On their way, PW 2 Khasim Patel who was also going to the same village accompanied them. They were passing through the footpath, near Tambara Kere, another witness namely Bukkappa (not examined) also joined them. When they covered some distance they saw two ladies Chanbasamma and Narsamma also going. When they reached near Shivana's land, they heard the sound of footsteps and when they turned back then they saw A-1 to A-14 coming behind them. PW 1 was hit by a stone on the left side of his hip.
3. Out of 14 persons, except A-12, the others were holding sticks, axes and knives. Deceased 1 was hit by another stone as a result of which he fell down and D-2 and D-3 wanted to raise him. By that time A-1, A-2, A-6 and A-7 started attacking with axes and A-10, A-11, A-14 beat with the sticks as a result of which D-l died after sustaining bleeding injuries. A-3 and A-5 and A-4 and A-7 axed the deceased Marappa as a result of which he also died. Bhimanna deceased was grappling with A-1 and when A-1 cried out, he was bitten, A-9 and A-13 went and beat Bhimanna with sticks as a result of which he moved to the side and then A-1 took out a jambia and hit him and when he fell on the ground, A-2 and A-6 hit him with the axes. A-12 was instigating others. PW 1 who received injuries due to the stone hits ran to the village. Meanwhile the accused persons ran away from the place. PW 1 informed the father of D-l about the occurrence and thereafter went to his own house and informed his family members. On that night he could not go to the police station as he was afraid and on the next morning at about 7 a. m. on coming to know that nobody lodged the report, at about 8.30 a. m. went to the police station and gave the FIR which was reduced to writing by ASI - PW 19. A case was registered and investigation commenced. The investigating officer visited the scene of occurrence, sent the dead bodies for post-mortem and also PW 1 for medical examination. The doctor who conducted the post-mortem on the dead bodies found number of injuries. He also found some injuries on PW 1 which could have been caused by a stone hit. Some of the accused were arrested and at their instances, recoveries were effected. After completion of the investigation, the charge-sheet was laid. The prosecution mainly relied upon the evidence of the eyewitnesses PWs 1 to 4. The plea of the accused is one of denial and they pleaded that due to enmity they have been falsely implicated.
The learned Sessions Judge acquitted all the accused on the ground that there was delay in giving the FIR and that the names of PWs 3 and 4 were not mentioned in the FIR and the conduct of PWs 1 and 2 namely not informing anybody about the incident particularly to any of the relatives of the deceased is unnatural and since there was semi-digested food found in the stomach of the deceased, the occurrence must have taken place sometime after taking the night meal and not at 5.30 p. m. and PWs 1 and 2 have improved their versions by giving details of the attack at a later stage. According to the learned Sessions Judge it was not safe to rely on the evidence of these witnesses and accordingly acquitted all the accused.
4.  The High Court on the other hand held that mere delay by itself is no ground to reject the evidence of the eyewitnesses and that the presence of PW 1 cannot be doubted and that because of mere presence of semi-digested food it cannot be said that the occurrence must have taken place late at night. The High Court also observed that the FIR need not contain all the details and on the other hand in the instant case the names of all the accused have been mentioned and the medical evidence corroborates the injuries caused and that the reasons given by the trial court are wholly unsound and accordingly set aside the order of acquittal.
5.  In this appeal Shri Javali, the learned Senior Counsel submits that it is rather strange that PW 1 who would have been the main target in the occurrence has not received any serious injuries and that he is also a partisan witness who has taken advantage of the occurrence which took place during the night time and has implicated number of accused persons in the FIR and this evidence has been subsequently procured and that the place of occurrence is on a busy road and the prosecution has no explanation as to why some other independent witnesses have not been examined and that at any rate the reasons given by the trial court cannot be said to be perverse or highly unsound and when two views are possible, the High Court ought not to have interfered in an appeal against acquittal.
6.  Since this is a regular appeal, we have gone through the evidence of PWs 1 to 4, the material witnesses in detail. This is a case where PW 1 is a partisan and has given the earliest report. But that by itself is not a ground to reject the entire prosecution case. Since the investigation was set into motion on a complaint given by him and the same version has also been put forward by PW 2 and to some extent by PWs 3 and 4, it is necessary to scrutinise the evidence of these witnesses with great care and caution. The presence of PW 1 in the first instance cannot be doubted at the scene of occurrence. He deposed that he was hit by two stones and the medical evidence corroborates the same.
Therefore it must be held that he received the injuries during the same occurrence. PW 1 has given the details of occurrence. In a case of this nature, the version given in Exbt. P-1 the earliest report assumes importance particularly when the Court has to scrutinize the later deposition in which the witness come forward with more number of details. PW 19 has deposed that PW 1 came to the police station and gave the report at about 8.30 a. m. In this report PW 1 has stated that he and D-l went to Yadgiri for purchasing seeds and in the evening both of them along with other two deceased persons and PW 2 were coming back to their village at about 5.30 p. m.
7. On the way they heard some sound of footsteps and when they turned back they saw all the 14 accused persons. He further stated that he also received two stone hits and A-1, A-2, A-6 and A-7 attacked deceased 1 with daggers and fell him down and again A-1, A-2, A-4 and A-7 attacked deceased 2 with daggers and killed him. Then all of them attacked D-3 with knife and daggers and A-12 was instigating. However, A-12 was not armed with any weapon. It is further stated in this report that after D-3 fell down, accused persons left the place and he himself apprehended danger and ran to the village and since he was suffering from pain during night time, on the next morning gave the report. These are the particulars mentioned in the FIR. The presence of PW 2 is also mentioned. In his present deposition he has also given all these details and added that A-10, A-11, and A-14 attacked deceased 1 and that A-3 and A-5 attacked deceased 2 with sticks along with A-4 and A-7. Though in Exbt. P-l he has not mentioned any details of the attack on D-3, now he has come forward with greater details. The witness, PW 1 has been cross-examined at length. It may be mentioned that it is not even suggested that he received injuries elsewhere. Therefore, we have no doubt about the presence of PW 1. Much of the cross-examination is about the improvements made by him in attributing specific acts. It may not be necessary to refer to the other part of the cross-examination.
8. No doubt a bare suggestion is made to him that he had not witnessed the occurrence and has falsely implicated the accused which he denied. However, in the further cross-examination he admitted the enmity between him and some of the accused, particularly between him and A-1, A-2, A-4 and A-5 and A-14 who were said to be the witnesses in the murder case in which PW 1 and others figure as accused. It is also suggested to him that he being member of the Panchayat, he worked against A-12 in the Sarpanch election and he has falsely implicated him. It is not in dispute that A-12 was the Sarpanch. PW 2 has given exactly the same details as those given by PW 1 in his deposition. He also attributed overt acts to A-1, A-2, A-6, A-7, A-10, A-11 and A-14 so far as the attack on D-l and A-3, A-4, A-5 and A-7 attacked on D-2 and A-1, A-2, A-6, A-9 and A-13 on D-3. PWs 3 and 4 spoke about the attack by A-1, A-2, A-4, A-7 and not others, Before we proceed further, it may be necessary to refer to the medical evidence in the case. The doctor PW 6, who conducted the post-mortem on all the three dead bodies, found on D-l, 15 injuries and out of them three were abrasions which could be due to fall and three lacerated injuries all near about the mouth. She further stated that death was due to the fracture of the skull. On D-2, she found 20 injuries, but out of them two were abrasions and six were lacerated wounds.
9. She opined that death was due to multiple fracture of the facid bones and shock and haemorrhage. On D-3, she found two abrasions and six incised wounds. The same doctor examined PW 1 and found on him two wounds below the left shoulder and abrasion on the forehead which could have been caused by a stone. Incidentally she also examined A-1 who was produced by the police and found on him lacerated wound over the middle on the lower lip which could have been caused due to biting. A-9 was also examined by her on whom she found one lacerated wound below the left shoulder. The medical evidence shows that there are only three lacerated wounds on D-l and six lacerated wounds on D-2 totalling 9 and the abrasions were due to fall. The question is whether A-3, A-5, A-9, A-10, A-11, A-13 and A-14, seven in number who are said to have attacked two deceased with sticks indiscriminately caused only 9 lacerated injuries and not even a single contusion. No overt act has been attributed to A-8 throughout.
10. As pointed out in cases of this nature, the overt act test need not only be a decisive test but is one of the legitimate tests to be applied while scrutinising the evidence. If such overt acts are mentioned consistently right from the stage of the FIR and if the medical evidence supports it, then such of those accused to whom such overt acts have been attributed could safely be held to be members of the unlawful assembly with the common object of committing those offences. In the earliest report PW 1 attributed specific overt acts only to A-1, A-2, A-4, A-6 and A-7. No doubt he mentioned that A-12 being Sarpanch of the Panchayat was also present and was instigating without being armed with any kind of weapon. We think it is highly unsafe to accept it so far A-12 is concerned. Then it is only in his later deposition he attributed overt acts to all the remaining accused. He also deposed that A-9 and A-13 inflicted injuries on the third deceased but the medical evidence does not support the same. No stick injuries are found on D-3. For all these reasons it is highly unsafe to accept the version of PW 1 in respect of overt acts attributed to these remaining accused.
11.  By this it does not mean that we are doubting the veracity of PW 1 whose presence need not be disputed but on a closer scrutiny we are of the view that it is not safe to convict them for the reasons stated above. In this context we must also mention that the submission namely that the delay in giving the FIR or the conduct of PW 1 in not informing the relatives of the deceased immediately cannot be accepted to the extent of rejecting the evidence of PW 1 as well as that of PW 2 outright. In the result the conviction of A-3, A-5, A-8, A-10, A-11, A-12, A-13 and A-14 and the sentences awarded against them are set aside. So far A-9 Mukappa is concerned, the appeal stands abated since he is reported to be dead. Narasappa (A-1) who dies before the filing of this appeal is not before us. The convictions of the remaining accused namely, Malappa, son of Hanamantha, original accused 2, Sabanna, son of Mukappa, original accused 4 Nagappa, son of Ningappa Kottoru, original accused 6, Yellappa, son of Mukappa, original accused 7 and the sentences awarded against them are confirmed. The appeal is dismissed as against them and allowed in respect of the remaining other accused7. In view of the above, the appeal is partly allowed.
Appeal Partly Allowed.
