Kirti Malhotra Smt v M. K. Malhotra
Supreme Court of India

19 July 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by the wife is sequel to a divorce petition under Section 13(1) (ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (the Act) filed by the husband on the ground of mental cruelty.
The trial court dismissed the petition. The First Appellate Court reversed the findings of the trial court and granted the divorce on the ground of mental cruelty. Letters patent Appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
2.  The marriage between the parties took place in January 1976 and a son was born in December 1976. Both the parties are Central Government employees. The respondent-husband is working in the Ministry of Home Affairs as Desk Officer whereas the appellant-wife is employed as Senior Section Officer, Northern Railway.
3.  It is not disputed that after the grant of divorce by the First Appellate Court the husband has remarried on 23-7-1987. In this view of the matter no useful purpose would be served in going into the merits of the controversy.
Mr. R. F. Nariman, learned counsel appearing for the appellant has very fairly contended that the respondent be directed to pay some reasonable maintenance to the son who is about 18 years of age. Rs. 1000 per month is being paid to the appellant for the maintenance of her son under the interim orders of this Court.
4.  We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We are of the view that Rs. 1000 per month as maintenance for an 18-years-old boy is very much on the lower side.
We, therefore, direct the respondent-husband to pay Rs. 3000 per month before 15the day of every month to Nipun Malhotra, the son of the divorced couple. The amount shall be paid in the name of Nipun Malhotra or be deposited in the bank account opened by the boy. The appellant shall inform the respondent the name of the bank and the account number for depositing the amount every month.
5. We further direct that the maintenance amount of Rs. 3000 fixed by us shall be paid by the respondent to Nipun Malhotra till he attain the age of 27 years. The amount of Rs. 3000 shall be payable with effect from 1-7-1994. The appeal is disposed of. No orders are necessary on the IA and the criminal miscellaneous petition in view of our order in the appeal.
Appeal disposed of.
