Shrenik Jhaveri v A. K. Menon and others
Supreme Court of India

16 November 1995
I.A. No. 2 in C.A. No. 6838 of 1995
The Order of the Court was as follows:
No order on IA No. 2.
The appeal is taken on board.
1.  On 14-9-1995 while issuing notice we stated that the only question which we would be inclined to consider is in regard to the rate of interest exceeding 15%. The facts reveal that the parties arrived at a settlement insofar as the dues were concerned and the terms of the settlement were reduced to writing. The question regarding the rate of interest was left open to be decided by the learned Judge of the Special Court. The learned Judge, for reasons stated in his order, determined the rate of interest at 30% from the date of the petition till the date of payment or realisation.  However, while doing so in his order he stated that notwithstanding the fact that he was mentioning the rate of interest as a part of the consent terms he would leave the right to appeal to the first respondent on the question of interest. In determining the rate of interest, the learned Judge took into consideration the fact that the appellant herein was not required to pay interest on the amount determined under the consent terms for a period of almost three years which amount would come to around 8 to 9 crores of rupees and also because the conduct of the appellant was such that he was not entitled to any liberal term insofar as the rate of interest was concerned. There are certain other observations in the order which let the learned Judge to conclude that the high rate of interest was called for and accordingly he stipulated 30% from the date of the petition till payment or realisation.
2.  We have heard Mr Salve, the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, and Mr A. Subba Rao, the learned counsel for the Custodian, and Ms. S.S. Jauhar for Respondent 2 herein. We have also heard Mr. Bhat, the learned counsel for Respondent 3 herein.
3. After taking into consideration the submissions made, the facts of this case which cannot be said to be routine, the prevailing rate of interest on bank loans and other credit facilities, we think it appropriate to reduce the rate of interest from 30% to 24% per annum. The rest of the terms and conditions of the consent decree remain intact.
4.  The appeal will stand disposed of with this modification only. No order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
