Major D. N. Sood and Another v Shanti Devi (Smt)
Supreme Court of India

15 December 1995
C.A. No. 12143 of 1995 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 867 of 1995)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  This appeal arises out of a petition filed by the respondent (landlord) for the eviction of the appellant (tenant) under the provisions of Section 14-D of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"). In the said proceedings the appellant has been granted leave to defend by the Additional Rent Controller, Delhi by order dated 22-9-1992. Feeling aggrieved by the said order passed by the Additional Rent Controller, the respondent filed a revision petition in the Delhi High Court under Section 25(B) (8) of the Act. The appellant raised an objection about the maintainability of the said revision petition and placed reliance on the earlier judgments of the High Court holding that an order granting leave to defend is interlocutory in nature and a revision does not lie against the said order.
2.   By the impugned judgment the learned Single Judge of the High Court has disagreed with the said view in the earlier judgments of the Court and has held that a revision lies under Section 25(B) (8) of the Act against an order granting leave to defend. The learned Judge has differed from the earlier judgments of the High Court on the ground that at the time the said judgments were delivered, the provisions of Sections 14-B, 14-C and 14-D were not there and they were introduced by the Amendment Act of 1988 and at in view of the changed scenario it must be held that a revision to the High Court will lie against an order of the Rent Controller granting leave to defend.
3.  We are unable to endorse this approach of the learned Judge in departing from the law laid in the earlier decisions of the High Court holding that an order granting leave to defend is an interlocutory order against which a revision does not lie. If the learned Judge was not inclined to agree with the said view, on the basis of the amendments introduced in the Act by the Amendment Act of 1988, the proper course for him was to refer the matter to be considered by a larger Bench. Sitting singly the learned Judge could not disagree with the view expressed earlier by other coordinate Benches of the High Court. Till the view taken in the earlier decisions was reversed by a larger Bench the learned Judge was bound by it.
4.   We are, therefore, unable to uphold the impugned judgment of the High Court taking the view that the revision filed by the respondent was maintainable and on the basis of the law as laid down in the earlier decisions of the High Court, which has not been overruled, it must be held that the revision filed by the respondent was not maintainable
5.  The appeal is therefore, allowed, the judgment of the High Court dated 2-3-1995 is set aside and the revision petition filed by the respondent is dismissed as not maintainable.
6.   The Additional Rent Controller will proceed with the eviction petition submitted by the respondent and hear and dispose of the same expeditiously within a period of six months. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
