Jagannivasan v State of Kerala
Supreme Court of India

9 March 1995
Cr.A. No. 261 of 1989
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant was convicted for offence punishable under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and was reduced sentenced by the High Court to four years' rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs 5000, out of which Rs4000 was ordered to be paid as compensation to the prosecutrix.
2.  The prosecutrix PW 1, undeniably was of consenting age, she being sixteen or seventeen years on the date of the occurrence. The prosecutrix and the accused-appellant were neighbours and belonged to the same Harijan community. She was a constant visitor to the house of PW 5. On the day of the occurrence, PW 5 apparently, invited her to house. At about 2 p.m. that day appellant however suddenly came there, closed her mouth, took her inside smothered kisses on her face, and then lay her on the ground and committed rape on her. The act did not leave any tell-tale circumstantial evidence from which inference of rape could be deduced inasmuch as her clothes were intact, her glass bangles were unbroken and no injury of any sort was found on her outward person. According to PW 3, a neighbour, he had seen the prosecutrix going to the house of PW 5 and the appellant thereafter to have entered that house. Likewise, after some time, he had seen first the appellant exit from that house and thereafter the prosecutrix. The prosecutrix kept her mouth shut for six days. Allegedly, for the reason that she felt pain on her private parts for the first time, she informed her mother about the incident, who in turn, related it to her husband. It is thereafter that the matter was reported to the police. The necessary medical examination of the prosecutrix took place. The doctor examining her found that no visible injuries were available on her person or on her private parts. Her hymen was found irregular and her vagina admitted two fingers. The doctor preponderated that admission of two fingers in the vagina of the prosecutrix suggested that she could be used to sexual intercourse and that otherwise there were no visible signs of rape or marks of violence.
3.  The star witness of the prosecution of course, was the prosecutrix. Her word, if believed, would lead to conviction and if not, would lead to acquittal. That there is no corroboration in such cases is not an absolute must, but at times courts have sought corroboration as a prudent measure, in case doubt instils the judicial mind. Now, here three courts below have accepted the version of the prosecutrix and have recorded and kept maintained the conviction. The trial court in its judgment has observed that when the prosecutrix was being examined during trial, she was being observed by the Presiding Officer and according to him she appeared to be a truthful witness. With this observation in the way, would it be desirable to doubt the statement of the prosecutrix in this fourth round of litigation, is the question to be considered.
4.  Each court has elaborately discussed the evidence of the prosecutrix and highlighted the circumstances in which she was raped and the fear instilled in her mind for which reason she did not disclose the crime of rape to her parents. But, that, in our view, is not the end of the matter.
5.  We may proceed with the assumption that the sexual act did take place in the way suggested by the prosecution and that the appellant was involved in it, . But, was it a case of consent? In order to determine that, we have to see the conduct of the prosecutrix. The peculiarity in that regard which creates doubt is that the prosecutrix kept quite for six days and did not whisper a word about it to anyone. Her getting pain in her private parts six days later is unbelievable made to her. There is evidence on the record that the appellant had been employed in Dubai and presumably had mastered a handsome income when compared to persons working in his home State. He was a bachelor and obviously an attractive catch for girls in his brotherhood to be bonded in matrimony. The fact that PW 5, the woman who lived in the neighbourhood, was absent at the crucial time, whose room was used for the sex act, leads to the doubt that the meeting between the prosecutrix and the appellant was arranged by PW 5 with the implicit consent of the parties. This PW 5 was declared hostile by the prosecution. Another factor of significance is that on that day there were dances organised in the village to celebrate the Onam festival and most of the populace had gone to witness such performance. There was thus less likelihood of their meeting being interfered with by curious onlookers.  Thus, it cannot be ruled out that a suitable time for the meeting was chosen by the two when PW 5 would conveniently be away and the visit of the prosecutrix and the appellant in her house would raise no suspicion. It is case of the prosecution that after the sex act, the prosecutrix went to the dancing performance rather than go to her parents and inform them of the suggested crime committed on her. In these circumstances, we are of the view that it would be unsafe to rely on the word of the prosecutrix, given vent to after six days to the effect that she was subjected to rape or that sexual intercourse was committed without her consent. It would rather be safe to lean in favour of the appellant and accord to him the benefit of doubt.
6.  As a result, this appeal succeeds. All the judgment of the courts below are set aside and the appellant is acquitted of the charge.
7.  Before we part with the judgment, there is another aspect which engages our attention. The High Court while reducing the sentence of imprisonment, imposed a fine of Rs 5000, out of which Rs 4000 was ordered to be paid to the prosecutrix as compensation. This Court did not grant him stay of payment of fine. If the fine has not been paid so far, he no longer is required to pay that fine. But, in case he has paid that fine and the same lies deposited in the Court, a sum of Rs 4000 as ordered, shall all the same be paid to the prosecutrix as a presumptive gift of the appellant to her. In case it stands paid, she is allowed to retain the same as such and not refund it. The balance of Rs. 1000 in that event be kept appropriated by the State as costs of the prosecution. This disposes of the appeal.
Appeal disposed of.
