Kayamuddin Shamsuddin Khan v State Bank of India
Supreme Court of India

19 January 1995
C.A. No. ... of 1995 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 986 of 1994]
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard counsel for the parties.
1.  The respondent had filed a suit in the Court of the third Joint Civil Judge, Senior Division, Amaravati for the recovery of Rs.1,25,145.05 with interest at the rate of 16.5% per annum till realisation with costs of proceedings. In the said suit a decree was passed in favour of the respondent.
The appellant filed an appeal, First Appeal No. 489 of 1993, in the Bombay High Court (Nagpur Bench) against the said decree.
2.   Along with the appeal the appellant also filed an application (Civil Application No. 2022 of 1993) for stay of the execution of the decree. The High Court, on 22-10-1993, passed the following order on the said application.
"The appellant to deposit Rs.75,000 within two weeks failing which the appeal shall stand dismissed without reference to the Court."
3.  It appears that the appellant has failed to deposit the said sum of Rs.75,000 within the period aforementioned. The appeal of the appellant stands dismissed in terms of the said order. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned order the appellant has filed this appeal.
4.  The question which arises for consideration in this appeal is whether the High Court was justified in directing that the appeal shall stand dismissed without reference to the court in the event of failure on the part of the appellant to deposit Rs.75,000 within two weeks.
5.  The learned counsel for the respondent has invited our attention to sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XLI in the Code of Civil Procedure, as amended in the State of Maharashtra, which reads as under:
"(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for payment of money, the appellant shall, within such time as the Appellate Court may allow, deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or furnish such security in respect thereof as the Court may think fitProvided that the Court may dispense with the deposit or security where it deems fit to do so for sufficient cause".
6.  The submission of the learned counsel for the respondent is that the High Court was right in giving the direction regarding the deposit of Rs.75,000 as per the aforesaid provision and since the appellant has failed to comply with the same the appeal has been rightly directed to be dismissed.
7.   We, however, find that the only consequence for non-compliance with the direction given under sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XLI is as provided in sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of Order XLI which reads as under:
"(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-rules, where the appellant fails to make the deposit or furnish the security specified in sub-rule (3) of Rule 1, the Court shall not make an order staying the execution of the decree."
8.  This would mean that non-compliance with the direction given regarding deposit under sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XLI would result in the Court refusing to stay the execution of the decree. In other words, the application for stay of the execution of the decree could be dismissed for such non-compliance but the Court could not give a direction for the dismissal of the appeal itself for such non-compliance.
9.  In the result, the appeal is allowed. The direction given by the High Court in its order dated 22-10-1993 that the appeal shall stand dismissed without further reference to the court in the event of the appellant's failure to deposit 
Rs.75,000 within two weeks is set aside and it is directed that as a result of non-deposit of Rs.75,000 within two weeks Civil Application No. 2022 of 1993 filed by the appellant shall stand dismissed. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
