Parshotam Singh v State of Punjab and Others
Supreme Court of India

12  May  1995
C.A. No. 5537 of 1995 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 8 April 1994 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in C.W.P. No. 12414 of 1991)
The Judgment was delivered by: K. JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J.
Leave granted.
1.  The Punjab Public Service Commission issued an advertisement dated 22-7-1989 for conducting examination for Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch and Allied Services) to fill in 8 posts of the PCS (Executive Branch), 4 posts of Excise and Taxation Officers and 5 posts of Assistant Registrars, Cooperative Societies. One of the posts of Excise and Taxation Officer was reserved for the wards of freedom fighters. The appellant, who claimed to be the son of a freedom fighter applied. However, he gave his first choice of service as the PCS (Executive Branch) and second that of Excise and Taxation officer.
2.  It is an admitted case that there was no reservation in favour of the wards of the freedom fighters either in the PCS (Executive Branch) or against the post of Assistant Registrars, Cooperative Societies. The appellant passed the competitive examination and also appeared in the viva voce and as envisaged by the rules, a joint merit list was prepared and appointments were ordered to be made on the basis of that list in the order namely (i) to the posts in the PCS (Executive Branch), ten to those of Excise and Taxation Officers and finally to those of Assistant Registrars, Cooperative Societies. The Grievance of the appellant is that Respondent 2, the Punjab Public Service Commission did not consider his candidature for the PCS (Executive Branch) on the premise that as he had applied as a ward of a freedom fighter, therefore his case was to be considered only for that category. Challenging the action of the Commission, the appellant filed a writ petition but the same was dismissed by the High Court. Hence the present appeal.
3.  There is no dispute that the appellant in his application has given his order of preference and the first preference was to the post of PCS (Executive Branch). Since he happened to be a ward of a freedom fighter, he also gave his second preference to one of the posts of Excise and Taxation Officers reserved for such wards. Before the High Court the respondents in the first instance admitted in their counter-affidavit that the appellant's case was considered only for the post of Excise and taxation Officer and was selected as such. But in an additional affidavit, they however averred that even if the case of the appellant has been considered for a post in PCS (Executive Branch) he was not liable to be selected on the basis of merit as per the rules.
4. Refuting the stand taken by the Public Service Commission the appellant also contended before the High Court that he secured more marks than Respondent 4 yet he was declared successful for being selected in the PCS (Executive branch). The High Court, however, dismissed the write petition holding that the selection of Respondent 4 could not be faulted.
5.  Learned counsel appearing for the appellant contended that there cannot be any dispute at all that the appellant's candidature was not considered at all for the PCS (Executive Branch) though that was his first preference on the sole ground that the appellant came in the reserved category and thereby eligible for the one reserved post for the wards of the freedom fighters. Having perused the records including the application, we agree with the learned counsel that the first preference of the appellant was PCS (Executive Branch) and it is also clear that his candidature was not considered for the PCS (Executive Branch) on the sole ground that his candidature could be limited only to the reserved post. This, on our view, is clearly wrong.
6.  Learned counsel has also placed some materials to show that two posts were filled up by other candidates not on the basis of merit but on the basis of compassionate grounds. Be that as it may, the definite stand taken by the appellant is that even according to the merit he stood higher in rank than Respondent 4 on the basis of the marks obtained.
7.  As we are satisfied that the candidature of the appellant was not considered for the PCS (Executive branch) on a wrong premise as mentioned above, we direct Respondents 1 and 2 namely State of Punjab and Punjab Public Service Commission respectively to examine the case of the appellant and if he is found eligible on the basis of the merit list and if he thus becomes entitled in the order of merit, he shall be selected for the post of PCS (Executive Branch). Accordingly the appeal is disposed of with the above directions. However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
