Commissioner of Income Tax v Umacharan Shaw and Brothers
Supreme Court of India

25 January 1995
C.A. No. 2498 of 1977
The Judgment was delivered by: J. S. VERMA J.
1.  These appeals are directed against the decision of the High Court in references made under section 256(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, to answer the following questions:
" Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the assessee is entitled to the deduction of Rs. 52,531 for the provision made by the assessee for gratuity payable to its employees under the Kerala Industrial Employees' Payment of Gratuity Act, 1970 ?
Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal is justified in taking into consideration for the quantification of the liability for the assessment year 1971-72 under the Kerala Industrial Employees' Payment of Gratuity Act, 1970, the completed years of service of the employees prior to the beginning of the accounting year?
Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in holding that in computing the quantum of the amount to be allowed as a deduction for gratuity payable under the Kerala Industrial Employees' Payment of Gratuity Act, 1970, which law came into force only in the accounting year relevant to the concerned assessment year 1970-71, the assessee is entitled to take into consideration the period of past service of the employees rendered up to the commencement of the relevant accounting year?
Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in holding that in computing the quantum of the amount to be allowed as a deduction for gratuity payable under the Kerala Industrial Employees' Payment of Gratuity Act, 1970, which law came into force only in the accounting year 1971-72, the assessee is entitled to take into consideration the period of past service of the employees rendered up to the commencement of the relevant accounting year?"
2.  The High Court answered the above questions in the affirmative, in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
3.  The High Court placed reliance on the decision of the Kerala High Court in CIT v. High Land Produce Co. Ltd. 1975 Indlaw KER 54 which has been affirmed by this court in CIT v. High Land Produce Co. Ltd. 1986 Indlaw SC 363, wherein reliance was placed on the decision in CIT v. Andhra Prabha Pvt. Ltd. 1986 Indlaw SC 364 (SC). It may be mentioned that in taking this view this court applied the principles laid down in an earlier decision in Shree Sajjan Mills Ltd. v. CIT 1985 Indlaw SC 325.
4.  These appeals, therefore, fail. We may, however, make it clear that the exact amount of which deduction is to be given has to be determined before the deduction is actually made. The appeals are dismissed accordingly. No costs.
Appeals dismissed.
