C. K. Ali v Taluk Land Board and Others
Supreme Court of India

2 January 1995
C.A. No. ..... of 1995 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 9699 of 1987)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The surplus area of the appellant's father was declared in 1978. This order was confirmed by the High Court. Subsequently, the appellant filed an application under Section 85(8) of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 claiming that he was not aware of the order of the Taluk Land Board and in fact 5.70 acres of the land declared surplus was purchased by him from the Land Tribunal. The application was rejected by all the authorities as he being major son must have been aware of the proceedings taken against his father.
2.  On 28-11-1994, after hearing learned counsel for the appellant, we directed him to produce the original purchase certificate issued by the Land Tribunal. Today a certified copy of that certificate has been produced. Copy of it has been served on the counsel for the State. From this certificate it appears the land was purchased by the appellant from the Land Tribunal. We do not propose to enter into the effect of the certificate as none of the subordinate authorities have examined it and dismissed the application filed by the appellant only on the ground of delay.
3.   We are of opinion that in case the certificate issued by the Land Tribunal is genuine and authentic, the mere fact that the appellant is the major son could not preclude him from claiming that he was an independent tenure-holder of the area purchased by him. In our opinion, it would be unjust to throw out the claim of the appellant only on assumption that he being major son must have been aware of the proceedings.
4.  In the result, the orders passed by the High Court and the Taluk Land Board are set aside and the matter is remitted to the Taluk Land Board for deciding it afresh. The Board shall afford an opportunity to the State to rebut the purchase certificate. It shall thereafter decide the dispute between the parties on merits in accordance with law. We may not be taken to have expressed any opinion on the purchase certificate.
5.  The appeal is disposed of accordingly. The parties shall bear their own costs.
Appeal disposed of.
