R. Subramaniam v Chief Personnel Officer Central Railways Ministry
Supreme Court of India

16 January 1995
W.P. (C) No. 881 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  By this petition the petitioner who was a railway employee and who retired in the year 1971 but did not opt for Pension Scheme as introduced by the Railway Board by its letter dated 16-11-1957 and rather opted for the Provident Fund Scheme seeks direction to the opposite party to grant him same benefit as was granted to others by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Bombay by its order dated 11-11-1987. The relevant portion of the order passed by the Tribunal is extracted below:
"The respondents are directed to implement the directions given in clauses (i) to (iv) of this order in respect of all the railway employees who were similarly placed like the applicants i.e., those who retired during the period from 1-4-1969 to 14-7-1972 and who had indicated their option in favour of pension scheme either at any time while in service or after their retirement and who now desire to opt for the pension scheme."
2.  It is not disputed that the SLP filed by the Union against the order has been dismissed by this Court and the review petition was also dismissed on 6-5-1991. The Union, in our opinion, cannot successfully resist the claim of the petitioner when the Tribunal has directed that this benefit shall be granted even to those employees who retired on or before the Pension Scheme was introduced and opt for it even now.
3. Since the petitioner opted for the Pension Scheme in terms of the order passed by the Tribunal maybe in 1990, we are of the opinion that in the facts and circumstances of the case the respondent should extend same benefit to the petitioner as has been extended to others.
4.  In the result, this petition succeeds and is allowed. Rule is made absolute. The respondent is directed to accept the option of the petitioner and grant him benefit of Pension Scheme. The petitioner is further directed to deposit the entire amount which he received in lieu of Provident Fund System within three months from the date the Government accepts the option of the petitioner. The option shall be accepted within two months from the date a copy of this order is produced.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.
