Virendranath v State of Maharashtra
Supreme Court of India

29 March 1995
Cr.As. No. 402 of 1994 with No. ... of 1995 [Arising out of S.L.P. (Cr.) No. 2859 of 1992]
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Leave granted in the special leave petition. Tagged with Criminal Appeal No. 402 of 1994, which is already on Board.
2.  The appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 402 of 1994 is the offender and the appellant in criminal appeal arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2859 of 1992 is the abettor. They stand convicted under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) and under Section 7 read with Section 12 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
3.  The prosecution case is that the complainant, PW 1 found a bundle of blankets and bed-sheets lying unclaimed on a road, which he carried to his house. A-1 got scent of it and recovered the bundle and brought the complainant to the police station. A-1 demanded a bribe of Rs 2000 from the complainant for not taking any action against him. After haggling, the demand was reduced to Rs 500. Rs 50 was paid on an occasion later on 16-12-1985 at another place in Bazargaon, as the complainant to begin with had no money. The balance of Rs 450 was to be paid two days later. On the later date, the complainant went to the anti-corruption staff and laid a complaint to the afore effect. Necessary formalities for organising a trap were made and at the appointed place the complainant as also PW 3 and PW 12 went to Hotel Dinesh.  In response to the query made by A-1, the complainant told him that he had brought the money. They then went to Baba Restaurant as suggested by Accused 1 and sat on benches near the counter. A-1 then told A-2, the restaurant-owner to accept money which the complainant, PW 1 would give him. After some snacks and tea were served, PW 1 gave the money to A-2 as per the directions of A-1. Thereafter, the green signal was given and the members of the raiding party arrived and the tainted notes were recovered from the possession of Accused 2. This is the sum total of the prosecution case.
4.  The Court of the Special Judge and the High Court believed the prosecution case and in particular the evidence of PW 1, PW 3 and PW 12 to the successful completion of the trap. Two points however have been urged by the learned counsel appearing for the respective appellants and these are:
(1) since the tainted money was found with A-2, complicity of A-1 is ruled out and
(2) complicity of A-2 is otherwise not established unless the prosecution could lead further evidence to show some meeting of minds between the two accused for acceptance of money, as mere acceptance on the suggestion of A-1 did not establish any guilty intent.
5. In so far as the first question is concerned, the fact that the tainted money in the hands of the complainant was meant to be passed on the A-1 as bribe is beyond dispute in view of the consistent and cogent evidence of the members of the trap party. PW 3 is an independent witness in that regard. He is a witness to the effect that it is at the asking of A-1 that A-2 took the tainted money and that beforehand talk had ensued between A-1 and the complainant, the bribe money with the complainant was meant to pass on to A-1 at the restaurant of A-2 the convenient place chosen by him. When the complainant paid the money to A-2 on the directions of A-1 then it was as good as if A-1 had taken the money and passed on to A-2. Acceptance is thus established from the conduct of A-1. On this understanding of the situation, it is difficult for us to accept the contention of learned counsel for A-1 that he was not guilty of the crime. We reject the contention outright and confirm the conviction of A-1, dismissing his appeal. However, we are inclined to reduce his sentence to the minimum imposable, i.e., one year rigorous imprisonment under all counts, while sustaining that of fine with the default clause.
6.  In so far as A-2 is concerned, we find considerable merit in the contention raised on his behalf that he could have received the money innocently from the complainant at the asking of A-1, without realising that it was bribe money. The argument prevails because the prosecution has nowhere led any other evidence of conduct or consistency of a behaviour from which it could be spelt out that A-2 was a habitual go-between in facilitating acceptance of bribe by A-1. This single instance which has been brought forth does not reveal of any regularity of conduct of this nature. There thus exists an area of doubt, the benefit of which shall go to A-2. Accordingly, the appeal of A-2 is allowed and he is acquitted of the charges.
7.  In the end result, Criminal Appeal No. 402 of 1994 is dismissed, subject to the modification in sentence and Criminal Appeal No. ... of 1995 arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2859 of 1992 stands allowed, upsetting the convictions and sentence. Order accordingly.
Appeals disposed of.
