1.  These two petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution of India have been filed by the employee and the employer respectively and are directed against an award dated 27.11.1982 made by the Labour Court, Gorakhpur and published in the official gazette on 4.1.1993 in adjudication No. 2/1977 whereby the Labour Court directed that the employee Hridayanand petitioner in writ petition No. 4092/83 be reinstated in service and specifically ordering that the employee will not be entitled to any wages for the period he remained but of employment.
2.  I have heard Sri S.N. Dey learned counsel for the workman and Sri V.R. Agarwal, learned counsel for the employer.
3.  The workman was employed with M/s. G.P. Stores. The case of the employed was that his service were illegally terminated on 7.3.1976 because he was demanding due salary as a salesman. The case as advanced by the employer before the Labour Court was that the employee was employed as a Packer and on 5.3.1976, he misbehaved with a partner of the employer firm namely Shri R.K. Agarwal. On the same date he was issued a charge-sheet which he refused to accept and from the next day i.e., 6th March, 1976 he absented from duty. The employer waited till 23rd March, 1976 and assuming that the employee was not longer interested in employment struck off his name from the rolls. An industrial disputes having been raised by the employee through the Dookan Karmchari Sabha the State Government made a reference under Section4-K of the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to the Labour Court, Gorakhpur which was registered as adjudication case No. 2/1977 and the Labour Court in the concluding parts of its award has stated that the employee was required to prove that the termination of his service was invalid and that he had failed to establish this. It also observed that the employer too has failed to establish that the employee voluntarily abandoned the employment and therefore, termination of his service was justified and valid.
4. The Labour Court therefore, further stated that keeping in view the entire circumstances and in view of the requirements of social justice, equity and good conscience. It would be proper to reinstate the employee on his job but the employee will not be entitled to any back wages.
5.  In his petition the employee Hridayanand contends that it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that while ordering reinstatement a workman should be granted back wages as a normal rule and the Labour Court erred in not awarding back wages. The respondent employer has not filed any counter affidavit in the employee's writ petition No. 4092 of 1983.
6.  The employer M/s. G.P. Stores in its writ petition No. 4361 of 1983 on the other hand contends that the Labour Court has not recorded a finding that the employee has failed to establish that the termination of employment was illegal and should have therefore, rejected the employee's claim and it has erred in directing reinstatement of the employee. In his counter affidavit the employee Hridayanand has stated that the Labour Court rightly ordered the reinstatement but erred in not granting him back wages. In the rejoinder affidavit sworn by R.K. Agarwal on behalf of the petitioner it has been stated that after the impugned award, the petitioner reinstated the respondent but he did not report for work, and on the contrary made allegations before the Dy. Labour Commissioner, Allahabad, that he has not been allowed to join his duties, ultimately a settlement was arrived at between the parties before the Regional Conciliation Officer, Allahabad under which respondent voluntarily resigned from the service of the petitioner w.e.f. 20.12.1983 and accepted full and final payment of Rs. 2,600/- inclusive of gratuity, a copy of the instrument of settlement dated 20.12.1983 has been annexed with the rejoinder affidavit, which has not been controverted and the learned counsel for the workman Shri S.N. Dey conceded that as per settlement the employee had resigned and the controversy about reinstatement does not survive between the parties any longer.
7.  A copy of the instrument of settlement has been annexed along with the rejoinder affidavit as Annexure No. R.A. 1, which shows that the dispute was about a subsequent termination of service from 20.6.1983 and it was that dispute, that was settled between the parties and the workman voluntarily resigned from 20.12.1983 and received Rs. 2,600/- for his dues including gratuity.
8.  Thus so far as writ petition filed by the employer is concerned it has become infructuous because as admitted in the rejoinder affidavit it offered employment to the employee after the award and paid him wages etc. for the period 29.6.1983 till the time he voluntary resigned on 20.12.1983.  Therefore, by virtue of the aforesaid developments the controversy about reinstatement has died out and the grievance of the employer does not survive. Therefore, writ petition No. 4361 of 1983 has to be dismissed as infructuous. As regards the employees writ petition No. 4092 of 1983 the controversy is whether the Labour Court's order declining to grant back wages to the petitioner requires interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
9.  The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in G.T. Lad v. Chemical & Fibres of India Ltd. 1978 Indlaw SC 5 in which it was observed that the general rule is that where reinstatement has been directed by the Court, the entire back-wages must follow as a matter of course. The Hon'ble Supreme Court further observed that there is a discretion for the Court having regard to special circumstances, if any, to modify this normal rule. Therefore, it cannot be said that there is an absolute rule that in every case of reinstatement back wages must be granted and as clarified by the Supreme Court there is a discretion which can be exercised in proper case declining to grant of back wages. As is clear from the tenor of the award the Tribunal was not clear in its mind that the termination of employment of the petitioner Hridayanand was not in accordance with law. The Labour Court could not come to any definite finding as to whether the employee's assertion or that of the employer was correct. It did not order reinstatement on the ground that the termination of the employment by the employer was illegal. It ordered reinstatement because of the considerations of social justice, equity and good conscious and it was for this reason that it declined to grant the relief of back wages. Since, there is no concluded finding that the termination of employment was illegal it is not possible for this Court to grant the relief of back wages to the workman. A long period of 20 years has elapsed since the dispute commenced between the parties and ultimately as referred to above the workman chose to resign. There is not a word in his writ petition that either for the whole or a part of the period between 7.3.1976 and the date of the award he was without employment. In paragraph No. 8 of the writ petition he stated as under:-
"8. That the petitioner was dismissed from 7.3.1976 and the award was made on 27.11.1982 and in this manner about 6 1/2 years elapsed before the award was given and during this period the petitioner has suffered severe financial difficulties and there is no evidence adduced by the respondent No. 1 before the Labour Court that the petitioner was in any manner gainfully employed during the said period."
10.  Thus, though he was conscious that the question of gainful employment during the period was relevant for the grant of back wages, he did not assert that he remained unemployed and suffered any financial loss because of the illegal termination of his service. Therefore, it is not a fit case in which this Court should exercise its extra-ordinary jurisdiction in ordering payment of back wages or even remitting the matter back to the Labour Court for a fresh decision on the validity of the termination and the claim of back wages. Therefore, this writ petition too deserves to be dismissed.
11.  In view of the above discussion both the writ petitions are dismissed. The parties will bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.
