Surjit Kaur (Mst) and Others v Arjan Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 December 1996
C.A. No. 1947 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The defendants are the appellants in this appeal. The suit in question had been filed on behalf of the respondents for declaration of their title and recovery of possession. It was dismissed by the trial court. The court of appeal also affirmed the findings recorded by the trial court.
2.   The second appeal filed before the High Court on behalf of the respondents, however, was allowed and the suit in question was decreed
3.  It appears that one Mit Singh, the original holder of the lands in question, died in the year 1940 leaving behind his widow, namely, Harnam Kaur and three daughters who are the appellants before this Court. There is no dispute that after the death of Mit Singh, his widow Ilarnam Kaur came into possession of the properties in question and remained in possession thereof. She executed a registered deed of gift in the year 1948 in favour of her three daughters i.e. the appellants. Hamam Kaur died on l1-1986. The suit which was filed on behalf of the respondents questioned the validity of the aforesaid deed of gift claiming that the widow had no right to execute the deed of gift and the respondents as reversioners were entitled to hold the properties after the death of the widow, Harnam Kaur.
4.   This stand of the respondents was negatived by the trial court as well as the court of appeal, but the High Court in second appeal reversed the findings recorded by the two courts. There are a series of judgments of this Court that even if the deed of gift is executed before coming into force of the Hindu Succession Act but if the widow survives and remains in possession of the properties after coming into force of the aforesaid Act, then she acquires absolute title to the properties left behind by her husband and her limited right crystallizes into an absolute right. In view of those judgments we fail to appreciate as to how the High Court set aside the judgments of the two courts and decreed the suit of the respondents as reversioners.
5.   In view of the fact that Hamam Kaur, the widow, died on 1l-l986 several years after coming into force of the Hindu Succession Act, the appellants shall be deemed to have acquired valid right, title and interest over the lands gifted to them
6.  In any case, after the death of the widow, H am am Kaur, the properties shall vest in the heirs of her husband and there is no dispute that Mit Singh, the husband of Harnam Kaur left behind only three daughters who are the appellants before us. They are Class I heirs under the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act and, as such, they will inherit the properties even as the heirs of Mit Singh, in preference to the respondents, who are not Class I heifs. On that ground also, the suit filed on behalf of the respondents ought to have been dismissed
7.  In the result, the appeal succeeds and is allowed. The judgment and decree of the High Court are set aside
IA No. 3 of 1996 stands disposed of. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
