O. K. Bhardwaj v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

4 October 1996
C.A. No. 12774 of 1996 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) No. 23720 of 1995)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
The High Court has recorded its opinion on two questions:
(i) that the punishment imposing stoppage of three increments with cumulative effect is not a major penalty but a minor penalty;
(ii) in the case of minor penalties,
"it is not necessary to give opportunity to the employee to give explanation and it is also not necessary to hear him before awarding the penalty"
1.    While we agree with the first proposition of the High Court having regard to the rule position which expressly says that "withholding increments of pay with or without cumulative effect" is a minor penalty, we find it not possible to agree with the second proposition. Even in the case of a minor penalty an opportunity has to be given to the delinquent employee to have his say or to file his explanation with respect to the charges against him.
2.   Moreover, if the charges are factual and if they are denied by the delinquent employee, an enquiry should also be called for. This is the minimum requirement of the principle of natural justice and the said requirement cannot be dispensed with.
3.    Learned counsel for the respondent, however, says that though the second proposition of the High Court may not be correct, yet so far as this case is concerned it does not make any difference for the reason that in this case, as a fact an opportunity was given to the appellant and that there has been adequate compliance with the principles of natural justice. But since the High Court has not considered the matter from the above angle that is on merits the proper course in our opinion is to remit the matter to the High Court to consider whether an opportunity was given to the appellant to put forward his case and whether in the light of the facts and circumstances of the case, an enquiry was called for and if called for, was it held according to law and the principles of natural justice, and to dispose of the matter according to law.
The appeal is allowed with the above directions. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
