State of Bihar v Akhlakh Ahmed and Others
Supreme Court of India

15 January 1996
Cr.As. Nos. ... of 1996 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (Cr.) Nos. 1344-1346 of 1995)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Special leave granted.
2. Charge sheets under Section 302 IPC read with Sections 147, 148, 149, 114, 323, 324, 341, 427, 337 and 307 Indian Penal Code read with Section 27, Arms Act, 1959 have been filed before the Court concerned against Anand Mohan, Arun Kumar Singh and 22 others.
3. By the impugned order, a learned Single Judge of the Patna High Court has granted bail to the respondents. It is alleged that the respondents were members of the unlawful assembly which killed the District Magistrate, Gopalganj (an IAS Officer). The District Magistrate was passing from the place where a crowd was assembled. He was in his official car with a red light on top of the vehicle. The District Magistrate was dragged out of the car and was killed. It is alleged that one Bhutkum Shukla fired shots from a pistol which killed the District Magistrate. The said Bhutkum Shukla is absconding.
4. We do not wish to go into the merits of various contentions raised by learned counsel for the parties. The High Court allowed the bail applications of the respondents on the following reasoning:
"The look of the case is indeed bad. That a District Magistrate accompanied by his armed bodyguard besides his driver and another travelling in his official car should be waylaid and killed by a mob on a public road is indeed shocking, particularly because there was no provocation of any kind from his side. I feel sad and indignant about the incident. I wish the investigating agency could share the same feeling and make a fair investigation so that the real culprits are identified and punished. But while considering the prayer for bail which involves the question of liberty of the citizens, one cannot go by sentiments alone.
All the petitioners except the petitioners Ram Babu Singh, Munna Kapar and Balakant Singh, who are drivers and police constable attached with the petitioner Anand Mohan as his bodyguard, claim to be political activists. In fact, Anand Mohan is an MLA. He is also the leader of the Bihar Peoples' Party in the Legislative Assembly (his wife Lovely Anand, co- accused, is an MP). Another petitioner Akhlakh Ahmed has been a Minister in the past. They professedly belong to the Bihar Peoples' Party and Samta Party, which are opposition parties in the State of Bihar. They allege false implication on account of political rivalry. I do not propose to refer to the prosecution case. The written report of the informant, who is a Dy. SP, runs into four close typed sheets.
The police has examined 45 witnesses (as per the case diary produced). It is the consistent case of the police that the deceased was killed by a mob. Specific allegation has been made against Bhutkum Shukla, brother of one Chhotan Shukla, whose murder a day earlier is said to be the precursor of the fateful event. Bhutkum Shukla is not a petitioner in these applications. As regards the petitioner, it is said that they were members of the mob. As regards Anand Mohan, Lovely Anand and Professor Arun Kumar Singh, it is said that they made fiery speeches which led to the occurrence. Anand Mohan is also said to have exhorted Bhutkum Shukla to kill the deceased. I may mention that the members of the mob and the order givers are usually and almost invariably granted bail by this Court.
I have gone through the statements of the 45 witnesses in the case diary. They include 9 so called independent witnesses plus 2 seizure witnesses. Out of the rest, 28 are police officials of various ranks, three are Magistrates, one a Supply Inspector and two drivers. I am constrained to observe that they have literally, if I may say so, made parrot like statements. Coming as they do, from the persons concerned, they do not inspire much confidence. Be that as it may, nothing has been said specifically about the individual role played by the accused persons except as indicated above, some of them are said to have made speeches and exhorted the assaulter to kill the deceased."
5. The High Court rejected the contention that the grant of bail would affect the course of investigation and also rejected the contention that the release of the respondents would affect the merit of the investigation as they may terrorise the witnesses.
6. Mr. U. R. Lalit has taken us through the statement of Sita Ram Paswan recorded during the investigation (he is stated to be an eyewitness) wherein it is stated as under:
"Meanwhile MLA Anand Mohan and Lovely Anand, MP started speaking aloud:  'Bhutkum, what are you looking for, kill him, he is DM of the administration, do not let him go alive.' Whereupon one tall white complexioned young man of 25-26 years' age came out from the crowd and drawing a revolver from his waist fired three shots at the man fallen on the ground, thus getting badly wounded."
7. In similar terms are the statements of Ram Swaroop and Jai Prakash Singh, who are also stated to be eyewitnesses.
8. Mr. U. R. Lalit has pressed for setting aside the order of the High Court and for cancellation of the bail only in respect of Anand Mohan and Arun Kumar Singh. We see no ground to interfere with the order of the High Court so far as Arun Kumar Singh is concerned. We reject the prayer in respect of Arun Kumar Singh.
9. We are, however, of the view that the interest of justice would be met if the impugned order of the High Court is set aside so far as Anand Mohan is concerned. We are of the view that in the facts and circumstances of this case, the High Court should not have granted ball to Anand Mohan.
10. We allow the appeals, set aside the order of the High Court to the extent that it relates to Anand Mohan and cancel the bail granted by the High Court to Anand Mohan. Anand Mohan shall be taken into custody forthwith.
11. Charge sheets against the respondents have been filed in the Court. We direct the trial court to fix the date for the commencement of the trial within two months from the receipt of this order. The evidence of the witnesses shall be recorded on a day to day basis and the trial shall be concluded expeditiously, without interruption after its commencement. We give liberty to Anand Mohan to move the trial court for grant of bail at a stage when the recording of the evidence of the eyewitnesses is completed. The appeals are disposed of in the above terms.
Appeals disposed of.
