Nilamani Routray v Bennett Coleman and Company Limited
Supreme Court of India

30 January 1996
Cr.A. No. 513 of 1994
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  On a complaint filed by the appellant herein, the respondent-Company and two others were summoned by the learned Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Bhubaneswar to stand trial for an offence punishable u/s. 500 of the Indian Penal Code. After entering appearance, the respondent-Company filed an application for recalling the process issued against it for reasons mentioned therein. In opposing the application, the appellant contended, inter alia, that once process was issued against an accused, the court had no power to recall or review it.
2.   The learned Magistrate rejected the above contention of the appellant relying upon the following passage from the judgment of this Court in K. M. Mathew v. State of Kerala 1991 Indlaw SC 7911991 Indlaw SC 791:
" It is open to the accused to plead before the Magistrate that the process against him ought not to have been issued. The Magistrate may drop the proceedings if he is satisfied on reconsideration of the complaint that there is no offence for which the accused could be tried. It is his judicial discretion. No specific provision is required for the Magistrate to drop the proceedings or rescind the process. The order issuing the process is an interim order and not a judgment. It can be varied or recalled. The fact the process has already been issued is no bar to drop the proceedings if the complaint on the very face of it does not disclose any offence against the accused."
3.  Assailing the above order of the learned Magistrate, the appellant moved the High Court by filing a revision petition which was rejected in view of the above judgment of this Court. Hence this appeal.
4.  It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that K. M. Mathew case 1991 Indlaw SC 7911991 Indlaw SC 791 requires reconsideration for it is settled law that a power of review has to be conferred by law specifically or by necessary implication and the Code of Criminal Procedure does not confer such power. Since we find that there is some substance in the above contention, it is desirable that the matter be heard by a Bench of three Judges. Let the papers be placed before the learned Chief Justice for necessary orders.
Order accordingly.
