Steel Authority of India Limited v Union of India and Another
Supreme Court of India

7 August 1996
C.As. Nos. 3990-4000 of 1984
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. These are appeals that arise out of an order of the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
2. No detailed discussion of facts is necessary for reasons which will become apparent. The appellants manufacture iron and steel. For that purpose they require oxygen gas. They make the oxygen gas themselves. Of the oxygen gas made by the appellants, 99.998% is captively consumed as aforesaid. In this respect the appellants declared the value of 100 cubic metres of the oxygen gas at Rs 23.21, being the cost of production. The balance. 002 per cent was used by the appellants contractors working in their plant, to whom the appellants charged the rate of Rs 325 per hundred cubic metres.
3.  The Excise authorities issued to the appellants a notice proposing to assess the value of the 99.998 per cent of the oxygen gas captively used also at the rate of Rs 325 per hundred cubic metres and did so. The Tribunal upheld the stand of the Excise authorities and it is against that order of the Tribunal that these appeals are filed.
4. At the stage when notice on these appeals was issued, particular reference was made to the ground that related to an exemption notification under Rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 which exempted altogether from excise duty oxygen gas intended for use in the manufacture of iron in any crude form, steel ingots and iron or steel products falling under Items Nos. 25, 26 and 26-AA of the First Schedule, provided that the Assistant Collector of Central Excise was satisfied that the oxygen gas had been so used. The appeal was admitted and there was a stay of recovery of the differential duty on the oxygen gas captively consumed.
5. The principal argument is based upon the exemption notification. It is not in dispute that the appellants manufacture the items set out in the exemption notification falling within the entries of the tariff therein stated. The appellants have however to satisfy the Assistant Collector of Central Excise that the oxygen gas had been used for the purpose set out in the exemption notification.
6. It therefore, becomes necessary to set aside the order under appeal and remand the matters to the Assistant Collector of Central Excise to determine what quantity of oxygen gas had been captively consumed, in respect of which the benefit of the exemption notification shall be available to the appellants. To the extent that it is available, no differential duty shall be payable.
7. Having regard to what has transpired, it becomes unnecessary to go into the question of the valuation at the rate of Rs 325 per hundred cubic metres. That question will remain open, should it be necessary to raise it.
8. The civil appeals are disposed of accordingly.
9. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeals disposed of.
