Bashir Ahmed and Others v State of Punjab and Others
Supreme Court of India

22 March 1996
C.A. No. 6909 of 1996 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 22 February 1994 of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in C.W.P. No. 12838 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Leave granted.
This appeal by special leave arises from the judgment and order of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana made on February 22, 1994 in CWP No.12838/93. Admittedly, the appellants had worked initially as cleaners and thereafter they were promoted as Divers in Poultry Department of the State of Punjab. Since they were found to be surplus, they were retrenched when the Government had notified for direct recruitment in the Department of Animal Husbandry, the appellants also had applied for direct recruitment. They were not selected on the ground that they did not possess the required educational qualifications. Consequently, they filed the writ petition which came to be dismissed. Thus, this appeal by special leave.
The learned counsel for the appellants has strenuously contended that this Court in C.A. No.3496 of 1990 titled B.N. Saxena vs. N.D.M.C. decided on July 25, 1990 read down the rule holding that after the initial appointments experience gained for a considerable length of time is itself a qualification for promotion and, therefore, requirement of further qualification was bad in law. He also relied upon another judgment in State of U.P. & Ors. Vs. J. P. Chaurasia and Others. [(1989) 1 SCC 121]. 1988 Indlaw SC 933 Relying
1. Thereon, it is contended that the rule prescribing educational qualifications as one of the qualifications for direct recruitment must be read down. So read down, since the appellants have the necessary experience, it must be construed to be a qualification for recruitment. The view taken by the High Court and recruitment authority is had in law. We find no force in that contention. It is seen that for the direct recruitment only. The Government in the rule has prescribed driving license and also knowledge of Punjabi language up to middle standard to be the qualification. Therefore, anyone who possesses those qualifications has to be considered for recruitment. Since, admittedly the appellants are not fulfilling the said criteria, the dismissal of the writ petition cannot be said to be illegal.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
