B. L. Wadehra v Union of India
Supreme Court of India

2 December 1996
W.P. (C) No. 286 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Pursuant to this Court's order dated 20-11-1996, the Government of India has filed a report dated 27-11-1996. We do not wish to comment on the report at present. The matter has been discussed in the Court. Mr K.N. Bhat, learned Additional Solicitor General states that to have a fresh look at the matter in the light of the discussion which has taken place in the Court, he seeks one week's adjournment.
The matter to come up on 9-12-1996.
2.  Mr Arun Jaitley, learned counsel appearing for MCD states that pursuant to this Court's order dated 20-11-1996*, the matter regarding taking over the colonies from DDA has been settled. He further states that the matter of cleaning the roads has also been settled with PWD and a positive understanding has been reached with MTNL. Mr V.B. Saharya will fde a short note in this respect.
3.  Mr N.N. Goswami, learned counsel for NCT, Delhi Administration states that 17 Municipal Magistrates have already been appointed and they have taken charge of their respective positions. The Chief Secretary shall issue directions to the Magistrates to give weekly report of their functioning.
4. A responsible officer from the Chief Secretary's office shall file an affidavit in this Court within two months indicating the progress in the functioning of the 17 Magistrates.
5.  We have been taken through the report placed on record by the Central Pollution Control Board regarding installation and functioning of various pollution control devices by the hospitals in Delhi.
So far as All India Institute of Medical Sciences is concerned, the Board indicates that the emission standard of particulate matter and all other hazardous gases are in excess of the standards prescribed by the Central Pollution Control Board.
6. Learned counsel for the Institute states that the emission shall be brought within the standards prescribed by the Board. That must be done within 3 months from today.
We make it clear that failing to achieve the standards laid down by the Board, the Institute may be liable to pay heavy pollution fine.
To come up on 7-4-1997.
7.  Similar status report has been given by the Board regarding Safdarjung Hospital. Their emission standards are in excess of the standards prescribed by the Board.
Learned counsel for the Hospital states that the emissions shall be brought within the prescribed limits within 3 months from today.
8.  Learned counsel for Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital states that the order for the installation of second incinerator has already been placed. She states that on the next date of hearing positive time schedule shall be given indicating the date by which the second incinerator shall be operative.
Order accordingly.
