K. S. Rao v P. Venkateswara (Dead) Through Lrs
Supreme Court of India

11 April 1996
C.A. No. 1372 of 1981
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by special leave is by the judgment-debtor whose objection to the execution of the decree against him has been rejected by the executing court. The judgment-debtor preferred an appeal to the Subordinate Judge against the rejection of his objection which was dismissed as not maintainable in view of a decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court that no appeal lay against dismissal of such an objection by the executing court. The judgment-debtor then preferred a revision petition to the High Court which has been dismissed in limine without any reasons being given in the order dismissing the revision.
Hence, this appeal by special leave.
2.  In the present case, it is unnecessary to decide whether an appeal lay against dismissal of the objection or not because even if no appeal is maintainable, the judgment-debtor is entitled to the relief on the undisputed facts alone. This-being so, the rejection of his objection by the executing court could be corrected even in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction under Section 115 CPC.
3.  Admittedly, the total holding comprises of 9.60 acres of dry land in which the appellant-judgment-debtor and his two brothers have equal shares. Accordingly, the share of the judgment-debtor by virtue of the definition of "family" in clause (l) of Section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Indebtedness (Relief) Act, 1977 is only 3.20 acres of dry land.
4. This being so, the judgment-debtor falls within the definition of a "small farmer" in clause (t) of Section 3 of the Act. The result is that the decretal debt in question including interest, if any, stood discharged by virtue of Section 4 of the Act and the execution of that decree cannot be made. The objection of the judgment-debtor to the execution of the decree was, therefore, erroneously rejected by the executing court. This illegality has, therefore, to be corrected.
5.  Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the executing court as well as that of the appellate court and of the High Court are set aside. Since the appeal has not been opposed by the respondents in spite of notice, no costs.
Appeal allowed.
