1.  Special leave grant in S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 10132 of 1995 and 10224 of 1995.
2.  These appeals and the writ petition raise common questions relating to reservation of seats for wards of employees in the matter of admission to institutions imparting technical ucation. The appeals are direct against the judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana dat September 2, 1994. We will first take up the appeals.
3.  Civil Appeal No. 4101 OF 1995 relates to the Technological Institute of Textile and Science at Bhiwani in the State of Haryana (for short 'the T.I.T. & S.'). The T.I.T. & S. is a society register under the West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961. It is running a technical institute which imparts ucation/training in Textile Technology, Textile Chemistry, Computer Science and Management Science leading to the award of B. Tech/M. Tech./M.M.S. Degrees. The T.I.T. & S. is affiliat to the Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (hereinafter referr to as'the respondent-University'). The T.I.T. & S. also owns and runs a textile mill under the same roof employing about 1500 workers wherein the students receive practical training under the actual mill working conditions. The normal intake in the B. Tech. Course of the T.I.T. & S. is 90 students each year and admission to these 90 seats is made according to merit on the basis of a competitive entrance test conduct by the respondent-University. In addition to the aforesaid 90 seats, the T.I.T. & S. has provid four additional seats for the wards of the employees of the appellant-Institute. These seats are available to the wards of only those employees who have put in minimum 10 years service in the T.I.T. & S. Two of these four seats are available in Computer Science and the other two in Textiles Out of these four seats two seats are earmark for college staff and two seats for mill/school staff. As per the rules prescrib for admission effective since academic session 1991-92, in order to be eligible for admission the candidate is requir to have at least 60% marks in the aggregate of three subjects (Physics, Chemistry and Maths) at 10+2 examination and admission is to be made on the basis of merit to be earn according to the marks secur in the Entrance Examination conduct by the respondent-University.
4.  Seats earmark for college and mill/school staff can be inter-chang in case there is no eligible candidate in one particular group and if a seat allott for Computer Course is not desir by the allottee, he shall be offer a seat in the Textile Course and, if any seat remains vacant, the requirement of service period may be relax with prior approval of the Chairman of the Society.
5.  Normally this facility for wards of the staff is available for one seat for one employee's child but in no case it can be extend to more than two children. The wards of the employees who secure admission on their own merit or on reserv seats of wards are eligible for freeship. The T.I.T. & S. does not receive any financial did either from the State Government or the Central Government or the respondent-University or any other local authority. By letter dat July 15, 1993, the respondent-University convey its decision not to permit the T.I.T. & S. to continue with the reservation of seats for the wards of the staff of the T.I.T. & S. in the B. Tech Course in view of the judgment of this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, 1993 (1) SCC 645 1993 Indlaw SC 1056, and the T.I.T. & S. was direct not to make any admission under this category. Feeling aggriev by the said order of the respondent-University, the T.I.T. & S. fil a Writ Petition (C.W.P. No. 9296 of 1993) in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana which has been dismiss by the impugn judgment of the High Court dat September 2, 1994.
6.  Civil Appeals arising out of S.L.Ps. Nos. 10132 of 1995 and 10224 of 1995 relate to the Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology, Patiala (for short 'the T.I.E.T.') and the Thapar Polytechnic which have been establish and are being run by the Patiala Technical ucation Trust. As per declaration of the Central Government dat December 30, 1985 under Section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 the T.I.E.T. is deem to be a university for the purpose of the said Act. The T.I.E.T. imparts ucation at the Graduate and Post-Graduate level. At the under-graduate level it awards degree in Bachelor of Engineering and at the post-graduate level it awards the degree in Master of Engineering. In the T.I.E.T. there are 180 seats in various courses for award of degree in Bachelor of Engineering 2% seats are reserv for the children of employees of the T.I.E.T. sand the Patiala Technical ucation Trust and 5% seats are reserv for the children of employees of Thapar Group of Companies.
7.  The candidates for these seats are to be sponsor by the Patiala Technical ucation trust. The T.I.E.T. receives maintenance grants for running expenses from the Government of Punjab.The Thapar Polytechnic conducts three year courses. Admission to these courses is made on the basis of merit to be determin in Joint Competitive Entrance Test conduct by the Punjab Government through Punjab School ucation Board. Provision is, however, made for reservation of 2% seats for wards of employees of the T.I.E.T. and the Thapar Polytechnic to be nominat by the Patiala Technical ucation Trust. The nomination is made on the basis of relative merits of candidates but the nominat candidates are not requir to appear in the Common Entrance Test. The Polytechnic receives grant for running expenses from the State Government. The Government of Punjab, by its letter dat September 16, 1991 address to the Director of Technical ucation and Industrial Training, Punjab, communicat that in view of the pronouncement of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana that reservations in admission are discriminatory and unconstitutional, reservation in admission for wards of employees working in the Department/Institutions cannot be justifi on the plea that it is done as a measure of welfare and that the Government had decid that with effect from the academic session 1991-92 onwards there shall be no reservation in admissions for wards of employees of Department/Institutions and that such reservations, wherever stipulat in (a) Diploma level courses in Government/Private aid /Private unaid Institutions affiliat with the State Board of Technical ucation, and (b) Certificate level courses in all such like Institutions under the purview of the Industrial Training wing of the said Department, shall stand concell with imm iate effect. As regards Degree level courses in such like Institutions, falling within the purview of the said Department and affiliat with State Board of Technical ucation, it was direct that since admission had already been finalis for the academic session 1991-92, the decision would be applicable in their case with effect from the next academic year, i.e., 1992-93. The T.I.E.T. fil a Writ Petition (Writ Petition No. 1745 of 1992) in the High Court and another Writ Petition (Writ Petition No. 1744 of 1992) was fil by the Patiala Technical ucation Trust assailing the said order of the Government of Punjab dat September 16, 1991. Both these Writ Petitions have been dismiss by the impugn judgment of the High Court dat September 2, 1994.
8.  The High Court has held that in view of the decision of this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan & Ors 1993 Indlaw SC 1056. (supra) no quota can be reserv for the management or for any family, caste or community which may have establish the college. The High Court has reject the contention that J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) was not applicable. The High Court has also plac reliance on the decisions of this Court State of Gujarat v. Meghji Pethraj Shah Charitable Trust & Ors., 1994 (3) SCC 552 1994 Indlaw SC 424 and Chairman/Direct, Combin Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das & Ors., 1992 (3) SCC 543 1991 Indlaw SC 716, and has held that the orders impugn in the writ petitions do not suffer from any illegality or unconstitutionality.
9.  In the context of admission to an institution imparting higher ucation in professional courses a question has often arisen whether the State can make provision giving preferential treatment to candidates seeking admission to the institution. In dealing with this question the approach of this Court has been that such preferential treatment must be consistent with the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution guaranting equality of opportunity and that though reasonable classification is permissible, such classification must have a reasonable nexus with object of the rules providing such admission, namely, to select the most meritorious amongst the candidates to have advantage of such ucation. Applying this test this Court has struck down, as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, provision for allotment of seats in m ical college in the State amongst the various districts in the State in the ratio of the population of each district to the total population of the State. [See ; Minor P. Rajendran v. State of Madras & Ors., 1968 (2) SCR 786 1968 Indlaw SC 341]. Similar provision for distribution of seats on unit basis was also struck down. [See : A. Peeriakaruppan, Etc. v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., 1971 (2) SCR 430 1970 Indlaw SC 164]. University wise distribution of seats has, however, been upheld on the ground that the universities are set up for satisfying the ucational ne s of different areas where they are set up and those attach to such universities have their ambitions to have training in specialis subjects like m icine satisfi through colleges attach to their own universities. [See : D.N. Chanchala v. State of Mysore & Ors., Etc., 1971 Supp. SCR 608 1971 Indlaw SC 641]. It has been laid down that university wise preferential treatment may be consistent with the rule of equality of opportunity where it is calculat to correct an imbalance or handicap and permit equality in the larger sense. [See : Jagdish Saran & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., 1980 (2) SCR 831 1980 Indlaw SC 110, at p. 849] The Court has insist that while nominating candidates for admission the concern authority should follow the criterion of merit and has view with disfavour the conferment of discretion in this regard on the founder of the institution or the person/persons in management of the institution. In Suman Gupta & Ors., Etc. v. State of J & K & Ors., 1983 (3) SCR 985 1983 Indlaw SC 139, there was an arrangement among some of the States under which a certain percentage of the seats in M ical Colleges was reserv for candidates from other States on a reciprocal basis. The nominations made by the State Governments against these seats were challeng on the ground that the same were made by the State Governments in their absolute and arbitrary discretion. It was held that the principle adopt by the State Governments of nominating candidates in their absolute and unfetter choice to seats in m ical colleges outside the State was invalid being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
10.  The Court direct the M ical Council of India to formulate a proper constitutional basis for determining the selection of candidates for nomination to seats in M ical Colleges outside the State and that until a policy is so formulat and concrete criteria are embodi in the proc ure select , the nominations shall be made by selecting candidates strictly on the basis of merit, the candidate nominat being those, in order of merit, imm iately below the candidates select for admission to the M ical Colleges of the home States. Similarly, in K. Sujatha v. Marathawada University & Ors., 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 155 1993 Indlaw SC 1483, admission to 20% of the seats was at the discretion of the management of the M ical College. It was argu that these seats were not the open merit seats. Rejecting the said contention, it was held that there cannot be different eligibility rules for candidates admitt from different sources.
11.  In J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) a Constitution Bench of this Court was dealing with admission to private unaid /aid recognis /affiliat  ucational institutions conducting professional courses such as m ical, engineering courses etc. and charging of the capitation fees by the management of the institution for the purpose of admission. As regards aid institutions it was held that they have to abide by the rules and regulations as may be fram by the Government and/or recognising/affiliating authorities in the matter of recruitment of teachers and staff, their conditions of service, syllabus, standard of teaching and so on and, in particular, in the matter of admission of students, they have to follow the rule of merit and merit alone subject to any reservation made under Article 15 and they shall not be entitl to charge any fees higher than what is charg in Governmental institutions for similar courses As regards unaid institutions which are recognis /affiliat it was held that it may not be insist that the private ucational institution shall charge only that fee as is charg for similar courses in governmental institutions and that private ucational institutions are entitl to charge a higher fee not exce ing the ceiling fix in that behalf since they have to meet the cost of imparting ucation on their own resources and the main source apart from donations/charities, if any, can only be the fees collect from the students. At the same time, it was laid down :-
"No private ucational institution can survive or subsist without recognition and/or affiliation. The bodies which grant recognition and/or affiliation are the authorities of the State. In such a situation, it is obligatory - in the interest of general public - upon the authority granting recognition or affiliation to insist upon such conditions as are appropriate to ensure not only ucation of requisite standard but also fairness and equal treatment in the matter of admission of student. Since the recognizing/affiliating authority is the State, it is under an obligation to impose such conditions as part of its duty enjoin upon if by Article 14 of the Constitution. It cannot allow itself or its power and privilege to be us unfairly. The incidents attaching to the main activity attach to supplemental activity as well. Affiliation/recognition is not there for anybody to get it gratis or unconditionally. In our opinion, no Government, authority or University is justifi or is entitl to grant recognition/affiliation without imposing such conditions. Doing so would amount to abdicating its obligations enjoin upon it by Part III its activity is bound to be characteris as unconstitutional and illegal. To reiterate, what applies to the main activity applies equally to supplemental activity. The State cannot claim immunity from the obligations arising from Articles 14 and 15. If so, it cannot confer such immunity upon its affiliates."
12.  In J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) this Court has evolv a Scheme which every authority granting recognition/affiliation shall impose upon the institutions seeking such recognition/affiliation. It has been observ that the idea behind the Scheme is to eliminate discretion in the management altogether in the matter of admission because it is the discretion in the matter of admission that is at the root of the several ills complain of. The Scheme is in the nature of guidelines which the appropriate Governments and recognising and affiliating authorities are requir to impose and implement in addition to such other conditions and stipulations as they may think appropriate as conditions for grant of permission, grant of recognition or grant of affiliation, as the case may be. The Scheme postulates that at least 50% of the seats in every professional college shall be fill by the nominees of ht Government or University, as the case may be, and the students for these seats shall be select on the basis of merit determin on the basis of a common entrance examination where it is held or in the absence of an entrance examination, by such criteria as may be determin by the competent authority or the appropriate authority, as the case may be. The remaining 50% seats shall be fill by those candidates who are prepar to pay the fee prescrib therefor and who have compli with the instructions regarding deposit and furnishing the case security/Bank guarantee for the balance of the amount. As regards 'payment seats' it has been prescrib :-
"The allotment of students against payment seats shall also be done on the basis of inter se merit determin on the same basis as in the case of free seats. There shall be no quota reserv for the management or for any family, caste or community which may have establish such college."
13.  The aforesaid requirement in the Scheme evolv by this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) that the admission to professional colleges shall be made on the basis of merit gives effect to the law laid down by this Court that admission in professional colleges must be made on the basis of merit so as to secure the best possible talent. In the State of Gujarat & Ors. v. Meghji Pethraj Shah Charitable Trust & Ors1994 Indlaw SC 424. (supra), the M.P. Shah M ical College was establish in Jamnagar in 1954 by the then State of Saurashtra and Shri M.P. Shah had donat Rs. 15 lakhs for establishing the college. Initially the College had 60 seats and as per the arrangement between Shri M.P. Shah and the then Chief minister of the State, Shri Shah was entitl to nominate students for admission to the extent of 10% of the total strength admitt every year and this arrangement was to continue n permanent basis. In course of time, the annual intake of students in the college rose to 175 and in 1964 the Government of Gujarat decid to reserve 12 seats for nominees of the donor and in the meanwhile Shri Shah had designat the M.P. Shah Charitable Trust as his nominee. After the decision in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra), the Government of Gujarat resolv to discontinue the 12 donor seats in the M.P. Shah M ical College. The Trust fil a writ petition in the Gujarat High Court challenging the validity of the said resolution of the Government of Gujarat which was allow . The said decision of the High Court was revers by this Court and the resolution of the Government of Gujarat was upheld. It was observ :-
"Now, where an individual or an organisation which establishes and runs a m ical college (recognis by State or affiliat to a university) is not entitl , according to Unnikrishnan to admit students on its own, or in its discretion, it is inconceivable that a person or a body which has assist in setting up of a government m ical college would be permitt to have a quota of its own to which it can nominate students of its own choice. There is no room for such an arrangement in law."
14.  Shri Kapil Sibal, the learn senior counsel appearing for the T.I.T. & S. in Civil Appeal No. 4101 of 1995, has urg that it is permissible to make reservation for the wards of the employees in the institution for the purpose of admission to the institution since the T.I.T. & S. is an unaid institution. He has plac reliance on the following observations of this Court in Chitra Ghosh & Another v. Union of India and Others, 1970 (1) SCR 413 1969 Indlaw SC 525, :-
"It i the Central Government which bears the financial burden of running the m ical college. It is for it to lay down the criteria for eligibility. From the very nature of things it is not possible to throw the admission open to students from all the country. The Government cannot be deni the right to decide from what sources the admission will be made. That essentiality is a question of policy and depends inter alia on an overall assessment and survey of the requirements of residents of particular territories and other categories of persons for whom it is essential to provide facilities for m ical ucation. If the sources are properly classifi whether on territorial, geographical or other reasonable basis it is not for the courts to interfere with the manner and method of making the classification."
15.  The said contention of the learn counsel and his reliance on the observations in Chitra Ghosh 1969 Indlaw SC 525 (supra) proce on a misapprehension about the correct position. In the cases in hand, we are not requir to consider the validity of grant of preferential treatment to the wards of employees in the institution in the matter of admission by the State, as defin in Article 12 of the Constitution. It is a converse case. Here the State, viz., The Maharashi Dayanand University, has direct the T.I.T. & S. not to give such preferential treatment and the validity of the said direction is being challeng by the institution. In giving the impugn direction the respondent-University is only giving effect to the law laid down by this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) regarding admission to unaid  ucational institutions. Since the T.I.T. & S. is affiliat with it the respondent-University as the affiliating authority is bound to ensure that in the matter of admission to the institution there is no violation of the right to equality of opportunity guarante under Article 14 of the Constitution.
16.  In Chitra Ghosh 1969 Indlaw SC 525 (supra) this Court was dealing with validity of reservation of certain number of seats in a m ical college run by the Central Government for candidates falling in specifi categories and admission was to be made against those seats on the basis of nomination by the Central Government. The admission of the students on the basis of nomination by the Central Government was challeng on the ground that these students had obtain less percentage of marks than the appellants in that case and reliance was plac on the judgment of the Full Bench of the Patna High Court in Umesh Ch. Sinha v. V.N. Singh, Principal, P.M.C. & Hospital & Ors., ILR 46 Patna 616, where preferential treatment had been given to the employees of the Patna University in the matter of admission to the Patna M ical College and the High Court had held that there was no reasonable nexus between the principle governing admission to the college on the one hand and the precunniary difficulties or the meritorious services render by the employees of the Patna University on the other and that preferential treatment to the children of these employees would amount to favouritism and patronage. Distinguishing the said decision of the Patna High Court, this Court has said :-
"There is no question of any preferential treatment being accord to any particular category or class of persons desirous of receiving m ical ucation in the present case. The mere fact that the Central Government has to make the nominations with regard to the reserv seats cannot be consider to be preferential treatment of any kind. As the candidates for the reserv seats have to be drawn from different sources it would be difficult to have uniformity in the matter of selection from amongst them. The High Court was right in saying that the standards of the examinations pass by them, the subjects studi by them and the ucational back-ground of each of them would be different and divergent and therefore the Central Government was the appropriate authority which could make a proper selection out of those categories. Moreover, this is being done with the tacit approval and consent of the M ical Course Admission Committee."
17.  The question whether reservation in the matter of admission is permissible forwards of employees of the institution was consider by this Court in Chairman/Director, Combin Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das & Ors. 1991 Indlaw SC 716 (supra). It relates to the G.B. Pant University, which is aid and financ by the Government of U.P. The Government of U.P. had issu a notification directing that admission of the students to the various Engineering Institutions in the State shall be made in order of merit and through a Combin Entrance Examination to be conduct by an Admission Committee. The G.B. Pant University made provision for reserving 5% seats over and above the sanction strength of seats for sons and wards of the employees of the University for admission to the B. Tech course. The State Government insist that any such reservation was not justifi and would be contrary to constitutional provisions. The University accept the said directions issu by the State Government and decid to do away with the reservation. In writ petitions fil by the students who fail to qualify for admission in the general category of candidates and were claiming admission against the reserv quota, interim orders were pass by the Allahabad High Court for giving provisional admission. Setting aside the said orders of the High Court, this Court has held :-
"There is no dispute that the G.B. Pant University is aid and financ by the State Government and the University is an instrumentality of the State. Any instrumentality of the State cannot give preferential treatment to a class of persons without there being any justification for the same. The reservation of seats for admission to the B. Tech course in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University is violative of the doctrine of equality enshrin under Article 14 of the Constitution. There is no rational for the reservation of the seats in favour of the sons and wards of the employees of the University nor any such reservation has any rational nexus with the object which is sought to be achiev by the University. The State Government, in our opinion, rightly insist on the University to do away with the reservations in favour of the sons and wards of the employees."
18.  In so far as Civil Appeal No. 4101 of 1995 is concern the letter of respondent-University dat January 15, 1993 directing the T.I.T. & S. not to continue with the reservation of seats for wards of the staff of the T.I.T. & S. in the B. Tech. Court was taken in pursuance of the decision of this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) and is in consonance with the law laid down in Chairman/Director, Combin Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das & Ors. 1991 Indlaw SC 716 (supra) since the T.I.T. & S. is affiliat to the respondent-University. It is no doubt true that the four additional seats for which reservation was made for the wards of the college and mill/school staff of the T.I.T. & S. are in addition to 90 seats and admission is made on the basis of marks obtain in the Entrance Examination conduct by the respondent-University. But for the purpose of admission to these four seats a separate merit list is drawn in respect of the candidates who are eligible for these seats and admission is not made according to merit as reflect in the common merit list. Such reservation in favour of wards of the college and mill/school staff of the T.I.T. & S. does not satisfy the test of admission being given strictly on the basis of merit as laid down by this Court and has been rightly held to be impressible by the High Court. The said appeal is, therefore, liable to be dismiss .
19.  In Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 10132 of 1995 there was reservation to the extent of 2% of seats for wards of the employees of the T.I.E.T. and the Patiala Technical ucation Trust and there was reservation to the extent of 5% of seats for wards of the employees of the Thapar group of industries. In Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 10224 of 1995, there was reservation to the extent of 2% of seats for wards of employees in the Thapar Polytechnic and the patiala Technical ucation Trust. The T.I.E.T. and the Thapar Polytechnic receive maintenance grants from the Government of Punjab and are Government aid  ucational institutions. It is no doubt true that the T.I.E.T. has been declar to be a "deem university" by the Central Government under the provisions of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. But this downs not mean that it is permissible for the T.I.E.T. to depart from the principle laid down by this Court that admission should be made strictly on the basis of merit. The position of the T.I.E.T., a deem University, cannot be better than that of the G.B. Pant University which is a full fl g University and in view of the decision of this Court in Chairman/Director, Combin Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das & Ors. 1991 Indlaw SC 716 (supra) it must be held that it was not permissible for the T.I.E.T. to reserve 2% of the seats for the wards of the employees of the T.I.E.T. and the Patiala Technical ucation Trust and 5% of seats for the children of employees in the Thapar group of industries. The reservation of 2% of seats in the Thapar Polytechnic for wards of employees in the Thapar Polytechnic and the Patiala Technical ucation Trust was also impressible in view of the law laid down by this Court in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) and Chairman/Director, Combin Entrance Examination (CEE) 1990 v. Osiris Das & Ors. 1991 Indlaw SC 716 (supra). The directions contain in letter of the Government of Punjab dat September 16, 1991, being in consonance with the said decisions, have been rightly upheld by the High Court and both the appeals are, therefore, liable to be dismiss . Writ Petition No. 507 of 1995 has been jointly fil by the T.I.E.T. and the Patiala Technical ucation Trust under Article 32 of the Constitution for quashing Memo dat June 6, 1995 address by the Director, Technical ucation and Industrial Training, Punjab (Technical ucation Wing) to the Co-ordinator, Punjabi University, Punjab and a copy is endors to the Director of the T.I.E.T. In the said Memo dat June 6, 1995, issu by the Director of Technical ucation and Industrial Training, Punjab, to the Punjabi University, Patiala, it is stat that reservation propos by the T.I.E.T. in respect of 10 seats under paragraph 3(d) of the Brochure-cum-Application form for admission on CET - 1995 providing for 10 seats for Thapar Organisation is not legally sustainable and should not be reflect in the Admission Brochure and reference has been made to the judgment in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra). The said Memo is challeng in the writ petition on the ground that the T.I.E.T. is a "deem university" under the University Grants Commission Act and that the decision in J.P. Unni Krishnan 1993 Indlaw SC 1056 (supra) has no application to university employees.
20.  While dealing with Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 10132 of 1995, we have consider this submission and have held that the such reservation of seats in the T.I.E.T. is not permissible. For the same reasons, it must be held that the direction contain in the Memo dat June 6, 1995 does not suffer from any infirmity and the Writ Petition is also liable to be dismissed.
21.  In the result, the Civil Appeals as well as the Writ Petition are dismissed. But in the circumstances, there is no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed
