Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat v Dr. Anand Sarabhai and Others
Supreme Court of India

7 February 1996
C.As. No. 2154 of 1978 with No. 2157 of 1978
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Both these appeals are preferred by the Revenue against the judgment and order of the Gujarat High Court. The questions referred in both these appeals are identical. They read as follows:
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was right in law in holding that the distributions received by the assessee from various discretionary trusts were assessable only in the hands of the assessee of the respective trusts u/s. 164 of the Income-Tax Act, 1961 and not in the hands of the assessee.
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was right in law in holding that the amount received by the assessee from various discretionary trusts is exempt from tax inasmuch as the amount was paid out of dividends, received by the trusts which were exempt under Section 80-K of the Income-Tax Act, 1961."
2. The first question was answered by the High Court in the affirmative, i.e., in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue. It is, however, agreed now before us by counsel for both the parties that the judgment of the High Court has to be reversed following the decision of this Court in CIT v. Kamalini Khatau 1994 Indlaw SC 16251994 Indlaw SC 1625. Accordingly, the first question is answered in the negative, i.e., in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee.
3.  So far as the second question is concerned, the High Court has declined to answer that question in view of its answer to Question 1. Inasmuch as we have reversed the High Court's answer to Question 1, Question 2 now requires to be gone into and answered. Accordingly, the matters are remitted to the High Court to consider and answer Question 2 alone in accordance with law.
4.  Appeals are allowed in part and the matters are remitted to the High Court. No costs.
Appeals partly allowed.
