Delay condoned .
Special leave granted.
1.  The notice upon the SLP stated that the matter might be disposed of at the SLP stage. The respondent has been served but has not chosen to appear.
2.  By the judgment and order under appeal the High Court of Kerala rejected the reference made by the appellant u/s. 256(2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The questions raised related to the assessment years 1986-87 and 1987-88. They read thus 1996 Indlaw KER 211 and 1996 Indlaw KER 433.
"1. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and also in the light of the relevant provisions, the assessee is entitled to carry forward any loss.
2. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and also considering the relevant provisions and the provision contained in sub-s. (10) of s. 139 which retrospectively came into force from April 1, 1986, the Tribunal is right in law in holding that the assessee is entitled to have the loss carried forward?
3. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and since the Assessing Officer had extended time only up to September 30, 1986, and return filed on October 10, 1986, being one within the further extension of time applied for by the assessee (and on which no order was passed by the officer), the Tribunal is right in law in holding that therefore, in view of the proviso to s. 139(1) as it stood then the assessee is entitled to have the loss carried forward.
4. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and also in the light of the relevant provisions, the assessee is entitled to carry forward any loss?
5. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case and in view of the amendment to s. 139(1) with effect from April 1, 1987, the Tribunal is right in law
(i) in taking into consideration the loss return filed on September 30, 1987?
(ii) in setting aside the order of the assessing authority and in giving a direction to the assessing authority to pass fresh order in accordance with law.
6. Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the decision of the Supreme Court in CIT v. Manmohan Das, 1965 Indlaw SC 225, relied on by the Tribunal have application to the facts of the case?"
By the order under appeal, the High Court rejected the reference.
3.  We are inclined to agree with learned counsel for the appellant that the provision of law to be applied is different for the two assessment years and that the facts need to be considered in this light. We are not satisfied that this has been done. The questions raise issues of law and deserve to be referred to the High Court for fuller consideration.
4.  The appeals are allowed. The order under appeal is set aside and the Tribunal is directed to refer to the High Court for decision the aforestated questions of law.
No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
