A. S. Narayana Deekshitulu and Others v State of Andhra Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

9  May  1997
Writ Petition (civil) 638 of 1987, I.A. No. 7 & 12 IN Writ Petition (C) No. 638 of 1987.(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.) WITH I.A. No. 3 in W.P. (C) 696/87, I.A. No. 3 in T.C. (C) No. 170/88, I.A. No.4 in T.C. (C) No. 175/88, I.A. No. 2 in T.C. (C) No. 38/90 and I.A. No. 4 in W.P. (C) No. 1090/87.
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  In view of separate judgments pronounced today in the above mentioned matters, the following recommendations have come to be made by the Committee and accepted by the Government:
Constitution of Archakas and other Employees Salary and Remuneration Fund.
2.  Providing Pension Schemes as in the case of Regional Joint Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner Cadre temples.
Providing Dhoties, Uniform/Dresses to the Archakas and other employees.
3.  Since it is suggested to appoint Additional Commissioner, the appointment of the welfare officer to look after the welfare measures in respect of Archakas and secular staff has become redundant.
4.  Acceptance of the Government to frame a separate set of service conditions in respect of the Archakas and other religious staff in view of their peculiar duties attached to them is a good proposal.
Merging of the existing welfare scheme with the welfare scheme formulated.
5.  In regard to condition No. 7 relating to approaching the Income Tax Authorities for obtaining income tax in respect of the income derived from the fund and the donations received from the public, and also for giving 100% exemption to the donors under Section 80-G of the Income Tax Act, in relation to the contribution made to the funds, the Government of India is directed to consider giving such exemption.
6.  Though the suggestion that the welfare measures should be taken to the door steps of the needy is laudable, it involves practical difficulty of huge outlay of expenditure. Therefore, the welfare measures would be administered by the Additional Commissioner from the Head-Quarters in Hyderabad.
7.  Amendment to the Act in regard to the Andhra Pradesh Endowments Archakas and other secular employees welfare funds, should also be brought within the statutory operation by suitable amendments to the Act so that it would form a statutory base.
8.  Framing of scheme of Agama Patasalas and conducting of refresher courses suggested in the Deed.
9. In view of what is held in the separate judgments, we approve of the above recommendations made by the Committee and accepted by the Government.
10. The covenants of the Deed of Trust must be deemed to be treated as part of this order.
The application is accordingly disposed of.
Accordingly disposed
