Messrs Amalgamation Private Limited v Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras
Supreme Court of India

25 April 1997
W I TH
CIVIL APPEALS NOS. 7-11 OF 1980
The Judgment was delivered by S.C. Agrawal, J.
1. These appeals, by certificate of fitness granted by the Madras High Court u/s. 66(A)(2) of the Income tax Act, 1922  (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1922 Act') and S.261 of the Income tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1961 Act') read with Art.133 of the Constitution of India, are directed against the Judgment of the Said High Court dated March 1, 1976 in Tax Cases Nos. 160 of1969 and 239 of1971 (References Nos. 52 of 1969 and 1 of T.C. No. 160 of 1969
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in upholding the basis of valuation adopted by the Income-taxofficer for the shares In Messrs. Sri Rama Vilas Service (Private) Ltd. as on January 1, 1954?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to section 12B(2) has no application in regard to the sale of shares to M/s Simpson &Company Ltd ?"
T.C.No. 239 of 1971"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in holding that the proviso to section 12B(2) has no application in regard to the sale various shares by the assessee-company to M/s Simpson &General Finance Co. (Private) Ltd. and that the assessee was entitled to a capital loss of Rs. 9, 47, 541/- in the assessment year 1958-59? (2) Whether, on the fact and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in l aw in holding that the second proviso to section 12B(2) had no application and that the full value of the consideration accounted for by the assessee should not be altered ?"
2. The se questions arise in the following facts and circumstances.M/s Amalgamation Private Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the assessee-Company' )is a company incorporated on December 22, 1938 as a private limited Company. The assessee- Company held shares in several companies, such as simpson and Company Ltd., Addison &Company Pvt. Ltd., George Oakes (Private) Ltd., Addison Paints &Chemicals private Ltd., India pistons Private ltd., etc. Out of the issued capital of Rs. 7, 50, 000shares of Rs. 10 in Simpson and Company Ltd. the a ssessee-company held, at the material time, 7,06,933 ordinary shares. Simpson and Company Ltd, had a subsidiary by name simpson and General Finance Company (private)Ltd, Carrying on the business of financing by way of hire purchase transactions to outsiders and by way of loans and advance to the companies of this group. As on July 1, 1956 a sum of Rs. 1, 85, 16, 000/- was due to Simpson and General Finance company (Private) Ltd. from the assessee-company. U/s. 295 of the Companies Act, 1956
3. The assessee-company appealed against the assessment of the capital gains to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. While the said appeal was pending, the Commissioner, of Income Tax proceeded Under Section 33B of the 1922 Act as he was of the view that the order of the Income Tax officer was erroneous and prejudicial to the interest of revenue in so far ashe had wrongly allowed the capital loss amounting to Rs. 14, 46, 955/- on the sale of the sharesin S.R.V.S. (Private) Ltd. After considering the submission of the assessee-company, the Commissioner held that the appreciation in value of the shares of Simpson and Company Ltd. held by S.R.V.S.(Private) Ltd. should not have been taken into account and if the value of the shares held by S.R.V.S.(Private) ltd. in Simpson &Company Ltd. , as on January1, 1954had been Rs. 24, 38, 578/- S.R.V.S. (Private) Ltd. would not have parted with the se shares at cost on July 31, 1955. The commissioner revised the capital lo ss of Rs. 14, 46, 955/- allowed by the Income Tax Officer and considered that the re was capital gain liable for assessment of Rs. 3, 91, 579/-. This figure was directed to be substituted and the assessment of capital gains was revised accordingly. The assessee-company appealed against the said order of he Commissioner to the Tribunal contending that the sale value fixed by the Company law Administration represented the correct value of the shares and the transactions were without any motive to avoid capital gain and they had been necessitated by the various provisions of the Companies Act which prohibited inter-company loans and that the method adopted by the Income Tax officer, viz., the secondary valuation, was proper.
4. The said appeal was allowed by the Tribunal and the order of the Commissioner of Income Tax was set aside and the method adopted by the Income Tax Officer of Secondary Valuation was held to be proper, The Appellant Assistant Commissioner took up the appeals of the assessee- Company for this and Other years subsequent to the order of the Tribunal and following the Tribunal's order he worked out the Capital loss in respect of the Other shares under consideration and in effect accepted the assessee-company's claim of capital loss of Rs. 4, 37, 703/-. The said order led to appeals both by the assessee-company and the Revenue to the Tribunal. The assessee-company's appeal related to computation of the capital loss of Rs. 4, 37, 703/- as emerging from the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner instead of Rs. 4, 90, 244/- which would be the Correct figure. The Revenue contested the acceptance of the Claim of the assessee-company with reference to the capital loss of Rs. 4, 37, 703/-as shown in the returns.Onthe first occasion when the matter come before the Tribunal; it remanded the case to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and called for a specific finding whether the sales under consideration were effected with the object of avoidance of tax or reduction of liability to tax and also Wanted the full value of consideration to be worked out, in case the first proviso to section 12B(2) of the 1922 Act was held to be applicable The Appellate Assistant Commissioner observed that the re was ample evidence to show that the sale of shares was a forced one and that the assessee-company had no option but to comply with the statutory provisions and that the evidence produced clearly established the assessee- company's contention that the sale was not motivated by any desire to avoid capital gains and that the Revenue had not proved by any conclusive evidence that the motive underlying the transaction was the avoidance or reduction of the liability to capital gains tax .He worked out the figures in accordance with the rules framed under the wealth Tax Act and found that the pricesfixed by the Company Law Administration were not very much different from the figures worked out by him. After receiving the report of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal considered the matter again and held that the proviso to Section 12B of the 1922 Act could not be invoked in the instant case as the re was no evidence to support the view that the sales were effected with a view to avoid the provisions of Section 12B. The Tribunal accepted the contention of the assessee- company and held that the Revenue was not justified in computing the capital gains and disturbing the figures fixed by the Government of India. The two questions referred in T.C. No. 160 of 1969 arise out of proceedings under Section 33B of the 1922Act, while questions Nos. land 2 referred in T.C. No. 239 of 1971 arise out of the order of the Tribunal in the appeal against the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner inrespect of the assessment year 195 8-59.Since the second question in T.C. No. 160 of 1969 and questions Nos.1 and 2 in T.C. No. 239 of 1971 raisedmore or less the same issue, they were taken up together by the High Court. After referring to the provisions of Sections 12b (2) and m ore particularly the first proviso to the said sub-section, the High Court has observed that the first requisite for the application of the said proviso, namely, that the person to whom the sale is made should be a person with whom the assessee is directly or indirectly connected, was satisfied in the present case because the sale of shares to a subsidiary of a sub sidiary is one to a person with whom the assessee-company is directly or indirectly or indirectly connected. As regards the second requirement of the proviso, as to whethe r the sale was effected with the object of avoidance or reduction of the liability of the assessee- company under that Section, the High Court has pointed out that the object with which the transaction was put through was the avoidance or reduction of the liability to capita gains. According to the High Court, such a finding of taking the result as if it was the object would not satisfy the requirement of the first proviso to Section 12B(20 of the 1922 Act. The High Court was of the view that the tribunal had rightly called for a finding on this point specifically from the appellate Assistant Commissioner. After referring to the finding recorded by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, which was accepted b y the Tribunal, that the Object of the transaction was not to avoid or reduce such liability to capital gains tax, that the sales was a forced case since the assessee-company had no option and that the prices had been fixed by the company law Administration , the High Court held that the first proviso to Section 12B(2) cannot be attracted to the present case. The High Court did not accept the contention urged on behalf of the Revenue that the sale price had been fixed by the company law Administration on ad hoc basis and, in this context, it has observed that the letter dated May 18of 1957(Annexure G. VII. At the remand report of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner) clearly shows that the company Law Administration worked out the figure s in consultation. with the Central Board of Revenue and when the assessee-company sold the shares at those prices, it could not be validly contended that the assessee-company transferred the shares at certain prices with the object of avoidance or reduction of liability to capital gains. On that view the High Court answered the second question in T.C. No.160 of1969 and the second question in T.C.No. 239 of 1971 in the affirmative and against the Revenue. As regards the first question in T.C. No. 160 of1969 which raises the question of valuation, the High Court felt that on the view it had taken as regards the second question it would not survive for consideration because the question of valuation would be material only if the proviso applied. The High Court has, however, considered the said question and has indicated the answer to that question also. The High Court has expressed the view that this is a case of substantial holding and that the re is textual backing to the method adopted by the Income T ax officer and that the Commissioner had found fault with it without any valid reason. The High Court, therefore , answered the first question in T.C. No. 160 of 1969 in affirmative and in favour of the assessee-company.
5. As regards the first question in T.C. No.239 of 1971, the High Court felt that it did not require any independent treatment in view of the answer given with regard to second question in T.C. No. 160 of 1969 which would answer that question also. Therefore , that question also was answered in the affirmative and in favour of the assessee-company.
6. We have heard Shri K.N. Shukla , the learned senior Counsel appearing for the Revenue in support of the appeals in respect of the answers given by the High Court to the se questions, . Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel, we are of the view that the High Court to the se questions, Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel, we are of the view that the High Court has rightly construed the provisions contained in the proviso to section 12B(2) of the 1922 Act and, in view of the finding recorded by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner , which finding was accepted by the Tribunal, that the object of the transaction was not to avoid or reduce the liability to capital gains, the said proviso was not attracted. In our opinion, the said finding of the High Court does not suffer from any legal infirmity and the re is no ground to interfere with the judgment of the High Court on this aspect of the case .We may now take up the appeals of the Revenue in Respect of questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in T.C. No. 239 of 1971.
The said questions were as follows:-
"(4) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate Tribunal was right in law In holding that the loss sustained by the assessee on account of standing guarantee to sembiam Saw Mills (Private) Std. (in voluntary liquidation) should be allowed in 1962-63 assessment after taking into account the amountsreceived from the liquidators during the years 1959-60 to 1962-63 ?
(5) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case , the Tribunal was right in law in deleting the receipts of Rs. 1, 41, 000/-, Rs.2, 29, 627/-, Rs. 1, 10, 500/-and Rs.4, 381/-from the liquidators of Sembiam Saw Mills (Private) Ltd. (in voluntary liquidation), from the assessments for 1959-60, 19 60-61, 1961-62 and 1962-63 respectively?
(6) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate Tribunal was right in law In holding that an amount of Rs. 4, 23, 256/- representing the real loss sustained by the assessee on account of standing guarantee of Sembiam Saw Mills (Private) Ltd. (in voluntary liquidation) should beallowed in the assessment year 1962-63?"
7. The re was a company by name Sembiam Saw Mills (Private) Ltd. (for short' SSM'), which was originally a subsidiary of Addison&company (Private) Ltd. On and from February 1, 1954, the assessee-company purchased all the shares of SSM from M/s Addison &company (Private)Ltd, and SS Mthus became the direct subsidiary of the assessee-company. SSM had borrowed monies from the National Bank of India Ltd, and the assessee-company had guaranteed the loan to said company by the said Bank. SSM went into liquidation some time in 1995. For the purpose of over draft facilities SSM executed a promissory note in favour of the assessee-company which was endorsed by the assessee-company to the Bank along with a separate guarantee letter in favour of the Bank. When SSM went into liquidation , the assessee-company, as guarantor, was required to clear those overdrafts in accordance with the terms of the guarantee. After adjusting the amount recovered from the liquidators , the sumdue to the assessee- company from the liquidated company on account of the said over draft was Rs. 9, 08, 764/-.The assessee-company claimed this amount as a loss which arose in the Course of and incidental to its business in the assessment for the 1958- 59. The re were receipts by the assessee-company in the course of the liquidation of SSM in the later years, The total amount received came to Rs. 4, 58, 508, 28 spread over the relevant accounting years for the assessment years 1959- 60 to 1962-63.The assessee-company relied on the clause in the memorandum of association authorising it to be the guarantor for the loans and contended that the transactions in question sprang out of normal business transactions and hence the loss was an allowable deduction in the assessment for 1958-59.
8. The Income Tax Officer held that the loss in qu estion did not arise during the course of or incidental to the business of the assessee-company and in his view it was at best a capital loss which did not come within the scope of Section 12Bof the 1922 Act. In making the assessments for the years 195 9-60to 1962-63 the Income Tax officer treated the receipts from the liquidator as income as a protective measure. In appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner did not accept the claim of the assessee- Company for allowance of the loss in1 958-59as he was of the view that it was not a loss which arose during the course of or was incidental to its business. But the appeals for the years 1959-60to 1962-63 we real lowed in so far as they related to the question of the receipts in the respective years from the liquidator. As the guarantee loss had not been allowed as a deduction in 1958-59, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner heldthat the subsequent recoveries could not be included in the total income in the later years. The assess ee-company as well asthe Revenue Preferred appeals against the said order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner before the Tribunal. The Tribunal held that the assessee-company had guaranteed the loan in the course of carrying on its own business and that the loss was clearly admissible as a deduction. But since the assessee-company had received the last of the payments from the liquidator in the previous year relevant to the assessment year 1962-63 it was held that the balance of Rs. 4, 2 3, 256/- remaining unrecoverable represented the real business loss allowable for the assessment year 1962-63.
9. At the instance of the Revenue the Tribunal referred the aforementioned questions Nos. 4, 5 and6 for the opinion of the High Court.The High Court, while dealing with said questions, has observed that the real point in issue was whether the guarantee that was executed in favour of the Bank in respect of the loan to SSM, the subsidiary of the assessee-company, was done in the course of its own business. The High Court has referred to its earlier judgment in Amalgamations P. Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, 1969 Indlaw MAD 64, Where in the nature of the business of the assessee-company has been considered and it has been held that the provisions of Section 23Aof the 1922 Act were applicable to the assessee-company since the assessee-company's business includes furnishing guarantee to debts borrowed by subsidiary companies. The High Court has held that the said finding given in that case is clearly applicable to the questions under consideration before it and that the assessee-company had incurred the loss in carrying on its own business which includes furnishing guarantees to debts borrowed by its subsidiary companies. According to the High Court, the loss was allowable as a deduction in the year in which it came to be ascertained and in the instant case the High Court held that the assessee-company could have ascertained whether there was loss in the transaction of guarantee only at the stage of final payment by the liquidators which was received in the relevant previous year for the assessment year 1962-63 and that the Tribunal was right in allowing it in that year, The High Court, the ref ore, answered questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 in the affirmative and against the Revenue.
10. After hearing Shri Shukla on the appeals filed by the Revenuein respect of the se questions, we are unable to hold that the judgment of the High Court in respect of the se questions suffers from any legal infirmity. We, therefore, affirm the answer given by the High Court to questions Nos. 4, 5 and 6 referred to it . In the circumstances, it must be held that Civil Appeals Nos. 139-142of 1980filed by the Revenue are liable to be dismissed.We would now come to Civil Appeals Nos.7-11 of1980 filed by the assessee-company in relation to questionNo.3 in T.C.No. 239of 1971, which was as under:-
"(3) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Appellate Tribunal was right in law In holding that the sums of Rs. 437, 066/-, Rs. 90, 896/-, Rs. 1, 08, 978/-, Rs. 1, 18, 102and Rs. 1, 11, 740/- are admissible as a deduction in the assessments of the assessee for the assessment years 1958-59 to1962-63respectively ?"
11. The assessee-company was a bulk shareholder in several companies and in the relevant year there were sixteen companies. The assessee-company was rendering certain common services t o its subsidiaries by having (1) a finance committee: (2)a liaison office in Delhi; (3) an export promotion department; and (4) an internal audit department. The expenditure on account of maintenance of liaison office in Delhi and the departments of export promotion and internal audit was borne by the assessee-company and was recovered from the subsidiaries. The finance committee was working in an advisory capacity to the various subsidiary companies to help the m to carry on their business more efficiently. All purchase requisitions for the purchase of capital equipment beyond Rs. 500/- of each purchase and Rs. 2, 500/-with reference to purchase of raw materials were submitted to the finance committee for their approval. The purpose of such control was to judiciously use the funds of the company to the best advantage of each company. Various data were gathered before such sanction was accorded or refused, Technical matters or Other matters of management were also referred to the members of the finance committee who were experienced in their respective fields. The finance committee went through the financial position of each company daily. The directors of the assessee- company were also Directors/managers in the subsidiary companies. As per the service agreements between the m and the concerned subsidiary company they were entitled to payment of remuneration and also a certa in percentage of the profits as commission. Similar service agreements had been entered by Other directors of the subsidiary companies who were not the directors of the assessee-company. In view of the provisions of Section 198of the Companies Act, 1956
"of the assessee-company, This expression was also used in the Income Tax Ac t, 1918 in U.K. In A ther t on V. British Insulated and Helsby Cables Limited, (1925) 10 TC 155(HL), Viscount Cave, L.C., has thus explained the said expression:-"
"
The se observations have been referred to with approval by this Court while construing S. 10(2)(XV) of the 1922 Act.  In Travancore Titanium Products Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala, (966) 1966 (60) ITR 227, this Court while construing the expression "for the purpose of business" in S.10(2) (XV) of the 1922 Act, has said:-"
"InThe Indian Aluminium Co. Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, 1972 Indlaw SC 248, decided by a Constitution Bench of this Court, the aforementioned test laid down in Travancore Titanium Products ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala (supra), was qualified in the se terms:-"
The High Court, in our opinion, has rightly proceeded on the basis that there must be a nexus between expenditure and business of the assessee.
Shri T. A. Ramachandran , the learned senior counsel appearing for the assessee-company, has submitted that the said test is satisfied in the present case since the purpose of the payment of remuneration to the directors of the subsidiary companies was to enable the se companies to earn higher profits which would be passed on to the assessee- company as and by way of dividends. The learned counsel has placed strong reliance on the decisionof Bombay High Court in J. R. Patel and Sons (P) Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat, 1967 Indlaw GUJ 24, and has urged that the High Court has committed an error in distinguishing the se cases on ground that they related to managing agents whereas the present caserelates to holding company and its subsidiaries, Shri Ramachandran has contended that the principle laid down in the said decisions is equally applicable to a case of holding company.
We are unable to accept this contention. The High Court, in our opinion, has rightly pointed out that the business of the assessee-company is the holding of investments any expenditure had been incurred that could have been allowed as deduction. The expenditure incurred in payment of managerial remuneration to the directors of the subsidiary companies cannot be said to be expenditure incurred in carrying on the business of the assessee-company of holding It s investments. The assessee-company couldhold its investments and earn its dividends the entire profits earned on account of their managerial remuneration paid by the assessee-company and the assessee-company was only entitled to dividend from the subsidiary company as and when declared, it cannot be said that the re was a direct and immediate connection between the expenditure incurred and the business of the assessee-company. The decisions in Tata Sons Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City (supra) and J.R. Pateland Sons (P) Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat (supra) ar not applicablein the facts oft his case.In Tata sons Ltd. V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City (supra) the assessee was the managing agent of an Other Company and under the managing agency agreement the asessee was to be paid a commission at a certain rate which was to be computed upon the net profits of the managed company. During the relevant years the assessee paid voluntarily certainsums as half share of the bonus which the managed company paid to some of its officers and it claimed deduction of the said amounts underS.10(2)(XV) of the 1922 Act. The Bombay High Court upheld the claim of the assessee for such a deduction on the view that from the point of view of commercial principles what the assessee had done was something which had as its object increasing the profits of the managed company and there by increasing its own shares on commission and, therefore , the deduction claimed by the as sessee was wholly and exclusively for the purposes of its business and was an allowable deduction u/s. 10(2)(XV) of the 1922 Act. While dealing with the contentionurged on behalf of the Revenue that the payment had been made not to the employees of the assessee but to the employees of a managed company -a different entity altogether - the High Court has observed:-"
12. InJ.R. Patel and Sons (P) Ltd, V. Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat (supra) the assessee was the managing agent and its managing director was also the director of the managed company. Prior to coming in to force of the Companies Act, 1956 on April 1, 1956, he was getting monthly salary from the assessee and in addition he was getting monthly remuneration as technical adviser of the managed company as well as commission at a prescribed rate on the sale price of heals and reeds manufactured and sold by the managed company. After the passing of the Companies Act, 1956, the remuneration that could be received by him was reduced and he could not also be paid the commission. The assessee, therefore , increased the emoluments. The said excess payment made by the as sessee was disallowed and the expenditure incurred was restricted to the amount that was being paid prior to coming in to force of the companies Act, 1956. The Gujarat High Court held that the assessee had paid extra payment to its managing director so that the affairs of the managed company could be properly looked after and that as a result of the remuneration the profits of the managed company and the share of the commission of the assessee increased and, therefore , the excess amount paid by the assessee to its managing directing was expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of its business and was an allowable deduction under S. 10(2)(XV) of the 1922 Act, Reliance was placed on the decision in Tata Sons Ltd. (supra ). This was also a case where the profits of the assessee in the form of managing agency commission were directly linked to the profit of the managed company which is not the position in the present case.The alternative claim by the assessee-company for deduction in respect of the expenditure incurred by the assessee-company in respect of amount paidto its own directors who were also the members of the finance committee has been rightly rejected by the High Court in view of the resolution passed by the assessee-company where in the directors, whether they be the members of the finance committee or not, have been treated as a class and with reference to all of the m the assessee-company incurred the expenditure only because they could not be remunerated to that extent by the subsidiary companies. The fact that they were directors of the assessee-company and members of the finance committee was not taken into account in taking over the remuneration payable to the m. In the circumstances, Civil Appeals Nos. 7-11 of 1980 filed by the assessee- Company are also liable to be dismissed. In the result, Civil Appeals Nos. 139-142 of 1980 filed by the Revenue and Civil Appeals Nos. 7-11 of 1980 filed by the assessee-company are dismissed. No order as to costs.
