U.P.S.R.T.C., Aligarh v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

27 March 1997
Appeal (civil)  4980-86 of 1995
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  These appeals by special leave arise from the orders of the Division Bench ofthe Allahabad High Court , made on October 17,1994 in F.A. No. 271/1994 and batch.
2.  The Notification undersection 4(1) of theLand Acquisition Act, 1894 (for short, the "Act") was published on June 3,1979 acquiring a total extent of 24.9 acres of land for public purpose, namely, for establishment of road transport depot. The Land Acquisition Officer awarded compensation at the rate of Rs.11.25per sq. yard. On reference under section 18 of the Act, the Additional District Judge by his award and decree enhanced the compensation to Rs.25/- persq. Yard. Onappeal, the Division Benchof theHigh Court has dismissed the appeals on the ground of limitation. Thus, these appeals.
3.  On our direction the learned counsel for the parties have placed on recordthe adduced evidence. It is now admitted position that two sale deeds had been filed in support of the claim for higher compensation but neither the vendor not the venderhas been examined tosubstantiate those documents which is not the evidence legally admissible nor tobe considered.The reference Court also did not properly consider the claims in the legal perspective . Thus, we find that the approach adopted by the High Court as well as the reference Court is not correct in Law. However, we arenot expressingany opinion on merits. we set aside the award and decree of the reference Court and that of the Division Benchof the High Court. The matter is remitted to the reference Court with a direction to give opportunity to the parties to adduce evidence afresh, consider the same in the light of the law laid down by this Court andthen decide the compensation accordingly within six months from the receipt of this order.
4.  The appeals are, accordingly, allowed but, in the circumstances, without costs.
Appeal allowed
