The respondent who retired as the chief justice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana on 31.12.89 was enrolled as an advocate on27.1.59, appointed as District and Sessions Judge on 20.11.68 and then as a judge and the Chief Justice of Punjab and Haryana High Court on 14.12.77 and 4.10.89 respectively. On his retirement he elected for computation of his pension under Part III of the 1st Schedule to the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954. According to the provisions contained in part III, pension of the judge has to be determined in accordance with the rules of his service. The rules which applied to him are the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963. His pension was, therefore, fixed in accordance with the said rules. On 20.2.90, Rule 16 of the said Rules was amended by the Government of Punjab and it was provided that in case of a direct recruit to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service the actual period of practice at the bar not exceeding 10 years shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
1. In view of this amendment the respondent claimed that being a direct recruit to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service he was entitled to addition of actual period of practice at the bar not exceeding 10 years to his qualifying service and, therefore, his pension and other retirement benefits have to be re fixed. The High Court, in its turn, wrote to the Accountant General on 5.6.90 for refixation of his pension and other retirement benefits after giving him benefit of the amendment. The Accountant General, it appears, was not inclined to agree with this claim and, therefore, referred the matter to the State Government for correct interpretation of the rule.
On25.2.91the State Government decided that the notification dated 22.2.90 has only prospective effect and, therefore, benefit of the amended Rule 16 cannot be given to the respondent. He, therefore, filed a writ petition in the High Court interalia praying that the Union of India and the State Government be directed to give benefit of the amended Rule 16 to him and to compute his pension afresh in accordance with the said provision. The stand taken by the Union of India was that it was not really concerned with the subject-matter of the petition and that it pertained to the State of Punjab. The State contended that the amended rule applies to those only who retired after 22.2.90.
The learned single Judge following the judgment of this Court in D.S. Nakara and others Vs. Union of India 1983 (1) SCC 305 1982 Indlaw SC 158 held that all retired judges irrespective of the date of retirement constitute one class and the benefits available under the amended rule cannot be confined to the judges who retired after the amendment. He, therefore, found the action of the state of Punjab as illegal, allowed the petition and directed the State of Punjab to refix pension of the respondent in accordance with the amended rule with effect from 22.2.90 and to pay the arrears with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum. The State of Punjab filed a letters patent appeal. The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed it with a clarification that the prayer being restricted only to pension and not to other retirement benefits, the order passed by the learned Single Judge should be read as confined to grant of pension only. The State has, therefore, filed this appeal.
The only controversy in this appeal is whether the High Court was right in directing refixation of pension of the respondent in accordance with amended Rule 16. The respondent, having retired as a judge of a High Court and having elected to receive pension payable under part III of the First Schedule to the Act his below:-
"16. Death-cum-retirement benefits:-In respect of death-cum- retirement benefits the members of the service shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time.
Provided that in the case of a direct recruit to this service, the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years, shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation Pension and other retirement benefits."
The change brought about by the amendment is that whereas in respect of death-cum-retirement benefits members of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service were earlier governed by the All India Service (death-cum-retirement benefits) Rules, now they are governed by the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Moreover, now in the case of a direct recruit to the added to has service for the purpose of determining the qualifying service. Formerly, that is, prior to 22.2.1990, qualifying service of a member of the Punjab Superior judicial Service and also as a judge of the High Court, if he was elevated to that position before retirement.
Even in case of a direct recruit to that Service his standing at the Bar was irrelevant but now that period has tube added for determining the qualifying service. Obviously, this enlargement of the Period of qualifying service would lead to an Increase in the quantum of pension. This has-been regarded by the High Court and as contended by the respondent, liberalization of the pension scheme. For that reason, it further held that benefit of a ruleliberalising pension cannot be restricted to persons retiring subsequently that is after the date of such liberalization otherwise it would amount to vicious discrimination violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. The High Court has also held that there is nothing in the language of the Rule to suggest that the benefit conferred by it is confined to the persons retiring after February 22,1990. Therefore, what we have to consider is: What is the nature of the change made by the amendment? Is it by way of upward revision of the existing pension scheme? Then obviously the ratio of the decision in D.S. Nakara'scase would apply. If it is held to be a new retrial benefiter a new scheme then the benefit of it cannot be extended to those who retired earlier.
Conceptually, pension is a reward for past service. It is determined on the basis of length of service and last pay drawn. Length of service is determinative of eligibility and the quantum of pension. The formula adopted for determining last average emoluments drawn has an impact on the quantum of Pension. In D.S. Nakara's case 1982 Indlaw SC 158 (supra) the change in the formula of determining average emoluments by reducing 36 months' service to 10 months' service as measure of pension, made with a view to giving a higher average, was regarded as liberalization or upward revision of the existing pension scheme, On the basis of the same reasoning it may be said that any modification with respect to the other determinative factor, namely, qualifying service made with a view to make it more beneficial in terms of quantum of pension can also be regarded as liberalization or upward revision of the existing pension scheme.
If, however, the change is not confined to the period of service but extends or relates to a period anterior to the joining of service then it would assume different character. Then it is not liberalization of the existing scheme but introduction of a new retiral benefit. What has been done by amending Rule 16 is to make the period of practice at the Bar, which was otherwise irrelevant for determining the qualifying service, also relevant for that purpose. It is a new concept and a new retrial benefit. The object of the amendment does not appear to be to go for liberalization. The purpose for which it appears to have been made is to make it more attractive for those who are already in-services that they may not leave it and for new entrants so that they may be tempted to join it. Though Rule 16does not specifically state that the amended rule will apply only to those who retired after 22.2.90, the intention behind it clearly appears to be to extend the new benefit to those only who retired after that date.
For these reasons the principle laid down inD.S. Nakara's case 1982 Indlaw SC 158 (supra) that if pensioners form a class computation of their pension cannot baby different formula affording unequal treatment merely on the ground that some retired earlier and some retired later, will have no application toa case of this type. Therefore, on both the grounds the High Court was in error in applying the ratio of the decision in D.S. Nakara's case 1982 Indlaw SC 158 (supra) to this case. As rightly contended on behalf of the State, benefit of the amendment would be available to only those direct recruits who retired after it has come into force.
The following observations made by this court in Union of India Vs. P.N. Menon 1994(4) SCC 68 1994 Indlaw SC 2079 also to some extent supportthe view that we are taking:
"Whenever the Government or an authority, which can be held to be a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution frames a scheme for persons who have superannuated from service, due to many constraints, it is not always possible to extend the same benefits to one and all, irrespective of the dates of superannuation. As such any revised scheme in respect of post- retirement benefits, if implemented with a cut-off date, which can be held to be reasonable andrational in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution need not be held to be invalid. It shall not amount to "picking out a date from the hat", as was said by this Court in the case of D.R. Nim V. Union of India 1967 Indlaw SC 157 in connection with fixation of Seniority. Whenever a revision takes place, a cut-off date becomes imperative because the benefit has to be allowed within the financial resources available with the Government."
We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the judgment and order passed by the High Court and dismiss the writ petition filed by the respondents. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed
