Commr. of Police v Jayasurian
Supreme Court of India

4 April 1997
C.As. Nos. 2685-2686 of 1997 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 3352-52-A of 1994)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
Special leave granted.
1.  The respondents in these appeals were employed as Police Constables in the Police Force of the State of Tamil Nadu and were attached to Madras Harbour. On 9-11-1987 they were assigned duty at Ore Berth inside the Harbour. On the basis of a complaint made by one Tome-de-Jesus, disciplinary proceedings were initiated against them on the basis of a charge-sheet containing the following two charges.
(i) Highly reprehensible conduct in extorting a sum of Rs.300 from Thiru Tome-de-Jesus, Utility Steward of TSS Nancowry ship on 9-11-1987 at about 11 p.m. inside Harbour.
(ii) High-handed behaviour in picking up quarrel with Thiru K. Ramdoss, Customs Officer, on the same date and time, and abusing him with filthy words near 2-A Gate, Customs Checkpost.
2.  An Enquiry Officer was appointed to conduct an enquiry into the charges. After recording evidence the Enquiry Officer found that Charge 1 was established but Charge 2 was not proved against the respondents. On the basis of the report of the Enquiry Officer the Disciplinary Authority passed order dated 7-8-1989 for removal of the respondents from service. The said order was set aside by the Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as "the Tribunal") by judgment dated 13-12-1989 on the ground that the report of the Enquiry Officer was not furnished to the respondents before the Disciplinary Authority passed the order of punishment.
3. Thereafter the matter was again considered by the Disciplinary Authority after furnishing the copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer to the respondents and, by order dated 16-11-1990, the Disciplinary Authority gave the benefit of doubt to both the respondents and dropped the proceedings against them. The Commissioner of Police, in exercise of his power under Rule 15-A of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Disciplinary and Appeal) Rules, 1955, issued a show-cause notice dated 20-11-1990 wherein he required the respondents to show cause why the punishment of removal from service should not be awarded to them. In the said show-cause notice the Commissioner of Police stated that he did not accept the order of the Disciplinary Authority and he was in agreement with the findings of the Enquiry Officer in holding that the first count of the charge is proved. Both the respondents submitted their representations in reply to the said show-cause notice. After considering the same the Commissioner of Police passed the orders dated 12-1-1991 whereby the respondents were removed from service. Feeling aggrieved by the said orders of the Commissioner of Police, the respondents moved the Tribunal by filing OAs Nos.722 and 843 of 1991 which have been allowed by the Tribunal by the impugned judgment dated 13-8-1992.
4.  The Tribunal has set aside the order of removal passed by the Commissioner of Police on the following grounds:
(1) The charge memo was given by the Assistant Commissioner of Police who was not the appointing authority of the respondent.
(2) The show-cause notice should have been singed only by the competent authority and that it was signed by the Office Superintendent.
(3) No opportunity was given to the respondents to make representation before the Commissioner of Police before he arrived at the decision.
(4) The Commissioner of Police has erred in arriving at a conclusion about removal of the respondents from service on the basis of unreliable report of the Enquiry Officer and that evidence which was factually inconsistent and unreliable could not be the basis for arriving at a decision of removing from service.
5.  We have heard Shri A. Mariaputham, the learned counsel for the appellant and Shri Gaurav Banerjee, the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.  As regards the first ground given by the Tribunal, we find that the matter is covered by the decision of this Court in Inspector General of Police v. Thavasiappan 1996 Indlaw SC 34251996 Indlaw SC 34251996 Indlaw SC 3425, wherein, construing the rules applicable in this case, it has been held that any superior authority who can be held to be the controlling authority can initiate a departmental proceeding and issue the charge memo and that initiation of a departmental proceeding and conducting an enquiry can be by authority other than the authority competent to impose the proposed penalty.
7.  Insofar as the second ground regarding the show-cause notice having not been signed by the Commissioner of Police is concerned, we find that in the order of removal dated 12-1-1991 the Commissioner of Police had dealt with the said grievance and has said
"The show-cause notice was signed by us and the fair copy of the same was attested by the Superintendent clearly indicating the fact on my approval."
8.  In view of the said statement in the order of removal that the Commissioner of Police had signed the show-cause notice it cannot be said that show-cause notice was not issued by the Commissioner of Police.
9.  The third ground given by the Tribunal also cannot be sustained because the respondents have admittedly submitted their representations in reply to the show-cause notice. The representation submitted by Respondent 1 has been placed on record as Annexure R-5 to the counter-affidavit filed by the said respondent. The order dated 12-1-1991 passed by the Commissioner of Police indicates that the submissions that were made by the respondents in their representations have been taken note of by the Commissioner of Police and have been dealt with by him. The Tribunal was, therefore, in error in proceeding on the basis that no opportunity was given to the respondents to submit their representations against the show-cause notice.
10.  The last ground given by the Tribunal is that the Commissioner of Police was in error in accepting the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer since it was based on evidence which was inconsistent and unreliable. The order dated 16-11-1990 passed by the Disciplinary Authority dropping the proceedings against the respondents has been placed before us. It only mentions that there was a contradiction between the evidence of the complainants (PW 1) and that of PW 2 but the nature of the contradictions between the two statements is not indicated.
11. The Commissioner of Police, in his order dated 12-1-1991, has dealt with the matter and has stated that the only contradiction which was pointed out was that in his statement, during preliminary enquiry the complainant had referred to the lady accompanying him as his girl friend, while in his statement before the Enquiry Officer he described her as his relative. The Commissioner of Police has stated that there is no contradiction in the matter of extortion of money by the delinquents and that the discrepancies pointed out are not vital. The Commissioner of Police, after considering the statements of PW 1 and PW 2, has expressed the view that there was no reason not to accept their evidence. We have also perused the statements of PW 1 and PW 2. In our opinion, no infirmity can be found in the approach of the Commissioner of Police in the appreciation of the evidence adduced in the enquiry and the Tribunal, in exercise of its power of judicial review, was not justified in interfering with the finding of the Commissioner of Police that Charge 1 is proved.
12.  We are, therefore, unable to uphold the impugned judgment of the Tribunal. The appeals are accordingly allowed, the judgment of the Tribunal dated 13-8-1992 is set aside and OAs Nos.722 and 843 of 1991 filed by the respondents are dismissed.
13.  After the impugned judgment of the Tribunal the respondents have been reinstated in service. They shall not be required to refund the emoluments drawn by them for the period they have worked after reinstatement.
No costs
Appeals allowed.
