M.V. Javali v Mahajan Borewell & Co. & Ors.
Supreme Court of India

26 September 1997
Criminal Appeal No. 899 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Special Leave granted. Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant, who is an Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax, filed a complaint in the Special Court for Economic Offences at Pantalone alleging commission of an offence under section 276B, read with section 278B, of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ("Act' for short) by M/s Borewell & Co., a registered partnership firm (the respondent No.1) and its three partners (the respondent Nos. 2 to 4). The Special Court took cognisance of the offence alleged and issued process against the respondents for their attendance. After centering appearance they filed an application praying for their discharge under Section 245(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The Special Court allowed the application onthe ground that before granting sanction for their prosecution under Section 279(1) of the Act, the Sanctioning Authority did not give the respondents a personal hearing. The other grounds raised by the respondents for their discharge were however kept open. Assailing the order of discharge the appellant filed a revision petition in the High Court which was dismissed by the impugned order. Hence this appeal.
2.  In upholding the order of discharge, the High Court did not deal with the ground that found favour with the Special Court but held relying upon its earlier judgment in P.V. Pai Vs. R.L. Rinawna [ILR 1993 Karnataka 709] that the prosecuting of respondent No.1 under section276B was not maintainable for if ultimately the Special Court found it to be guilty it(the Court) could not legally impose a substantive sentence upon it which was mandatory thereunder. As regards the other respondents, though the High Court found it to be guilty it (the Court) couldnot legally impose a substantive sentence upon it which was mandatory thereunder. As regards the other respondents, though the High Court found that the prosecution against them was maintainable for the above offence, it still upheld their discharge.
3.  To answerthe question whether a company, belong a juristic person and thus incapable of being sentenced to imprisonment can be prosecuted and forthat matter convicted - for committing an offence under the Act which provides for compulsory imprisonment and fine, it will be necessary to refer tothe provisions of the Act with which we are concerned in this appeal.
4.  Section 276B lays down that if a person fails to pay to the credit of the Central Government, the tax deducted at source by him as required byor under the provisions of Chapter XVII-B [which includes section 194 C (2) for violation of which the prosecution in the instant case was lodged] he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a termwhich shall not be less than three months but which may extend to seven years and with fine. Section 278 B reads as under;
278B (1) "Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in chargeof, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be deemed to be quiltyof the offence and shall be liableto be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed withouthis knowledge or that hehad exercisedall due dilligence to prevent the commission of such office.
(2) Notwithstandinganything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committedwith the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director,manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be quilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation For the purposes of this Section-
(a) "company"meansa body corporate, and includes-
(i) a firm; and
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals whether incorporated or not; and
(b) "director", In relation to-
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm,
(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, means any members controlling the affairs thereof."
(emphasis supplied)
5.  From a plain reading of the above Section it is manifest that if an offence under the Act is committed by a company the persons who a reliable to be proceeded against and punished are: (i) The company, (which includes a firm); (ii) every person, who atthe time theoffence was committed, wasincharge of, and wasresponsible to the company for the conduct of the business; and (iii) any director (who in relation toa firm meansa partner), manager, secretary or other officer of the companywith whose consent or connivance or becauseof neglect attributable to whom the offence hasbeen committed. The words 'as well as the company' appearing in the Section also make it unmistakably clear that the company alone can be prosecuted andpunished even if the persons mentioned in categories (ii) and (iii), who are for allintents and purpose vicariously liable for the offence, are not arraigned, forit is the company which is primarily guilty of the offence.
6.  Even though in view of the above provisions of Section 278B, a company cam be prosecuted and punished for an offence committed under Section 276B (besides other offences under the Act) the sentence of imprisonment which has got to be imposed thereunder cannot be imposed, it being a juristic person. This apparent anomalous situation can be resolved, needless to say, onlyby a proper interpretation of the section. Before we proceed to consider the principles governing the interpretation of statutes we may profitably look to the 47th report of the Law Commission of India dated February 28, 1972. While dealing with social and economic offences committed by Corporations (including companies, firms and associationof individuals) if observed that though a company hasno physical body and traditional punishments might thus prove ineffective, the real penalty could be inflicted upon its respectability, that is, by way of a stigma. Therefore, it was appropriate that the company itself be punished sothat in the public mind the offence would be linked with the name of the Corporation and not merely with the name of the director or manager who might be a non-entity. Punishment of finein substitution of imprisonment could solve the problem in this behalf. The Commission recommended, apart from introduction of a provision in Section 62 of the Indian Penal Code, appropriate amendments in the Central Excise Act, 1944, Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and Income Tax Act, 1961 on the lines of Section 93 of the Gold Control Act, 1968. The provisions contained in Section 278B of the Act appear to be based on the recommendations of the Law Commission. Para 8.1 of the Law Commission Report reads as under:
"8.1. An important type of while- collar crime is that committed by Corporations, Since a Corporation has no physical body on which the pain of punishment could be inflicted, not a mind which can be guilty of a criminal intent, traditional punishments prove ineffective, and new and different punishments haveto bedevised.
The real penalty of a corporation is the diminution of respectability, that is, the stigma. It is now usual to insert provisions to the effectthat the Director or Manager who has Acted for the corporation should be punished. But it is appropriate that the corporation itself, should be punished. Inthe public mind, the offence should be linked with the name of the corporation, and not merely with the name of the Director or Manger, who may be a non-entity. Punishment of fine in substitution of imprisonment in the case of a corporation could solve the problem in one aspect; but, at the same, it is necessary that there should besome procedure, like a judgment of condemnation, available in the case of an anti- social or economic offence committed by a Corporation. This will be analogous to the punishment of public censure proposed for individuals."
7.  And Para 8.3, tothe extent it is relevant for our purposes, reads as under:
"8.3. In many of the Acts relating to economic offences, imprisonment is mandatory. Where the convicted person is a corporation, this provision becomes unworkable, and it is desirable to provide that in such cases, it shall be competent to the court to impose a fine. This difficulty can arise under the Penal Code also, but it is likely to arise more frequently in the case of economic laws."
8.  Coming now to the principles of interpretation of statutes this Court observed in Siraj-ui-HagKhan vs. The Sunni Central Board of Wakf U.P. (A.I.R. 1959 SC 198) 1958 Indlaw SC 213 as under:
"It is well settled that in construing the provisions of a statute, courts should be slow to adopt a construction which tends to make any part of the statute meaningless or ineffective; and attempt must always be made so to reconcile the relevant provisions as to advance the remedy intended by the statute. In such a case, it is legitimate and even necessary to adopt the rule of liberal construction so as to give meaning to all parts of the provision and to make the whole of it effective and operative."
9.  Again in Union of India Vs. Filip Tiago De Gama (A.I.R. 1990 SC 981) 1989 Indlaw SC 335 this Court observed:
"The paramount object in statutory interpretation isto discover what the legislature intended. This intentionis primarily to be ascertained form the text of enActment in question. That does not mean the text to be construed merely as a piece of prose, without reference to its nature or purpose.
A statuteis neither aliterary text nor a divine revelation. ' Words arecertainly not crystals, transparent and unchanged' as Mr. Justice Holmes has wisely and properly warned (Towne v. Eisjher, (1918) 245 US 418, 425. Learned Hand, J. was equally emphatic when he said 'Statutes should be construed, not as theorems of Euclid, but with some imagination of the purposes which lie behind them'. (Lenigh Valley Coal Co. vs. Yensavage: 218 FR 547 at 553)"
It further observed as under:
"If there is obvious anomaly in the application of law the Court could shape the law to remove the anomaly.If the strict grammtical interpretation gives rise to absurdityor inconsistency, the Court coulddiscard such interpretation and adopt an interpretation which will give effect to the purpose of the legislature. That couldbe done, if necessary even by modification of the language used. (See Mahadeolal Kanodia v. The Administrator General of West Bengal (1950) 3 SCR 578; (AIR 1960 SC 936 1960 Indlaw SC 175).The legislators do not always dealwithspecific controversies which the Courts decide. They incorporate general purpose behind the statutory words and it is for the court to decide specific cases. If a given case is well within the general purpose of the legislature but not within the literal meaning of the statute, then theCourt must strike the balance."
10.  Keeping in view the recommendations of the Law Commission andthe above principles of interpretation of Statutes we are of the opinion that the only harmonious construction that can be given to Section 276B is that the mandatory sentence of imprisonment and fine is to be imposed where it can be imposed, namely on persons coming under categories (ii) and (iii) above, butwhere it cannot be imposed, namely on a company, fine will be theonly punishment. We hasten to add, two other alternative interpretations could also begiven: (i) that a company cannot be prosecuted (as held in the impugned judgment); or (ii) that a company may be prosecuted and convicted but not punished, but these interpretations will be dehors Section 278B or wholly inconsistent with its plain language.
11.  For the foregoing discussion w are unable to sustain the impugned order of the High Court so far as it held that the prosecution of respondentNo.1 was legally impermissible. Equally unsustainable is the order of the High Court dismissing the revision petition oua the other respondents in absence of any finding to indicate that it agreed with the reasoning of the trial Court for their discharge. We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the impugned order of the High Court upholding the discharge of the respondents and direct it to hear the revision petition filed by the appellant afresh in accordance with law and in the light of the observations made herein before.
Petition dismissed
