Mohd. Aslam v Union of India
Supreme Court of India

14 March 1997
W.P. (C) No. 131 of 1997
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  While disposing of Writ Petition (Civil) No. 541 of 1995 we had observed as under:
"We have no doubt that the State and the Central Government will do everything that is necessary to protect the places of worship i.e. the two mosques in question, and if for that purpose they need any directions from this Court on account of impediment they would be at liberty to move this Court.
We, for the present, therefore, do not deem it necessary to give any direction but as stated above, if any directions are necessary it would be open to either of the Governments or the concerned to approach this Court ...."
2.  The learned counsel for the petitioner has produced before us Annexure 'H' stating that an order passed by the learned Judge for maintaining status quo has caused some difficulty, in that, the Administration and police official think that on account of that order they are not in a position to strengthen the barricades, add to them or improve upon them. We do not see any reason why the authority should think that the status quo order prevents them from strengthening the barricades or adding to them or improving upon them.
3.  By our order dated 17-8-1995 we had made it clear that the authorities will do everything that is necessary to protect the places of worship which would entitle them to take all steps that are necessary in that behalf and the status quo order cannot preclude them from doing so if that is considered necessary for maintenance of public peace, tranquillity and public order. We do not think that the Government and police authorities would have any difficulty in understanding our previous order and to implement the same since we had in no uncertain terms permitted them to do everything that is necessary to protect the place of worship. No order of any subordinate court can be construed to run counter to this Court's order. We, therefore, think that the petitioner's apprehension is misplaced and hence we dismiss the petition.
Petition dismissed.
