Brooke Bond India Limited v Brooke Bond India Limited
Supreme Court of India

27 February 1997
Civil Appeal No. 5771 (NT) of 1983
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  In this appeal, by certificate granted by theHigh Court under Section 261 of the Income Tax Act,1961 (hereinafter referredto as'the Act'), the following question referred to the Calcutta High Court by the Income Tax Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the Tribunal') was answered in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee:-
"Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was right in sustaining the disallowance of Rs. 13,99,305/- being expenses incurred in connection with the issue of fresh lot of shares in 1967?"
2.  The question relates to the assessment year 1969-70 and the relevant accountyear ended on June 30,1968. The assessee is a public limited company. It issued ordinary shares of Rs 16,75,000/- of Rs 10/- each at a premium with a view to increase its share capital and, in that connection, it incurred an expenditure of Rs. 13,99,305/- which amount was claimed by it as deductible expenses. The said deduction was disallowedby theIncome Tax Officer on the view that the expenditure incurred by the assessee was on the capital account. The said view of the Income TaxOfficer was affirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal. The High Court, while upholding the view of the Tribunal, has held that the expenditure and would fall under capital expenditure. The HighCourt has placed reliance on the observations of this Court in India Cements Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, 60 ITR 52 1965 Indlaw SC 318, and it did not agree with the view taken by the Madras High Court Commissioner of Income Tax, Tamil Nadu-I v. Kisenchand Chellaram (India) P. Ltd., 130 ITR 385 1979 Indlaw MAD 135.
3.  Dr. Debi Pal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant-assessee, has submittedthat the High Court was inerror in holding thatthe expenses incurred by the assessee In issuing the shares with a view to increase its capital did not constitute revenue expenditure. According to the learned counsel, the said view of the High Court is not in consonance with the law laid by the this Court in Empire Jute Company Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, 124 ITR 1 1980 Indlaw SC 301; Commissioner of Income Tax. Bombay-II v. Associated Cements Co. Ltd., 172 ITR 257 1988 Indlaw SC 435 and Alembic Chemical works Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax. Gujarat, 177 ITR 377 1989 Indlaw SC 559. The learned counsel has also invited our attention to the decisions of the HighCourts of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Madras High Court in Kisenchand Chellaram (India) P. Ltd. 1979 Indlaw MAD 135 (supra). [See:Warner Hindustan Ltd.v. Commissioner of Income Tax (A.P.), 171 ITR 224 1987 Indlaw AP 132; Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd. (No. 3) v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Karnataka-II, 175 ITR 220 1988 Indlaw KAR 44 and Federal Bank Ltd. v.Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala. 180 ITR 241 1989 Indlaw KER 122].
4.  We find that this matter has come up for consideration before this Court in m/s Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd., Chandigarh v. Commissioner of Income Tax. Patiala 1996 Indlaw SC 1622. (Tax Reference No. 1 of 1990 decided on December 4, 1996). In that case, the question under consideration was whether an amount of Rs. 1,50,000/- paid to the Registrar of Companies as filing fee for enhancement of capital was not revenue expenditure. The Court hastaken note of the decisions of the Madras, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and kerala High Courts towhich reference has been made by Dr. Pal aswell as the judgment under challenge in this appeal and the judgment under challenge in this appeal and the judgment of the High Courts taking the sameview sthat taken in the impugnedjudgment. This Court has also taken note of the decisions in Empire Jute Company Ltd. 1980 Indlaw SC 301 (supra) as well as India CementsLtd. 1965 Indlaw SC 318 (supra). While holding that the amount of Rs. 1,50,000/- paid to the Registrar of Companies as filing fee for enhancement of the capital was not revenue expenditure, this Court has said:-
"We do not consider it necessary to examine all the decisions in extenso becausewe are of the opinion that fee paid to the Registrarfor expansion of the capital base of the company was directly relatedto the capital incidentally thatwould certainly help in the business of the company and may also help in profit making, it still retains the character of a capital expenditure since the expenditure was directly related to the expansion of the capital base of the company. we are, therefore, of the opinion that the view taken by the differentHigh Courts in favour of the Revenuein this behalf isthe preferableview as compared to the view based on the decision of the Madras High Court in Kisenchand Chellaram's case."
5.  This decision thus covers the question that falls for consideration in this appeal.
6.  Dr. Pal has, however, submitted that this decision does not cover a case. like the present case, where the object of enhancement ofthe capital was to have more working funds for the assessee to carry on its business and to earn more profit and that in such a case the expenditure that is incurred in connection with issuing of shares to increase the capital has to be treated as revenue expenditure. In this connection, Dr. pal has invitedour attention to the submissions that were urged by the learned counsel for the assessee before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as before the Tribunal it was submitted on behalf of the assessee that increase in the capital was to meet the need for working funds forus the assessee-company. But the statement of case sent by the Tribunal doesnot indicate that a finding was recorded to the effect that the expansion of thecapital was undertaken by the assessee in order to meet the need for more working funds for the assessee.
7. We, therefore, cannot proceed on the basis that the expansion of the capital was undertaken by the assessee for the purpose of meeting the need for working funds for the assessee to carry on itsbusiness, In any event, the abovequoted observations of this Court in m/s Punjab State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.Chandigarh 1996 Indlaw SC 1622 (supra) clearly indicate that though the increase in the capital results in expansion ofthe capital base of the company and incidentally that would help in the business of the company and incidentally that would help in the business of the company and may also help in the profit making, the expenses incurred in that connection still retain the character of a capital expenditure since the expenditureis directly related to the expansion of the capital base of the company.
8.  In these circumstances, we do not find any merit in the appeal and it is accordingly dismissed. No order as to costs.
Appeal Dismissed
