Sufal Jha and others v Union of India and others
Supreme Court of India

2  May  1997
S.L.P. (C) No. 5653 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
On 14-3-1997 the following order was made:
"In the additional affidavit filed by Respondents 2 to 4 it is stated in para 2 as follows:
'2. That the Company is preparing a panel of all retrenched/ surplus staff of the projects already completed by the Company. By following the principle of "last come first go" and by taking into account the number of years put in by retrenched/surplus staff at project(s), employment will be offered at the new projects.' The respondents have also stated as follows in para 1:
That the respondent Company will adjust the petitioners at any of the projects of the Company. The wages drawn by the petitioners while working at the last project will be duly protected.' Learned counsel for the respondents is directed to produce copy of the panel showing the appointments made out of the panel after the retrenchment of the petitioners within six weeks. A copy of the panel shall be furnished to learned counsel opposite in advance, who may file a response thereof, if any List after six weeks."
1.  In response, an affidavit by Respondents 2 to 4 has been filed along with a list containing the panel of employees who have been retrenched at various units on account of the closure of various projects. In the affidavit of Shri Ravinder Kumar, Senior Manager (HRM) with Ircon International Limited (changed name of Indian Railway Construction Company Ltd.), it is stated that the appointments out of the panel of the retrenched employees are in the process of being made by the Company and that appointments shall be offered to the retrenched employees in order of the date of retrenchment of the respective persons and in case of failure by anyone to accept or join, the next person/persons shall be offered the appointment.
2.  After considering this affidavit and submission, as noticed hereinabove, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that this petition may be disposed of as settled with the direction that for considering the offer of appointments to the petitioners herein, whose names figure in the panel, they may be offered appointments in any of the projects in Madhya Pradesh, as and when the vacancies arise, of course based on the date of the retrenchment of the employees concerned. Mr Pandey, learned counsel appearing for the respondents does not object to that course being adopted.
3. We record the statements of the learned counsel for the parties and dispose of the special leave petition in the terms as noticed above. No costs.
Petition diposed of.
