Raja Provision Stores v Appellate Tribunal (Sales Tax), Trivandrum
Supreme Court of India

20 March 1997
C.A. No. 1220 of 1980. Appeal from the judgment and order Dt. 8 January 1980, of the Kerala High Court in T.R.C. No. 1 of 1980
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  The short question which arises in this appeal is whether the appellant who carries on business of buying paddy and after getting it husked sell the rice becomes liable to pay tax under section5A of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963. This question came up for consideration before the High Court of Kerala in M. Narayanan Nambiyar v. State of Kerala, 1979 Indlaw KER 27. In that case, the High Court held that a process of manufacture was involved in the production of rice by milling paddy and hence rice so produced represents "other goods" within the meaning of the said provision since rice is distinct in nature and character from paddy. In Ganesh Trading Co., Karnal v. State of Haryana, 1973 Indlaw SC 444, a Division Bench of this Court held that even though rice is produced out of paddy, paddy does not continue to be paddy even after dehusking. Rice and paddy are two different things in ordinary parlance.
2. Therefore, when paddy is dehusked and rice is produced there has been a change in the identity of the goods. This Court, therefore, took the view that the assessee is liable to pay tax on the goods purchased from the market. The same view was expressed by a three-judge Bench of this Court in State of Karnataka v. B Raghurama Shetty, 1981 Indlaw SC 294, following the decision in Ganesh Trading Co. 1973 Indlaw SC 444. It is thus clear from this decision that rice and paddy are two distinct and different commodities, distinct in nature and character and, therefore, the assessee on the purchase of paddy becomes liable to pay purchase tax. The learned counsel for the assessee tried to place reliance on the decision of this Court in State of Orissa v. Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd., 1985 Indlaw SC 436 with a view to persuade us to hold that the view expressed in the aforesaid two cases is not the correct view. We are afraid that we cannot agree with the learned counsel for the assessee in this behalf.
3.  The two decisions referred to earlier are directly on the point whereas the decision on which counsel relies is not and cannot be taken to have departed from the view taken in the aforesaid two cases. For the above reasons, we see no merit in the appeal and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
