1. These are appeals from an order passed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court, by which large number of writ petitions were disposed of. The common question involved in all those writ petitions was whether agarbathis were liable to sales tax under item No. 36 of the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957. The writ petitioners and the other dealers in agarbathis were paying sales tax on agarbathis as general goods taxable at the rate of 4 per cent up to July 8, 1983 and 5 per cent. from July 8, 1983. Item No. 36 of the First Schedule of the Act was amended thereafter and the amended entry at the material point of time which fell for consideration of the High Court was as under:
"Cosmetics and toilet preparations, including scents, perfumes, face powders, talcum powders, hair-tonics, hair-oils, hair lotions, face creams and snows, pomades, depilatories, tooth-powder, tooth-paste, tooth-brushes and shaving creams."
2. It may be noticed that the only change that was brought by the amendment was to include scents and perfumes within entry 36. The department's stand is that "perfumes" would include agarbathis and this stand found favour with the High Court. The High Court mainly relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. v. Indian Herbs Research and Supply Co. 1968 Indlaw SC 466 (SC). In that case, this Court had to construe the word "perfume" falling under item No. 37 of a notification issued under the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act which was as under:
"Scents and perfumes (in English) and Itra tatha sugandhian (in Hindi)"
This Court noted in that judgment that the Oxford Dictionary defined the word "perfume" as follows:
"It is evident therefore that the word 'perfume' originates from the word 'fumare' which means to 'smoke' or to emit vapour given off by some burning substance. In Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 17, 1965 Edn., Pg. 505, it is similarly pointed out that the literal meaning of the word 'incense' 15 the same as 'perfume' but 'perfume' has later on acquired an extended meaning so as to include anything sweet from smoking incense to fragrance of flowers. We are accordingly of the opinion that the word 'perfume' in item No. 37 of the Government notification should be construed in its ordinary sense, i.e., any substance natural or prepared which emits or is capable of emitting an agreeable odour either when burned or by the application of some foreign matter to induce any chemical reaction which results in fragrant odours being released from that substance."
3. There are several reasons why the meaning assigned to "perfume" in that case cannot be straightaway applied to construe item No. 36 of the First Schedule of the Andhra Act. Unlike entry 37 of the Uttar Pradesh Act which deals with "scents and perfumes", the entry in the Andhra Act is "cosmetics and toilet preparations". Agarbathis cannot be construed as either cosmetics or toilet preparations. Moreover, the meaning of this phrase has been clarified to include scents, perfumes, face powders, talcum powders, hair tonics, etc. "Scents and perfumes" must be construed having regard to the context of the other articles mentioned in item No. 36. All the items mentioned in the inclusive definition are items of cosmetics or toiletry.
4. An inclusive definition has been given clarifying, that cosmetic and toilet preparations would include scents, perfumes, face powders, talcum powders, hair-tonics, hair oils, hair lotions, face creams and snows, pomades, depilatories, tooth-powder, tooth-paste, tooth-brushes and shaving creams. The things specially mentioned in the entry "cosmetic and toilet preparations" are all of the nature of personal application. Incense sticks or agarbathis are goods of a different character altogether. These may emit a pleasant order when burnt. That, however, will not bring agarbathis within the class of articles mentioned in item No. 36 of the First Schedule. All these goods are articles of personal application. "Perfume" in this context has to be construed ejusdem generis.
5. Furthermore, the meaning of the word "perfume" in modern times has undergone a change. The meaning given by Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary, Encyclopaedic Edn. 1992 is as under:
"'Perfume'- 1. fragrant or pleasant smell the perfume of the flowers, flowery perfumes, 2. (any of several types of) sweet smelling liquid, often made from flowers, used especially on the body; sell perfumes and toilet waters, the French perfume. Perfume-1 (of flowers, etc.) give a fragrant smell to; the roses perfumed the room; (2) put perfume on; perfume a handkerchief."
The etymological meaning or the original meaning of "perfume" may have come from the word " fumare"(smoke). But in modern parlance its meaning is quite different.
6. Moreover, the main difficulty in the way of the respondents is the context in which the words "scents and perfumes" appear in item No. 36 of the First Schedule. "Cosmetics and toilet preparations" are the things that have to be taxed under item No. 36. We are of the opinion that having regards to the articles included in item 36 of the First Schedule under the heading "cosmetics and toilet preparations", the meaning of "perfumes" cannot be expanded to include agarbathis.
7. A similar approach was adopted by the Kerala High Court dealing with entry 80 of the First Schedule of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963. The entry read:
"80. Talcum powder, other perfumeries At the point of first 10 per and cosmetics not falling under sale by a dealer who is cent." any other item in this Schedule. liable to tax u/s. 5.
8. The question was whether agarbathi could be taxed under this entry. The division Bench of the Kerala High Court held that cosmetics and perfumeries under entry 80 should also come within the ambit of tax and having regard to the context, the court came to the conclusion that agarbathi cannot be considered to be a "perfumery", akin to "talcum powder"(the preceding words), occurring in entry 80 of the First Schedule. The case of Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. v. Indian Herbs Research and Supply Co. 1968 Indlaw SC 466 (SC) was considered and distinguished in the facts of that case.
9. In the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax. Maharashtra State, Bombay v. Gordhandas Tokersey 1983 Indlaw MUM 4461 (Bom), the entry for consideration was entry 19 of Schedule "E" to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 which at the relevant period was as under:
"Perfumes, depilatories and cosmetics (except soap and articles specified in entry 7 in this Schedule)"
10. The question before the Bombay High Court was whether sandalwood and sandalwood oil could be treated as "perfumes" and brought within that entry for taxation. In that case, it was laid down that the well-known rule of construction was that words in entries, such as entry 19 of Schedule to the Act have to be construed with reference to the words found in immediate connection with them. When two or more words which are capable of being understood in an analogous manner are coupled together, they should be understood in the common analogous sense and not in a general sense. By applying this principle, it was held that the word "perfumes" in entry 19 refers to such preparations as are commonly known in the market for use on the body as perfumes.
11. Distinguishing the decision in the case of Indian Herbs Research and Supply Co. 1968 Indlaw SC 466 (SC), it was held that both sandalwood and sandalwood oil had a delicate fragrance and was priced on that account but everything that possessed a delicate fragrance was not necessarily a "perfume". Moreover, they were not used in personal toilet or for the beautification of the body as perfumes. Therefore, neither sandalwood nor sandalwood oil was "perfume" within the meaning of entry 19 of Schedule E to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959.
12. The Punjab and Haryana High Court examined the scope of entry 16 of Schedule A of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, in the case of Assessing Authority, Amristar v. Amir Chand Om Parkash 1973 Indlaw PNH 36 (P&H). The said entry 16 was as follows:
"Cosmetics, perfumery and toilet goods, but not including tooth-paste, tooth-powder, soap and kum kum."
The court held that having regard to the context in which the word "perfumery" occurred, it could not be said that dhoop and agarbathi were included in "perfumery".
13. The Orissa High Court in the case of Kamaru Zuman Khan v. State of Orissa 1980 Indlaw ORI 15, was faced with the word "perfumery" being taken out of the original entry of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 which was as under:
" Perfumery, cosmetics, pomades and all toilet articles including toilet soaps ......."
14. With effect from July 1, 1971, perfumery" was taken out of this category and was treated as luxury goods in entry 36 of the Schedule. The Orissa High Court following the decision of this Court in the case of Indian Herbs Research and Supply Co. 1968 Indlaw SC 466 came to the conclusion that "perfume" in ordinary sense covered dhoop and dhoop-batti and held that agarbathis in that case were rightly taxed as luxury goods.
15. We are of the view that the Orissa High Court overlooked the sense in which "perfumery" was used in the Orissa Sales Tax Act. Initially "perfumery" was included in the entry which included apart from "perfumery", cosmetics, pomades and all toilet articles. Having regard to the nature of the goods included in the entry, "perfumery" could not have been given an extended meaning to include agarbathis. When "perfumery" was taken out of this entry and taxed as a luxury goods, a different and wider meaning could not be ascribed to it. No special definition was provided in the Act by which agarbathis were included in the "perfumery".
16. We are of the view that the High Courts of Kerala, Bombay and Punjab and Haryana were right in not giving an expanded meaning to "perfume" or "perfumery" and the Orissa High Court was in error in including agarbathis within the definition of "perfumery".
17. In our judgment neither in common parlance nor by the dictionary meaning nor having regard to the context of item 36 of the First Schedule of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act can it be said that "perfumes" would include agarbathis for the purpose of imposition of sales tax.
In view of the aforesaid, the judgment under appeal dated September 29, 1989 is set aside. The appeals are allowed with no order as to costs.
C.A. Nos. 4678-4681 of 1990 and W.P. (C) No. 870 of 1990:
In view of the decision in C.A. Nos. 1426-28 of 1990, C.A. Nos. 4678-4681 of 1990 are also allowed with no order as to costs.
Writ Petition (C) No. 870 of 1990 is allowed with a direction on the respondents not to tax agarbathis as falling under item 36 of the First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act. There will be no order as to costs. Appeals and writ petition allowed.
Appeals allowed.
