State of Tripura v Arati Bala Sarkar
Supreme Court of India

14 March 1997
C.A. No. 1947 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
Respondent 1, Even though duly served, has not chosen to appear.
1.  This appeal is directed against the judgment of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Agartala Bench, Agartala dated 5-7-1996 in Civil Rule No. 88 of 1992 filed by Respondent 1. The husband of Respondent 1, Prafulla Chandra Sarkar, was a Labour Sardar in the M. B. Tilla, FCI Godown. It appears that while travelling from Gaya to Calcutta he fell down from the train and he has not been seen thereafter. In the writ petition Respondent 1 sought the relief for making inquiry into the circumstances about the disappearance of her husband and the High Court while disposing of the said writ petition has given the following direction.
"Accordingly, we close this writ application but under the facts and circumstances of this case, we direct the authority to give some suitable employment or lump sum monetary compensation to this poor lady so that she may live a decent life. This shall be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of this letter. We hope and trust that the authority will show sympathy to this poor lady."
2.  Having regard to the fact that the husband of Respondent 1 was not even an employee of the State Government and the only grievance with which Respondent 1 came to the High Court was with regard to the inquiry into the circumstances in which he had disappeared while travelling from Gaya to Calcutta, we are unable to appreciate how the High Court could give the direction to give suitable employment or lump sum monetary compensation to Respondent 1.
3. In exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution it is not for the High Court to distribute benediction merely because Respondent 1, who has moved the Court, is undergoing hardship. We are, therefore, unable to uphold the aforesaid direction given by the High Court. The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the impugned direction given by the High Court is set aside. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
