Victoria v K.V. Naik & Ors.
Supreme Court of India

9  May  1997
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 10014 of 1997 and CRP No. 2587/96
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. This special leave petition arises from the order of the High Court of Kerala, made on 17.3.1997 in CRP No. 2587/96.
The respondents-mortgagorshad filed O.S. No.285/79 for redemption of the mortgage. The petitioner-mortgagee claimed fixityof thetenure in respect of the entire extent of the land under Section 4(1)(10) (b) and Section 13 of the Kerala Land Reforms Act; inthe alternative, she claimed to be entitled to deemed Kudikidappu rights over 3 cents of the total extent of8 cents,by operation of Explanation IV to section 2(25) of the Act. The trial Court negatived the contention by decree dated July 51, 1980. Final decree was passed on September 30, 1992.The court of Kudikidappu advanced by the petition era rises for consideration only at the time of the execution; thus, in this case, prima facie, they are not entitled to reference under Section 125(3)of the Act. When the petitioner had carriedthe matter to the High court held that it operates as constructive res judicata. Since that question was raised at the time when the final decree had been passed, the petitioner raised this point in the execution. Thus, this petition by special leave.
The High Court has considered various decisions of that Court in reaching the conclusion; particularly, it relied upon a judgment of the Division Bench in Narayanans. Kunchiyamma ParukkuttyAmma [1986 K.L.T. 1340]. The High Court recorded the findings thus:
"In the light of this position now settled, it is clear that the judgment debtors ar precluded from claiming that they are Kudikidappukars entitled to the protection of Explanation IV to section 2(25) of the Act in view oftheir prior approach tothe Land Tribunal on a claim that they are cultivating tenants entitled to an assignment of the right title and interest of the land owner over the land in question. The present plea of Kudikidappu is, therefore, barred by res judicata. It is well settled in this Court that when a claim of tenancy of Kudikidappu is barred by res judicata , such a question does not arise for decision within the meaning of Section 125(3) of the Act. (see the decision ofthe Full Bench in Kesava Bhat vs. Subraya Bhat, 1979 KLT 766).
It is therefore, to be held in the present case tha the claim of Kudikidappa sought to be put forward and consequently no reference is called for under Section 125(3) of the Act, Learned counsel for the judgment debtors contended that in the decree foredemption that has been passed, the claim of the judgment debtors for protection under Explanation IV to section 2(25) of the Act has been left open to be decided in execution and under such circumstances the question did arise and the same ought to be referred to the Land Tribunal under Section 125(3) of the Act. All that was done by the judgment in the case was to take note ofthe plea ofthe judgment debtors that they were entitled to protection as Kudikidappukars and without deciding that question at the stage of the decree leaving it to be Explanation IV to Section2(25) of the Act. Nor who there an adjudication that they were entitled to claim such aright. When the question of claim such a right. When the question of reference under Section 125(3) of the Act to the concerned Land Tribunal is mooted, the executing court has necessarily to decide the question whether the claim raised arises for decision. If the executing court were to come to the conclusion that the question does not arise for decision in view of the judgment debtor being barred by res would not be open for the executing court to refer that question to the Land Tribunal. I am, therefore, not in a position to accept the contention that the execution court had no option but to refer the question to the Land Tribunal.
Thus by making a reference of the claim of the judgment debtors that they are Kudikidappukars, the execution court has overlooked the fact that the claim of the judgment debtors is barred by resjudicata in the light of the decision of the supreme Court referred to above. Thereby the executing Court in under section 115of the Code of civil Procedure. Since it has to be held that a question of Kudikidappu does not arise for decision, the order of reference made by the executing Court is also one without jurisdiction."
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends relying upon the judgment of the Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in Balakrishnan vs. Bhaskaran [1987 (2) K.L.T] that a right of redemption is vested in the mortgagor under Section60 of the Transfer of property Act, can be extinguished either by an act of parties or by decree of court. Deposit of the mortgage money under Section 83does not ipso facto extinguishes the mortgage where the mortgagee had refused to accept the deposit. To put it differently , if the deposit is not accepted, the mortgage does not get extinguished; that means the patties continue to have the relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee. When Section 2,(25) and 125(3) of the Land Reforms Act are to be considered in a suit of redemption claiming the right of Kudikidappu as found, is not barred by the principle of constructive res judicata in executing proceedings. We find that later part of the view taken therein is not correct for the reason that if the plea has not been raised, it operates as constructive res judicataon the principle of " might and ought". If it is taken and rejected, it operates as res judicata and the same cannot be raised in execution .Even if it is left open, inequity, justiceand good conscience, it must not be extended to the mortgagee. Even if it is left open, in equity, justice and good conscience, it must not be extended to the mortgagee.
2. After all, the mortgagee, money-lender comes into possession of the property as mortgagee and always remains as mortgagee unless limitation snaps off the link. He cannot be permitted in good sense of law to eat away the cake as Kudikidappu, It would be abhorrence to good conscience and playing upon the property of indigent mortgagor's own property. Certainly, that is a matter gone into at the time of the execution. Since in the suit. the plea had been raised and negatived and a preliminary decree hadbeen passed followed by a final decree, it was not open to the petitioner to raise the plea after the passing of the final decreethat he was entitled to three cents of land as kudikidappu.
The special leave petition is accordingly dismissed.
