Shobhit Chamar and Another v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

4 March 1998
Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction : Cr.A. No. 1084 of 1997 with Cr. Appeal Nos. 262-263/98 @ S.L.P. (Cr.) Nos. 3729-30/97
The Judgment was delivered by: S. P. Kurdukar, J.
1.  The two condemned prisoners/appellants, namely,Shiv Prakash Pandey(A-1) and Shobhit Chamar (A-2) had initially sent apetition through jail to this Court which was registered as Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 3576 of 1997 where in leave was granted and a Criminal Appeal No. 1084 of 1997 came to be registered. In the meantime, the condemned prisoners filed Special LeavePetition (Crl.) Nos. 3729-30 of 1997 through their Advocate against the verysame judgment and order of conviction passed by the High Court of Patna, hence Leave isgranted herein as well. Since both these CriminalAppeals are filed by the condemned prisoners challenging the legality and correctness of the judgment of the High Court wherein the death sentence of both the appellants for committing six murders is confirmed, they are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.  The prosecution story unfolded at the trial is as under:- Jagarnath Pandey (since deceased) was the resident if village Tirojpur under policestation Durgawati, district Rohtas. He owned a house and an agricultural land having a bore well and a chamber room. The occurrence in the present case took place in his residential house during the night intervening between January 1 and 2, 1989 at about 1.00 a.m. Haridwar Pandey is the son of Jagarnath Pandey. On the date of incident, Jagarnath Pandeyand his son Ram Iqbal Pandey (both deceased) went to the chamber (room) for sleeping during that night. Besides Haridwar Pandey and Ram Iqbal Pandey, the family ofJagarnath Pandey was consisted of Taranath Pandey, a cousin (since deceased), Mahendra Pandey, nephew (since deceased), Anil Pandey 10 years old and Sunil Pandey, 8 years old, grand sons (since deceased) and other female members. They were in the house. After evening meals, all these persons went to sleep in their respective rooms. At about mid night, Bhajurama Devi (PW 2) who was sleeping in herroom heard the knock on the door and a call from Ram Iqbal Pandey requesting her to open the door as he the door in good faith but toher surprise,she saw 15 to 20 miscreants whoforcibly entered into the house.
3. All these miscreants then started knockin thedoor of a room where Lalmuni Devi (PW 6), informant, was sleeping. By then she realised that some dacoits had entered into the house. They continued to knock the door and also started abusing the intimated. When she opened the door, 4 to 5 dacoits entered into her room. Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) apprehending danger came out ofthe room and saw 15 to 20 dacoits armed with rifles had entered into her house and thereafter started collecting the valuables from rooms and putting them into bundles. She then spotted her father-in-law Jagarnath Pandey and Ram Iqbal Pandey in the courtyard with their hands tied from behind. Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) immediately took her children and other family members inside another room called Dumuha. Some of the dacoits then started asking the inmates of the house of disclose where the gun and the ornaments were kept otherwise their children would be killed. Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) told theat she did not know about the gun and she requested the dacoits not to cause harm to any of the family members. She identified Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1), Shobhit Chamar (A-2) and Ram Dular who was said to have been killed in encounter during the pendency of trial.
4.  It is alleged by the prosecution that A-2 then started snatching the two children, namely, Anil Pandey and Sunil Pandey from Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and when she resisted, A-2 assaulted her with baton of the rifle and snatched the children forcibly from her and brought them into the courtyard. Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) and Shobhit Chamar (A- 2) then fired from their guns killing Jagarnath Pandey and Ram Iqbal Pandey who collapsed due to fire arm injuries on the ground and died on the spot. A-2 along with two or three dacoits then went outside the house and after some time, came back along with Taranath Pandey and Mahendra Pandey who were also gun down in the courtyard. The two minor children were terribly scared and when they started weeping, some of the dacoits sad that they be spared. When they were let off, they went to Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and sat on her lap. One of the dacoits then saidthat these children should to be spared becausewhen they would grow,they might take the revenge and, therefore, they should also be finished. A-2 then forcibly brought the children from Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) in thecourtyard and thereafter miscreants fired at them.
5. Both the children succumbed to the fire arminjuries and died on the spot. A-2 was than enquiring about Haridwar husband of Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and asked her to call him so that he would also be killed. A-2 then stated that all male members of the family of Haridwar should be finished so that he would be satisfiedof taking revenge of murders of his brother and a nephew.During this occurrence, according to the prosecution, the dacoits also assaulted Bindu Devi (PW 4) wife of Ram IqbalPandey. Aftercommitting the six murders and assaulting the Family members of Jagarnath Pandey, the dacoits left the house with valuables worth Rs. 12.000/- raising slogans 'Jai Durga Maa'.
6.  Durgawati police station is situated at a distance of 10 kilometers from the village Tirojpur . Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) went to the police station at about 6.30 a.m. on 2nd January, 1989 and loaded the FIR (Ex.5). The FIR sets out all the details naming Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1), Shobhit Chamar(A-2), Ram Dular (A-3) and otherunidentified dacoits. It is then stated therein that Shobhit Chamar (A-2) had nursed a grudge against her family as he suspected that Haridwar was responsible for causing the murders of his brother and nephew.
7.  After registeringthe Crime, Arun Shukla (PW 11) who was uncharge of Durgawati police station left for the village and after reaching there, commenced the investigation. After carrying out the inquest panchanama on the six dead bodies, he sentthem to Bhabhua Hospital for post mortemexamination. The investigating officer thereafter carried out the necessary investigation and also recorded thestatements of various witnesses. After completing theinvestigation, the appellants along with two other acquitted accused, namely, Khobhru Chamar and Narad Chamar were sent up for trial for offences punishable under Sections 302/149. 380 and 460 of the Indian Penal Code and 27 of the Arms Act.
8.  The appellants denied the allegations levelled against them and pleaded thatthey were innocent and did not know anything aboutthe incident. They also pleaded thatthey have been falsely implicated in the present crime due to animosity. They also brought on record the copy of the complaint lodged by Gohni Kaur, the wife of elder brother of A-2 filed against Haridwar, Ram Iqbal Pandey and others in connection with the murder of her husband. Certain other documents werealso brought on record to show the enmity between the family of Haridwar and the accused.
9.  At the trial, the prosecution examined as manys 13 witnesses, of whom, BhajuramaDevi (PW 2), Bindu Devi (PW 4), Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and Lachhi Devi (PW 7) were the eye witnesses. Sumitra Devi (PW 1) was examined to prove that decoits had forcibly taken away Mahendra Pandey and Taranath Pandey from her houseand soon thereafter she found that they were killed. She disclosed the name of A-1, A-2 AND Ram Dular Chamar who had whisked away them. Dr.Jai Shanker Mishra(PW 9) was examinedto prove thepost mortem examination reports and causeof death of six deceased persons.
10.  The trialcourt after careful scrutiny of oral and documentary evidence on record vide its judgment and order dated February 16, 1996 held the appellants guilty f offences punishable under Sections 302, 302/149, 380 and 460 of theIndian Penal Code as also u/s. 27 of the Arms Act. The trial court, however, found that the prosecution had failed to establish beyond reasonable doubt any ofthe charges against Khobhru Chamar (A-3) and Narad Chamar (A-4) and consequentlythey were acquitted. After herein the appellants and their counsel on the question of sentence, the trial court awarded death sentence to both the appellants andmade aReference to the HighCourt u/s. 366 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
11.  This Reference came to be numbered as Death Reference No. 1 of 1996which was heard alongwith Criminal Appeal Nos. 118 and 136 of 1996 filed by the State of Bihar and the appellants respectively. The Counsel for the parties and the appellants on the question of sentence. Relevant portion of the judgment reads thus:-
"Since both the accused have faced the trialfrom being bar, hence both are remanded tojudicial custody to be producedon 23rd February, 1996 when the case will be put up for hearing on the point of sentence."
12.  Accordingly, the appellants were produced in the court on thesaid adjourneddate. The trial court heard the learned Counsel for the parties and thereafter pronounced the order of sentence. From the above facts, it isthus clear that the appellants were given sufficient opportunity of being heard on the question of sentence.No grievance whatsoever in this behalf was made either before the trial court or before the High Court. The arguments as regards non compliance of S. 235(2) Cr.P.C. was first time sought to be raised before us. Learned counsel for the appellants in support of his contention drew our attention to the judgment of this Court in Santa Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 1976(4) S.C.C. 190 1976 Indlaw SC 169. While dealing with the true scope of S. 235 (2) Cr.P.C., this Court observed:
"This provisionis clear and explicit and does not admit of any doubt. Itrequires that in every trial before a court of sessions, there must first be a decision as to the guilt of the accused. The court must, in the first instance, deliver ajudgment convicting or acquitting the accused. If the accused is acquitted, no further question arises. But if he is convicted, then the court has to "hear then accused on the question of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law".
13. When a judgment is rendered convicting the accused, he is, at that stage, to be given an opportunity to be heard in regard to the sentence and it is only after hearing him that the court can proceed to pass the sentence.
14.  The courtemphasised that S. 235(2) Cr.P.C. is mandatory and it mustbe complied with in true spirit. Non compliance thereof would not be a mere irregularity which could be cured u/s. 465 Cr.P.C. It was a case where the accused was charged for double murder and was represented bya lawyer throughout the trial. On the day judgment was pronounced, the accused was not so represented. The Sessions Judge pronouncedthe judgment convicting him u/s. 302 IPCand sentenced him to death without giving any opportunity to him to be heard on the question of sentence. It is on these facts, the court fond that non compliance of S. 235(2) Cr.P.C. would make the death sentence unsustainable. The same view has been reiterated by this Court in Allauddin Mian and others Sharif Mian and another Vs. State of Bihar. 1989(3) SCC 1989 Indlaw SC 577 It is true that in paragraph 10, this Court observed:
"Since the provision is intended to give the accused an opportunity to place before the courtall the relevant materialhaving a bearing on the question of sentence there can be no doubt that the provision is salutary and must bestrictly followed. It is clearly mandatory and should not be treated as a mere formality."
15.  What had happened in this case was that the trial court recorded the finding of quilt on March 31. 1987 and on the very same day, they were asked if they had anything to say on thequestion of sentence and immediately thereafter the order of death sentence was pronounced. It appearsthat grievance as regardsnon compliance of S. 235(2) Cr.P.C. was made in the courts below and it is in these circumstances, the court heldthat the accused were not given sufficient opportunity to be heard on the question of sentence and, therefore, there was non compliance of S. 235(2)Cr.P.C. was made in the Courts below and it is in these circumstances, the court held that the accused were not given sufficient opportunity to be heard on the question of sentence and,therefore, there was non compliance of S. 235(2) Cr.P.C.
16. The facts of the case beforeus are entirely differentand in fact after pronouncing the judgment of conviction on February 16, 1996, both the appellants were remanded to judicial custody till 23rd February, 1996 and were given full opportunity of being heard on the questionof sentence. The Advocate for the appellants was also heard fully on the question of sentence. It is in these circumstances, we find that the ratio of the above referredtwo decisions of thisCourts will have no application. The argument relating to prejudice thus would not survive.
17.  Learned Counsel for the appellants then urged that the procedure followed in recording the statements of the appellants u/s. 313 Cr.P.C. was totally irregular inasmuch as the material evidence and the circumstances which were relied upon by the prosecution were not put to them and resultantly they were denied an opportunity to explain the same. It was, therefore,contended that non compliance of S. 313 Cr. P.C. has vitiated the trial and the appellants could not be convicted for any offence.
18.  The statement of ShobhitChamar (A-2) recorded u/s. 313 Cr.P.C ofwhich a free translation in English was furnished by his Advocate reads thus:-
19. Q: Have you heard the evidence of witness. It is the allegation of witnesses that on the night of 1/2 January, 1989 Shiv Prakash Pandey, Shobhit Chamar, Khobhare Chamar, Ram Pratap Chamar and Narad Chamar and other associatedarmed with rifle and gun looted ornaments, clothes, cash from the house of the Informant LalmuniDevi, situatedin village Tirozpur, P.S. Durgawati, Distt. Rohtas, at present in district Bhabhua. Have you got to say anything?
A: No Sir.
20. Q: It is also alleged by the witnesses that at that time, place anddate accused Ram Dular, Shobhit andShiv Prakash killed JagarnathPandey, Ram Iqbal Pandey, Mahendra Pandey, Taranath Pandey, besides two children, namely, Anil Pandey and Sunil Pandey who were sons of Haridwar Pandey (all of them) by firing shots. Have you got anything to say?
21. Q: It is also alleged by the witnesses that at the time of occurrence, electric bulb was illuminating in the court yard of the house of informant, in the light of which (they) recognisedyou all. Have you got anything to say?
Q: Do you want to say something in your defence?
22. A: On the day of occurrence, I was inthe village (Illegible). Because Haridwar Pandey had killed three persons like Ram Kewal etc.. Due to fear of this, I had left the village.
23. The statement of Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) is almost similar exceptthe last question which he had given answer "No Sir".
24.  Relying upon the above statements of the appellants, it was contended by Mr. R.K. Jain, Learned Senior Advocate that the court had failed to formulate the question properly inasmuch as the material circumstances appearing in the evidence of the prosecution were not put to the appellants. Mr. Jain drew our attention to the decision of this Court in Tara Singh Vs. The State, 1951 SCR 729 1951 Indlaw SC 62 and in particular the observations at page 733. It was a case where statement of the accused was recorded u/s. 342 Cr.P.C., 1898. The questions put to the accused were reproduced in the judgment whichaccording to this Court were not sufficient compliance of S. 342 Cr.P.C. It is interesting to note that the Sessions Court repeated thesame questions and answers put to the accused at the committalstage by the Magistrate. itwas, therefore, a case where the Sessions Court did not record the statements of the accused u/s. 342 of the Cr. P.C. after recording the evidence of the prosecution at trial and, therefore, in these circumstances, the court heldthat there was breach of provisions of S. 342 Cr.P.C and consequently the conviction andsentence inflicted upon the accused was set aside and the case was sent back to the trial court for de nova trial.
25. In the case before us, the prosecutioncase mainlyrested upon the ocular evidence of eye witnesses. On conclusion of the prosecutionevident. the rial court did put the necessary questions relating to the evidence of eye witnesses to both the appellants and thereafter recorded the answers given by them. It is, therefore, clear that the decision rendered by this Court in Tara Singh Vs. The State 1951 Indlaw SC 62 (supra) is clearly distinguishable.
26.  In Rama Shankar Singh and others Vs. State ofWest Bengal. AIR 1962 SC 1239 1961 Indlaw SC 360, a similarquestion arose for consideration before this Court under the old Code. 1898 and this court observed as under:-
"The examination by the Sessions Judge of theappellants was perfunctory, butas observed in Ajmer Singh's case, 1953 SCR 418, (AIR 1953 Sc 76)1952 Indlaw SC 110everyerror or omission in complying with S. 342 does not vitiate the trial. "Errors of thistype fall within the category of curable irregularities and the question whether the trial has been vitiated depends in each case uponthe degree of error and upon whether prejudice has been or is likelyto have been caused to the accused."
The Court then observed:-
"Failureto comply with the provisions of the S.342 is an irregularity; andunless injustice is shown to have resulted therefrom a mere irregularity is by itself not sufficient to justify an order of retrial. Theappellate court must always consider whether by reason offailure to comply with a procedural provisions, which does not affect the jurisdiction of the court, the accused have been materially prejudiced."
27.  In State of Maharashtra Vs. Sukhdev Singh and another. 1992 (3) SCC 700 1992 Indlaw SC 44, thisCourt had an occasion to consider a similar question. It was a case which mainly depended upon the identification of the accused, various other circumstances forming a chain of circumstantial evidence and the confessional statement. It is in the context, this Court ruled that the court was duty bound to solicit accused's explanation inrespect of every incriminating material used by theprosecution against him irrespective of how weak or scanty the prosecution evidence was in this respect. This appeal was filed by the State of Maharashtra challenging the order of acquittal passed by the trial court against some of the accused and on examining the records, the Court found that there was non compliance of S. 313 Cr.P.C. and, therefore, the order of acquittal did not call for any interference.
28.  In Bhalinder Singh @ Raju Vs. State of Punjab, 1994 (1) SCC 726 1993 Indlaw SC 1551, this Court held that the circumstances not out to the accused while recording his statement u/s. 313 Cr.P.C., cannot be used against him. This was a case where prosecution solely relied upon the circumstantial evidence. This Court, therefore, came to the conclusion that the circumstances which were not put to the accused cannot be used by the prosecution for holding him guilty in a case of circumstantial evidence. This decision again does not help the appellants on the peculiar facts of this case.
29.  Mr. B.B.Singh, learned counsel for the respondent drew our attention to the judgment of this Court in Suresh Chandra Bahri Vs. State of Bihar, 1995 Suppl. (1) SCC 80 1994 Indlaw SC 354 and other appeals.This Court while dealing with the scope of S. 313 Cr.P.C. held as under:-
"The provisions in Section 313, therefore, make it obligatory on the courtto question the accused on the evidence and circumstance appearingagainst him so as to apprise him the exact case which he is required to meet. But it would not be enough for the accused to show that hehas not been questioned or examined on a particular circumstance but he must also show that such non-examination has actually and metrically prejudiced him and has resulted in failure of justice. In other words in the event ofany inadvertent omission on the part of the court to question theaccused on any incriminating circumstance appearingagainst him the same cannot ipso facto vitiate the trial unless it is shown that some prejudice was caused to him." In the final analysis, the Court observed: "In the facts and circumstances discussed above it cannot be said that any prejudice was caused to the appellant. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellants in this behalf therefore has no merit."
30.  In BijjoyChand Potra Vs. The State. 1952 SCR 202, a similar question arose beforethis Court asregards the scope of S. 342 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. In this reported decision, only three questions were put to the accused on the conclusion of the prosecution evidence, namely,
(1) what his defence was s to the evidence adduced against him.
(2) whether he had inflicted injuries on Kumad Patra and
(3) whetherhe would adduce any evidence.
31. While considering the challenge to the conviction on behalf of the accused on the ground that relevant prosecution evidence and other materials relied upon by the prosecution were not put to him u/s. 342 Cr.P.C 1898 the Court observed:-
"To sustain such an argument as his been put forward, itis not sufficient for the accused merely to show that he has not been fully examined as required by S. 342 of the Criminal Procedure Code, but he mustalso show that such examination has materially prejudiced him."
32.  We have perused all these reported decisions relied upon by the Learned Advocates for the parties and we see no hesitation in concluding that the challenge to the conviction based on non compliance of S. 313 Cr.P.C. first time in this appeal cannot be entertained unless the appellants demonstrate that the prejudice has been caused to them. In the present caseas indicated earlier, the prosecution strongly relied upon the ocular evidence of the eye witnesses and relevant questions with reference to this evidence were put to the appellants.If theevidence of these witnesses is found acceptable, the conviction can be sustained unless it is shownby the appellants that a prejudice has been caused to them. No such prejudice was demonstrated before us and, therefore, we are unable to accept the contention raised on behalf of the appellants.
33.  Advertising to the merits of the case, at the outset. It needs to be stated that there was no challenge to the fact that six persons were done to death during the incident in question. The medical evidence in the form of post mortem examination reports which wasduly proved by the medical expert Dr. Jai Shanker Misra (PW 9) unmistakably indicated that deceased persons had sustained several gunshot injuries which caused their instantaneous deaths. The courts below in our opinion have rightly held that six persons died homicidal deaths during the incident in question. We accordantly uphold the finding recorded by the courts below in this behalf.
34.  In order to prove the complicity of the appellants, the prosecution principally relied upon the evidence of four eye witness, namely, Bhajurama Devi (PW 2), Bindu Devi (PW 4), Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and Lachhi Devi(PW 7). All these witnesses werestaying in the house of Jagarnath Pandey and they had witnessed the entire incident in question. Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) lodged the FirstInformation Report on 2nd January. 1989 at about 6.30 a.m. naming the appellants and Ram Dular Chamar in addition to some unidentified dacoits. All these eye witnesses identified the appellants. According to them, the source of lightwas two electric bulbs which were on/burning in the court yard. All these eye witnesses are illiterateladieswho have lost theirmale family members. Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) in her evidence has given the photographic details as to how the incident took place. She stated that the appellants along with otherunidentified dacoits entered into the courtyard and gunned down six persons two on each occasion. They died on the spot due to fire arm injuries. She further stated that she identified three assailants of whom two are appellants in the light of electric bulbswhich were on/burning in the courtyard. The First Information Report lodged by her fully corroborates her evidence.
35.  Bhajurama Devi (PW 2) who is the mother of deceased Ram Iqbal Pandey, has stated that when she was sleeping in her room, during the night, her son Ram Iqbal Pandey (deceased) knocked the door and asked her to open it as he was feeling thirsty. When she opened the door. 20 to 25 dacoits entered into the house along with her son Ram Iqbal Pandey and Jagarnath Pandey (both since deceased) with their hands tied from behind.Shobhit Chamar (A-2)and his associated inquired aboutHaridwar Pandey and the gun and on her reply in thenegative, theystarted looting the valuables and assaulted Bindu Devi (PW 4). Suddenly, A-2 pumped out bullets from him gun killing Ram Iqbal Pandey and Jagarnath Pandey on the spot. Both the appellants then went out of the house and came back along with Taranath Pandey and Mahendra Pandeywho were made to stand in the courtyard and thereafter shots were fired killing both of them on the spot. The female members in the house were terribly scarred and they were praying not to kill any of the family members. Anil Pandey aged about 10 years and Sunil Pandey aged about 8 years both sons of Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) were watched from her. Some of the miscreants then told their associated not to kill the children whereupon A-1 asked his associated not to leave the childrenbecause when they would grow, they will take the revenge. In the meantime, the children who had gone to the mother were dragged back by the appellants and thereafter Shobhit Chamar (A-2) fired at them as a result thereof, both the children fell down and died.
36. The appellants andtheir associated then assaulted some of the inmates who had sustained the injuries. All the six dead bodies were found lying in the court yard. This witness war searchingly cross-examined on behalf of the appellants but no material could be brought on record to disbelieve her evidence. The evidence of this witness is absolutely free from any infirmity and thus clearly establishes that the appellants andother associates entered into the mouse during the dead hoursof Istand 2nd January, 1981, they were armed with firearms having a common object the eliminate malemembers of the familyof Haridwar and in pursuance thereof they killedsix persons. The evidence of Bindu Devi (PW 4) and Lachhi Devi (PW 7) is almost similar and intheir avoidance they assertedthat they identified the appellantsin thelight that was burning on in the courtyard. Their evidence in all material particulars support the evidence of Bhajurama Devi (PW 2) and Lalmuni Devi (PW 6).
37.  The courtbelow have very carefully gone through the evidence of these four eye witnesses. We havealso undertaken thesame exercise and in our opinion the courts below have committed no error whatsoever in coming to the conclusion that during the night in question. The appellants along with other cacoits entered into the because of Haridwar Pandey with deadly weapons and formed an unlawful assembly sharing a common object to eliminate male members of family of Haridwar. In prosecution of this common object, the appellants killed six persons two in each lot by using the fire arms. The trial court for want of proper identification gave benefit of doubt no Khoohru Chamar (A-3) and Narad Chamar (A-4) and acquitted themof all the charges. As far as Ram Dularis concerned, it was stated that he was killed in police encounter during the pendency of trial and hence trialabatedagainst him. Other miscreants whoentered into the house during the said night could not be identified and as a result thereof, they could not be arraigned as accused.
38.  The abovefindings recorded by the trial court and confirmed bythe High Court do not suffer from any infirmity. Onour careful consecration ofevidence on record. We share and confirm the same view. The fact that both the appellants along with other dacoits came armed with deadly weapons during the dead hours would unmistakably snow that they had come to the house of Haridwar Pandey with the common object in the first instanceto finish Haridwar Pandey as he was suspected to be the killer of brother and nephew of Shobhit Chamar (A-2). Finding that Haridwar was not available in the house, the appellants and other members of theunlawful assembly committed the dacoity of the valuable property and thereafter Shobhit Chamar (A-2) shot down the six male persons of the family of Haridwar Pandey including two innocent children aged about 10 and 8 years.
39.  At this culture, it would be very necessary to refer to the evidence of Bhajurama Devi (PW 2) who during her cross- examinations on behalf of A-1 admitted that she did not see any fire arm in the hands of A-1. The evidence of thesefour eye witnesses is consistent to prove that A-1 sharedthe same common object with A-2 and other dacoits who hadentered into the house of Haridwar Pandey and were insisting that whereaboutsof Haridwar Pandey be disclosed to them and his gun be handed over. A-1 also actively participated ingetting Jagarnath Pandey and Ram Iqbal Pandey with their hands tied from behind into the courtyard and thereafter A-2 pupped out bullets from his rifle. This evidence has got bearingwhen we consider the sentence to do awarded to A-1. The eye witnesses then stated that the appellants left the courtyard and within a short time came back along with Taranath Pandey and Mahendra Pandey and forced them to stand in the courtyard and thereafter A-2 fired at them and gunned down in the presence of the family members. Anil Pandey and Sunil Pandey who were sitting in the Dumunahere brought dragging by A-2. Having regard to the ages of the children, some of the dacoits asked A-2 to set them free and were accordingly freed.
40. In the meantime, A-1 asked the miscreants not to spare the children because when they grow, they would take the revenge. A-2 and his associate then brought the children forcibly from the ladof their mother Lalmuni Devi (PW 6) and thereafterA-2 and his associate punned down them. A-2 then claimed that they had finished all the male members of Haridwar Pandey and now his heard is cooled down.They thereafter left the place of accedence rejoicing the victory and giving slogans of success in the name of God.
41.  Mr. R.K.Jain, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellants, however, urged that the prosecution has failed to establish any common object/intention on the pat of the appellants to commit the crime in question. He further urged that if they had a common object/intention to take the revenge, theywould not have spared the ladies.This submission does not increase us in view of the ocular evidence of the four eye witnesses.
42.  It was then contended for the appellants that the evidence of four eye witnesses who are close relatives of the deceased persons be not acceptedas sufficient in the absence of cooperation from independent evidence. He further urged that the relations between A-2 and Haridwar had become strained and inimical becauseA-2 strongly believedthat Haridwar Pandey was responsible forthe murder go hid brother and nephew. It is because of this enmity, the eye witnesses falsely implicated the appellants at the behest of Haridwar Pandey. This submission again is devoid of any merit. The courts below have very carefully scrutinized the evidence of four eye witnesses and fount it trustworthy. We are inagreement withthe appreciation of evidence done by the courts below and therefore, we uphold the finding as regards the complicity of both the appellants in the present crime.
43.  Coming tothe question of sentence, the trial court as well as the High court awarded death sentence to both the appellants having regard to their complicity, the common objectshared by them, the degree of brutality and revengeful conduct exhibited by them. The trial court as well as the High Court had also referred to the law settled by this Court on the question of death sentence. The High Court while confirming the death sentence of both the appellants hadreferred to the decision of this Court in
(1) Bachan Singh Vs. State of Punjab. 1980(2) SCC 684 1980 Indlaw SC 586.
(2) Machhi Singh Vs. State of Punjab. 1983 (3) SCC 470 1983 Indlaw SC 116 and
(3) Dhananjoy Chatterjee @ Dhana Vs.. State of West Bengal. 1994(2) SCC 220 1994 Indlaw SC 1743.
44. After considering the law laid down by this Court in all these three reported decisions, the High Court held that the present case is one of the rarest of rare case where death sentence to both the appellants must be held to be theappropriate sentence. The High Court also considered the mitigating circumstances urged on behalf of the appellants against awardingthe death sentence. In paragraphs 34.35 and 36. the High Court has summarised the contentions raised on behalf of the Learned Counsel for the parties and concluded that the trial court had committed no mistake in awardingthe death sentence to both the appellants and accordingly accepted the Reference and dismissed the criminal appeals filed by the appellants.
45.  Mr. R.K. Jain, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellants heavily relied upon the minority decision rendered by Bhagwati,J. inthe case of Bachan Singh 1980 Indlaw PNH 53 (supra). Advocating the view expressed by Bhagwati, J., he urged that the present trend in the world is against the death penalty. Moreover, the present crime cannot be said to be the rearers of rare cases. He, therefore, urged that this is nota fit case where the appellants need to be awarded death sentence. In the facts and circumstances of this case, sentence of life imprisonmentto both the appellants would meet the ends of justice. This argument completely overlooks the majority judgment which has accepted the constitutionality of the death sentence in the rarest of rare cased.
46.  Having regard to the evidence of the eye witnesses and the facts proved in the present case we may now deal with the question of sentence in respect of both the appellant s separately. Wemay first deal with the question of sentence awarded to Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1)has been awarded the death sentencewith the aid of S. 145 IPC as also on the basis of a general statement made by the four eye witnesses thatthe miscreants had gunned down the six persons duringthe incident in question. The evidence on record discloses that A-1, A-2 and other miscreantscame together alongwith JagarnathPandey and Ram Iqbal Pandey with their hands tied behind and forced Ram Iqbal Pandey to give a knock on the door under the pretext that he wanted to drink water. When the door was opened by Bhajurama Devi (PW 2), A-1 and his associates entered into the house. A-1 also exhorted that no malenumber of Haridwar family should be kept alive. Being a member of an unlawful assembly sharing a common object,he wasrightly found guilty with the aid of S. 149 IPC for committing six murders. But, however, Bhajurama Devi(PW 2) in her evidence has admitted that A-1 was not having any fire arm in his hands at the time of entire episode. Other three eye witnesses undoubtedly made a general statement that A-2 and other miscreants fired at the six persons who died on the spot.
47. The evidence of all the four eye witnesses is consistent that Shobhit Chamar (A- 2) hadfired from his fire arm on all the six persons who died instantaneously. In theface of thisevidence, a distinction based on the degree of complicity and brutality will have to be drawn which has gota vital impact of awarding the sentence. It is well settled while awarding the sentence, the court has to bear in mind the crime and the criminal. Shobhit Chamar (A-2) had an axe to grind against Haridwar and his family members as he believed that Haridwar was responsible for causing murders of hisbrother and nephew. Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) asit appears from the record that he is not related to Shobhit Chamar (A-2) and, therefore, he might not be having the same degree of revenge and brutality as thatof Shobhit Chamar (A-2) had, Keeping this distinction in mind, in our occasion, the case of Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) will not fall in the category of rarest of rare cases. This distinction was over looked by the courts below. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the death sentence awarded to Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) was not justified having regard to the facts and circumstances of thecase. His case would not allin thecategory of rarest of rare cases.We accordingly uphold the conviction of Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) under Section 302/149 IPC but however the death sentence awarded to him by the courts below is altered to one for life imprisonment.
48.  Coming to the case ofShobhit Chamar (A-2), the evidence on record proves beyond every reasonable doubt that he wasthe principal offender/miscreant who fired from his fire arm on all the six persons including the two innocent children. He had a deep routed revenge passed upon suspicion about the murders of his brother and nephewby Ranidwar Pandey which prompted him to take average against the family members of Haridwar and had done to the extent of killing six persons belonging the family of Haridwar in amost brutal, heinous and barbaric manner. Nothing was suggested to theeye witnesses on behalf of A-2 that any of these deceased persons had played any role in committing the murders of his brother and nephew and at any rate having regard to the ages of Anil Pandey and Sunil Pandey it could not beeven remotely suspected thatthey could be the assailants. Shobhit Chamar (A-2) wanted not only to teach a lesson to the family members of Haridwar but also to create a terror in the minds of the family members of Haridwar to satisfy his ego and muscle power. A-2 exhibited most inhuman conduct while rejoicing his victory after commission of the crime. It is in this background. we are of the considered view that the trial court aswell as the High Court has committed no error in awarding death sentence to him.
49.  Mr. B.B.Singh, Learned Counsel for the State of Bihar drew our attention tothe recent judgment of this Court in Shiv Ram and another Vs, State of U.P., with connected appeals 1998 (1) SCC 149. This decision to a great extent is similar even on facts.
50.  Mr. Jain was unable to pointout any mitigating circumstance which could pursued us to alter the death sentenced of A-2. In our considered view, the courts below were right in awarding the death sentence to Shobhit Chamar (A-2) as his case clearly falls within the ambit of rarest f rare cases. We accordingly confirm the death sentence of Shobhit Chamar (A-2).
51.  The convictions of both the appellants on other courts i.e. u/ss. 380 and 460 of the Indian Penal Code are also confirmed. Conviction and sentence of Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) u/s. 27 of the Arms Act to stand set aside cut, however, the conviction and sentence of Sophist Chamar (A-2) u/s. 27 of the Arms Act is confirmed.
52.  In the result, conviction and death sentence of Shobhit Chamar (A-2) passed by the trial court and on Reference confirmed by the HighCourt is affirmed and his Criminal Appeal is dismissed. The judgment and order of convection of Shiv Prakash Pandey (A-1) under Section 302/149 of the Indian Penal Code cased by the trial court and on appeal confirmed by the High Court is upheld but however the death sentence awarded to him by the trial court and on Reference confirmed by the High Court is altered to life imprisonment.
Appeal dismissed.
