Shetty's Constructions Company Private Limited v Konkan Railway Construction and Another
Supreme Court of India

2 April 1998
S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 1238 to 1245 of 1997
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  In these matters, two common decisions rendered by the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay in four arbitration proceedings have been brought on the anvil of scrutiny.
2.  Before dealing with the merits of these proceedings, one point which, in our view, requires to be decided at the threshold is to the effect whether the present arbitration proceedings are governed by the earlier Arbitration Act, 1940.
3.  In the light of the aforesaid factual data about the dates on which such claims were rejected the present question will have to be decided. The High Court in the impugned judgment has proceeded on the ground that the demands lodged under clause 63 of the Arbitration Agreement, were premature. We are not concerned with that controversy at this stage. Therefore, without expressing any opinion on the merits of that ground we proceed to decide this short question whether the new Act applies or the old Act applies on the facts of the present proceedings. The answer to this question is found from Section 85 of the new Act which reads as under.
"85. Repeal and savings. - (1) The Arbitration (Protocol and Convention) Act, 1937 (6 of 1937), the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) and the Foreign Awards (Recognition and Enforcement) Act, 1961 (45 of 1961) are hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, -
(a) the provisions of the said enactments shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced before this Act came into force unless otherwise agreed by the parties but this Act shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced on or after this Act comes into force;
(b) all rules made and notifications published, under the said enactments shall, to the extent to which they are not repugnant to this Act, be deemed respectively to have been made or issued under this Act."
4.  A mere look at sub-section (2)(a) of Section 85 shows that despite the repeal of Arbitration Act, 1940
5.  After we resolved this preliminary controversy between the parties, learned counsel for the respondents on our suggestion requested us to give some more time to the respondents to give further response on the aspect whether on the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, in these four arbitration suits which are governed by the old Act as held by us, and which have nothing to do with the other arbitration proceedings between the respondents and other contractors which may be pending under the new Act, to put an end to the simmering controversy about the qualification of the arbitrator, any retired Chief Justice of this Court or retired Judge of the Supreme Court or any other retired Judge of the High Court stationed at Bombay or elsewhere as found acceptable to parties can be requested to be such an arbitrator.
6. It is of course true that earlier the respondents had expressed their inability to accede to this suggestion but in view of our present decision and in view of the fact that the controversy will be confined to only the present four proceedings, which are governed by the 1940 Act, learned counsel for the respondents agreed to once again get the response from the respondent-authorities on this suggestion. At his request, adjourned to 28-4-1998.
Order accordingly.
