Formica India Division Limited v Collector of Central Excise
Supreme Court of India

1 April 1998
C.A. No. 167 of 1997 (Arising as an appeal from CEGAT Order No. 423/96-D, Dt. 21 June 1996)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant was manufacturing laminates and for that purpose it purchased duty paid glass fabrics from various manufacturers. The appellant classified the product namely, Pre-preg 'G', as chargeable to excise duty under Tariff Item 68 in the erstwhile Central Excise Tariff under the Schedule to the Central Excise Act. The said classification was initially approved by the Assistant Collector of Central Excises but subsequently a show cause notice was issued whereby it was proposed to classify the treated glass fabric under Tariff Item No. 22F. The appellant submitted its reply to the said show cause notice but the Assistant Collector passed an order classifying the product under Tariff Item No. 22F(4).The appeal filed by the appellant against the said order of Assistant Collector was allowed by the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) who held that the glass fabrics alone could be classified under Tariff Item 22F(4) and treated glass fabric could not be classified under the said item.
2. On further appeal the Central Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal by the impugned judgment dated 21st June, 1996, has reversed the said order of the Collector (Appeals) and has held that the treated glass fabric produced by the appellant was classifiable under Tariff Item No. 22F(4). Feeling aggrieved by the said decision of the Tribunal the appellant has filed the present appeal.
3.  Shri Laxmikumaran, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant, has invited our attention to the decision of this Court in Mahindra Engineering and  Chemical Products v. Union of India 1992 Indlaw SC 321  wherein this Court, while dealing with sub-item (4) of Item 22F of the erstwhile Central Excise Tariff, has held that the said item only covers glass fabrics manufactured out of the fabric/yarn and would not cover any product of the fabric.
4. In view of the said decision the impugned judgment of the Tribunal cannot be upheld because here the appellant was purchasing glass fabric from the market and by treating the same with resin the product Pre-preg 'G' was being manufactured. The appeal is, therefore, allowed accordingly, the impugned judgment of the Tribunal is set aside and the judgment of the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) is restored. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
