Swatantra Kumar v Qamar Ali and Others
Supreme Court of India

2 March 1998
Civil Appeal No. 1291 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Delay in filing the SLP is condoned after hearing the contesting respondents.
2. Leave granted.
3. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant-claimant as well as learned counsel for the respondent-Insurance Company who alone has thought it fit to contest this proceeding. The insured has been served. As the additional claim of the appellant will have to be borne by respondent No. 3, Insurance Company whose counsel was heard, we deem it fit to dispose of the appeal on merits after hearing him. The claimant was a pillion rider on a motorcycle which was driven by its driver on the fateful day, i.e., 6.1.1977 when both of them, namely the driver of the motorcycle as well as the pillion- rider got injured in a motor accident. The offending vehicle was insured with respondent No. 3, Insurance Company. The offending vehicle being a jeep dashed against the motorcycle and caused injuries to them. After the accident both the pillion-rider and the driver of the motorcycle had to be given prolonged medical treatment and both of them suffered permanent partial disabilities. The driver of the motorcycle, Shri Shashendra Lahiri suffered shortening of his leg by 3 inches while the appellant suffered shortening of his leg by 1.75 inches which is well established on record. In the claim petitions filed by them, compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 was granted in their favour accepting the negligence of the driver of the offending vehicle namely, the jeep. Their appeals were disposed of with slight modification and increase in compensation by the High Court. So far as Shri Shashendra Lahiri is concerned, he came to this Court in C.A. No. 15567 of 1996 wherein this Court held that he deserved an additional amount of Rs. 4 lakhs by way of compensation. Taking a leaf from the book of Shri Lahiri, the appellant also filed the present appeal which was delayed by 229 days. We have condoned the delay in the interest of justice as aforesaid.
4. In our view, it is well established that permanent partial disability was suffered by the appellant who was a pillion-rider on the motorcycle and was earning Rs. 500 per month from his photography business. It appears to us that as he has suffered prolonged period of medical treatment and hospitalisation in different hospitals and looking to the future economic loss he would suffer because of permanent partial disability which would affect his future photography business, interest of justice will be served if an additional amount of Rs. 1 lakh is granted to the appellant by way of compensation both on the heads of pain, shock and suffering as well as for future economic loss especially keeping in view the decision of this Court awarding an additional amount of Rs. 4. lakhs to the motorcycle driver, Shri Shashendra Lahiri. The award of the Tribunal as confirmed by the High Court with due modification is further modified upward by awarding an additional amount of Rs. 1 lakh to the appellant. The said amount shall be paid with interest of 12 per cent annum from the date of application till the date of actual payment. The said amount will be deposited by the respondent-Insurance Company within four months from today before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, it will be permitted to be withdrawn by the appellant after due verification. The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above. No costs.
Appeal allowed
