Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 : Re E and I of v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

6 April 1998
W.P. (C) No. 499 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. The following States and Union Territories have not filed the counter - affidavits till date:
1. Arunachal Pradesh
2. Assam
3. Bihar
4. Himachal Pradesh
5. Jammu & Kashmir
6. Karnataka
7. Kerala
8. Maharashtra
9. Meghalaya
10. Orissa
11. Punjab
12. Tamil Nadu
13. Tripura
14. Andaman and Nicobar Islands
15. Daman & Diu
16. Delhi
17. Pondicherry
2. Learned counsel appearing for these States/UTs pray for and are granted four weeks to file the affidavits in response to the petition.
3. The counter-affidavits filed by some of the other States including the Union of India do not give a complete picture. We, therefore, direct the Central Government to furnish the following details:
(a) Steps taken with respect to the administration of the Act u/s. 9(2)(b) of the' Act; and
(b) Steps taken, if any, to create awareness regarding the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the Dowry Prohibition (Maintenance of Lists and Presents to the Bride and Bridegroom) Rules, 1985 in the public
4. The information shall be furnished on an affidavit of a competent officer.
5. The State Governments including those which have filed the counter-affidavits shall also furnish the following information.
(a) Steps, if any, taken to bring about awareness regarding the provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 and the Dowry Prohibition (Maintenance of Lists and Presents to the Bride and Bridegroom) Rules, 1985 to the public;
(b) Whether rules have been framed u/s. 10 of the Act;
(c) The number of Dowry Prohibition Officers appointed for each district in the State under Section 8-B of the Act;
(d) The number of cases instituted suo motu by the Dowry Prohibition Officers for violation of the provisions of the Act with details;
(e) Statistics with regard to the cases registered under Sections 3, 4 and 6(2) of the Act; and
(f) Whether Advisory Boards have been set up as required under Section 8-B along with details of the composition of the Board.
6. The States which have already filed the counter-affidavits shall furnish the above information by way of an additional affidavit while the States which have yet to file the counter-affidavits shall include these details in the counter-affidavits to be filed by them.
7. The case is adjourned by six weeks within which period the counter-affidavits and the additional affidavits shall be filed.
Advance copies shall be furnished to the learned amicus curiae who will file a complete chart indicating compliance with the directions given hereinabove.
Order accordingly.
