T. N. Godavarman Thirumulpad (8-A) and another v Union of India and another
Supreme Court of India

14 January 1998
IA No. 13 in W.P. (C) No. 171 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Mr R.S. Mathur, the Chief Secretary of the Government of Uttar Pradesh is present in person. He has orally apprised us of the notice taken by the State Government in the last 16 hours after the order was made by this Court yesterday. An affidavit of an officer of the level not lower than the Secretary to the State Government be filed today giving details of the action so far taken by the State Government in this behalf.
2.  The Chief Secretary also informed us that action has already been taken to provide protection and security to the persons in compliance with this Court's order made yesterday. He added that further action is being taken by the State Government to fix the responsibility of the officers concerned of different Departments whose acts and omissions enabled the commission and continuance of the illegalities in the area in question, in addition to taking the necessary steps by stopping these activities now.
3.  We are also informed by the Chief Secretary that the Area Mining Officer, Shri V.L. Das, has already been placed under suspension and the Director, Geology and Mining, Shri I.K. Dhale has been asked to give his explanation whereafter further action as found necessary would be taken.
4.  We direct that full details of allocation taken hereafter be placed before the Court on affidavit of an officer not below the rank of the Secretary to the State Government be filed on or before 22-1-1998.
5.  In view of large quantities of illegally mined minerals admittedly lying in the area, as evident from the material produced before us, we direct the District Magistrate, Mirzapur, U.P. to seize the same forthwith together with instruments and vehicles used for commission of these illegal activities (including vehicles used for transportation of the minerals). The District Magistrate will exercise these functions as a Commissioner of this Court.
6. Particulars of the seized goods be furnished together with details of persons from whose possession they are seized by the District Magistrate on or before 22-1-1998. The Chief Secretary assures us that the District Magistrate functioning in this capacity would be rendered all assistance by every Department of the Government and all concerned to enable her to perform this task expeditiously.
7.  Arguments of the parties to suggest ways and means to dispose of the felled timber in the forests of north-eastern region are in progress. List on 15-1-1998.
Order accordingly.
