Phonographic Performance Limited v Federation of Hotel and Restaurant Association of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

3 August 1998
C.A. No. 1766 of 1998,
The Order of the Court was as follows:
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  This appeal is directed against an ex-parte interim order dated December 26, 1997, [reported at 1997 Indlaw MRTPC 67 (MRTP)] passed by a learned Member of Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission (hereinafter referred to as 'the Commission') in a complaint submitted by the respondent No. 1, under Section 12A, of the MRTP Act, 1969.
2.  There are certain unusual features in the passing of this order. The complaint is against the revised tariff fixed by the appellant in November, 1996. The complaint was filed in December, 1997, more than one year after the revision of the tariff. In the application for injunction which was submitted along with the complaint there is no prayer for passing an ex-parte ad-interim order.
3. The said application does not make out a case for passing an ex-parte interim order. The matter was allowed to be specially mentioned on December 26, 1997, since it was not on the Board and it was taken up without notice to the respondents in the complaint. An ex-parte order was passed by the learned Member of the Commission directing the Director (Research) to conduct an investigation and to file the preliminary investigation report within 45 days. An order was also passed for maintaining the status quo by the respondents in the complaint with regard to the revised tariff.
4.  Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the view that this was not a case in which the learned Member of the Commission should have taken the matter out of turn even though it was not on the Board and to pass an ex-parte ad-interim order without giving a notice to the respondents. We are, therefore, unable to up-hold the impugned order.
5. The appeal is, therefore, allowed, the order dated December 26, 1997, passed by the Commission is set aside. The Commission shall consider the application for injunction submitted by the complainant after affording an opportunity to the appellant to oppose the same. In case the Commission is inclined to pass an interim order during the pendency of the complaint, the Commission may impose conditions to protect the rights of the appellant in the event of the complaint being dismissed.
6.  We find that a counter affidavit has been filed in reply to the appeal on behalf of the Commission and the Director (Research), respondents Nos.3 and 4. It is settled law that in respect of an order passed by an authority acting in judicial or quasi-judicial capacity, the authority is not expected to defend its order by filing a counter affidavit in the proceeding in which the validity of the order is assailed. A counter affidavit was not required to be filed on behalf of the Commission and the Director (Research).
The appeal is disposed of accordingly. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
