Indian Poultry and Others v Sales Tax Officer, Rajnandgaon and Others
Supreme Court of India

19 November 1998
C.A. No. 798 of 1998 (Arising as an appeal by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 14 August 1997, of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in W.P. No. 515 of 1997),
The Judgment was delivered by: BHARUCHA, J.
1.  Under appeal is the order of the Madhya Pradesh High Court dismissing writ petitions filed by the appellants. The order states :
"In view of the decision of the Division Bench of this Court dated November 6, 1996 in M.C.C. No. 3 of 1996 Indian Poultry v. Commissioner of Income-tax 1996 Indlaw MP 238, the matter is no longer res integra. A similar controversy was raised in the said case and negativing the contention this Court held that the process which is involved in developing of chicks into broilers did not bring about any change so as to produce a commodity having any new commercial identity. It was held that manufacture implies a change but every change is not manufacture and yet every change in an article is the result of some treatment, labour and manipulation."
2.  The appellants are engaged in rearing broilers with the aid of techno-logical and mechanical processes. They buy very young chicks. The chicks are reared over a period of five weeks under strict control of air, temperature standardised feeding, medication and chemicals. The broilers that result are sold.
3.  One of the two appellants was registered as a manufacturer for the purposes of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958, but the schedule of the registration certificate was later amended so as to exclude what was required for the purposes of rearing the broilers. The other appellant was refused registration as a manufacturer. These actions were taken on the basis that the rearing of chicks so that they became broilers was not "manufacture" within the meaning of the said Act. The said actions were challenged by the writ petitions which, as aforestated, were dismissed.
4.  The definition of "manufacture" is contained in section 2(0) of the Act. The definition of "goods" is contained in section 2(g) thereof. They read thus :
"2(j) 'manufacture' includes any process or manner of producing, collecting, extracting, preparing or making any goods, and in respect of trees which have been severed from the land or which have been felled, also the process of lopping the branches, cutting the trunks or converting them into logs, poles or ballies or any other articles of wood, but does not include such manufactures or manufacturing processes."
" 2(g) 'goods' means all kinds of movable property other than actionable claims, newspapers, stocks, shares, securities or Government stamps and includes all materials, articles and commodities, whether or not to be used in the construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of movable or immovable property; and also includes all growing crops, grass, trees, plants and things attached to, or forming part of, the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale."
5. By reason of section 6(2)(a) a concessional rate of tax is payable on the sales of goods specified in Schedule 11 if they are to be used in the "manufacture or processing of goods."
6.  Our attention was drawn by learned counsel for the appellants to the judgment of this Court dated 3rd November, 1998 in Civil Appeal Nos. 12518 to 12520 of 1996 Ashirwad Ispat Udyog v. State Level Committee 1998 Indlaw SC 1991. The judgment considered the definition of "manufacture" in section2G of the said Act and held :
"Decisions construing the meaning of the word 'manufacture' as used in other statutes do not apply unless the definition of that word in the particular statute under consideration is similar to that construed in the decisions. The plain construction of the special definition of the word in a particular Act must prevail. In the special definition given in section 2(G) of the said Act 'manufacture' has been defined as including a process or manner of producing, collecting, extracting, preparing or making any goods. There can be no doubt whatsoever that 'collecting' goods does not result in the production of a new article. There is, therefore, inherent evidence in the definition itself that the narrow meaning of the word , manufacture' was not intended to be applied in the said Act. Again, the definition speaks of 'the process of lopping the branches ,cutting the trunks'. The lopping of branches and the cutting of trunks of trees also, self evidently, does not produce a new article. The clear words of the definition, therefore, must be given due weight and cannot be overlooked merely because in other contexts the word 'manufacture' has been judicially held to refer to the process of manufacture of new articles."
7.  Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that broilers were not "goods" for the purposes of the definition of "manufacture" in section 2(0), but they were "goods" within the meaning of section 2(g). This, in his submission, was because the levy of sales tax was not on "manufacture". For the purposes of section 2(0), what was requisite was manufacture. Learned counsel drew our attention in this context to the judgment of this Court in Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax  v. Coco Fibres 1990 Indlaw SC 2291990 Indlaw SC 229, where the provisions of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act were considered. This Court noted that the word "manufacture" had been defined under the Kerala Act and, therefore, what was relevant, and considered, was the meaning given to the word "manufacture" in common parlance.
8.  As aforestated, the said Act defines "manufacture". It defines "manufacture" in very wide terms, as has been analysed in the judgment in the case of Ashirwad spat 1998 Indlaw SC 1991There is inherent evidence in the definition that the narrow meaning of the word "manufacture" was not to be applied in the said Act.
9.  What, therefore, has to be considered is whether the rearing of the chicks until they become marketable broilers is "manufacture" within the definition of that word in the said Act. Our attention was drawn by learned counsel for the respondents to the definition of word "rear" in Webster's Dictionary. It is defined to mean, "to breed and raise an animal for use or market". The definition of "manufacture" under section 2(G) includes any manner of preparing goods. The preparing of any goods for the market is, therefore, for the purposes of this artificial definition, a process of manufacture.
10.  It is difficult to see why, as was argued by learned counsel for the respondents, "goods" would not include animate objects for the purposes of section 2(0) but would include animate objects for other purposes of the said Act. The definition of "goods" in section2(g) is in the definition sectionof the said Act. The same interpretation must, therefore, be placed upon the word "goods" wherever it occurs in the said Act. What, to use the popular expression, is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander.
11.  In our view, therefore, the appellants are entitled to succeed having regard to the definition of the word "manufacture" in section2(0) of the Act.
12.  The appeal is allowed. The order under appeal is set aside. The writ petitions filed by the appellants are made absolute to the extent aforestated. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
