Mevul Manilal Nagada and Others v Rudrappa Kaibasappa Yaradoni and Another
Supreme Court of India

12  May  1999
S.L.Ps. (Cr.) Nos. 1605-1607 of 1999 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 2 March 1999 in Cr.P No. 3062 of 1998 of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioner contends that prosecution launched against him for the offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is not maintainable as the complainant has not obtained previous sanction contemplated in Section 84(4) of the Karnataka Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1966. Section 84 is extracted below:
"84. Provision for settlement of disputes:
(1) For the purpose of settling disputes between producers, buyers and sellers, or their agents, including any disputes regarding the quality or weight of, or payment for, any agricultural produce, or any matter in relation to the regulation of marketing of agricultural produce in the market area, the market committee of that area shall appoint a panel of arbitrators periodically consisting of agriculturists, traders and commission agents, and constitute a Disputes Committee from among its members in such manner as may be prescribed;
(2) Rules shall be made regulating the procedure for settlement of disputes, the authority or authorities for settling the disputes and appeals from the decisions of such authorities, payment of fees by parties for settlement of disputes, by an arbitrator or arbitrators and all other matters connected with such settlement including the extent to which the provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall be applicable to arbitrations under this section;
(3) Subject to the rules made under sub-section (2), a market committee may make bye-laws regulating the details in respect of settlement of disputes relating to transactions in notified agricultural produce in the market area;
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be entertained by any court in respect of disputes referred to in sub-section (1), without the previous sanction of the market committee."
2.  We have absolutely no doubt that the prosecution under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is not a kind of dispute referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 84 of the Karnataka Act. Therefore, the previous sanction contemplated in sub-section (4) is not applicable to the prosecution proceedings for an offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
3. We, therefore, repel the contention of the petitioner and dismiss this special leave petition.
Petition dismissed.
