State of West Bengal v ASH Mohammad and another
Supreme Court of India

11 March 1999
Cr.A. No. 290 of 1991
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is filed by the State of West Bengal. The proceedings in this Court would reveal a very sorry state of affairs regarding the department concerned of the State of West Bengal in reciprocating to the repeated communications made by the Standing Counsel for the Government of West Bengal in the Supreme Court. When this appeal came up for hearing on 30-10-1996 it was noted that copies of the material records have not been filed by the State and hence a direction was given to the counsel for the State to file a paper-book containing all those documents and four weeks' time was granted for doing the needful.
2. Long after the expiry of the said four weeks' period when this Court took up this appeal again for hearing on 22-7-1997 it was realised that the direction contained in the order dated 30-10-1996 was not complied with in any manner. It was then observed by this Court that "it is unfortunate that almost ten months have gone by, but the State has not filed the paper-book as directed by this Court". Yet one more chance was offered in deference to the request made by the learned counsel as a last opportunity and three weeks' time was granted. Long after the expiry of the aforesaid period of three weeks the matter has come up before us today again.
3.  Now, Mr Dilip Kumar Sinha, Standing Counsel for the State of West Bengal has reported that in spite of repeated communications sent to the Legal Remembrancer of the Government of West Bengal by letter sent through speed post as well as fax, absolutely no response has been made.
4. Learned counsel stated at the Bar that he checked up whether the Legal Remembrancer was in receipt of the communication sent by him and he was satisfied that he got them.
5.  In view of the peremptory order passed by this Court on 22-7-1997 reading as follows:
"... in case the needful is not done within the specified period, the appeals shall be dismissed for non prosecution for which the State alone shall be held responsible."
6.  We have no alternative, except to record that this appeal will stand dismissed. We do so. At the same time we direct the Chief Secretary of the State of West Bengal to send a report to us, after conducting such inquiry as he deems fit, for fixing up the responsibility for the laches.
7. Such report shall reach this Court within four weeks from today. The Registry will communicate this order to the Chief Secretary, West Bengal forthwith along with a copy of the order dated 22-7-1997.
Appeal dismissed.
