National Insurance Company Limited v Jit Ram Shiv Kumar
Supreme Court of India

23 September 1999
C.A. No. 3110 of 1993 with C.A. No. 4430 of 1993
The Order of the Court is as follows:
CA. No. 3110/93
1.   Respondent had purchased 137 logs of timber on C and F basis of the value of U.S. $ 63, 193.76 from M/s. Wai Wingh Trading Co. Pvt. Ltd., of Singapor on 5.1.1987. The consignment was despatched from Malaysia to Visakhapatnam through the vessel Ship Sabah-3 against the bill of lading dated 5.1.1987.
2.  The value of the timber loge aforesaid in Indian currency is Rs. 8, 20, 575/- which was paid by the respondent to the abovesaid M/s. Wal Wingh Co. The consignment was insured with the appellant for a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs against all risks
3.   It was reported to the appellant on 12.2.1987 that thereabouts of ship Sabah-3 were not known. The appellant utilised the services of the surveyors M/s. Perfect Lambert & Co. who submitted their report on 27.8.1987 indicating therein that the timber logs might not have been loaded on-board the ship. However, the report of another surveyor M/s. Poloccaran and Co. who were utilised by M/s. Oriental Insurance Co., in respect of other consignments reported on 2.1.1990 that there was subsisting dispute between the ship owners and the charterers.
4.  Consequently the appellant repudiated the claim of the respondent on 24.9.1991 Principally on the ground that the respondent had not supported their claim by necessary documents. This led the respondent to approach the National Commission for a claim against the appellant which was allowed by the commission by its impugned judgment dated 15th April, 1993. The Commission has allowed the claim as under
"The opposite party-Insurance Company - should pay to the complainant insured as under
1. Rs. 8,20,575/- the full insured value of the consignment, actually paid by the complainant for import of logs of wood
2. Interest at the rate of 18% per annum after the elapse of a 6 months from the date of lodging of the claim on 12.2.1987, etc. from 12.2.1987
3. A compensation of Rs. 1 lakh for the unjustified delay and harassment of the insured in repudiating the claim
Interest at the rate of 18% on the above mentioned amounts after 30 days of the date of this order till the payment is made
The Commission has found that the repudiation of the claim by the appellant which was duly supported by the documents including bill of lading, etc. was wholly mala fide it was also notice that the claim was repudiated after four years."
5. We have heard learned Counsels for the parties. It is not disputed before us that the insurance cover issued by the appellant covered all the risks. The finding that the ship was lost on the high seas is also not disputed. The further finding that the claim was supported by the necessary documents is also disputed. What is contended is that the Commission was not justified in awarding interest at the rate of 18% to the respondent and further the award of compensation to the tune of Rs. 1 lakh was also not proper
6. So far as the question of quantum of interest is concerned, we see no infirmity in the order passed by the Commission except that the order of the Commission requires a little alteration so that the date "6.12.1987" is altered to "10.8.1987" in consonance with the judgment of the Commission itself
7. The amount of compensation to the tune of Rs. 1 lakh has been ordered by the Commission on the ground of unjustified delay and harassment of the respondent. Having regard to the facts of this case, specially the fact that the loss of timber which was purchased was loaded at Malaysia and the ship which was to come to Visakhapatnam was lost on high Seas and having regard to the further facts that the investigation in the claim of the respondent who had initially not furnished all the documents to the appellant, had to be carried in a foreign country with the help of the surveyor, the appellant were justified in taking time in repudiating the claim of the respondent after due investigation. To that extent, therefore, the claim of the respondent is liable to be rejected and is hereby rejected.  In view of the above the appeal is partly allowed. The claim of the respondent for compensation to the tune Rs. 1 lakh allowed by the Commission is rejected but the rest of the order is maintained. The appeal is disposed of in the matter indicated aboveC.A. No. 4430/93
8. In this appeal, which arises out of the common judgment of the National Commission, it is conteded by the appellant that the Commission ought to have allowed the claim for a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs which was the amount mentioned in the policy. We relied upon S. 29 of the Marine Insurance Act, 1963 which provides as under
" 29: (1) A policy may be either valued or unvalued
(2) A valued policy is a policy which specifies the agreed value of the subject-matter insured
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and in the absence of fraud, the value fixed by the policy is, as between the insurer and assured, conclusive of the insurable value of the subject intended to be insured, whether the loss be total or partial
(4) Unless the policy otherwise provides, the value fixed by the policy is not conclusive for the purpose of determining whether there has been a constructive total loss."
9.   He also relied upon S. 68 of the Act which is to the following effect
" 68. Subject to the provisions of this Act, and to any express provision in the policy, where there is a total loss of the subject matter insured -
(1) If the policy be a valued policy the measure of indemnity is the sum fixed by the policy;
(2) If the policy be an unvalued policy, the measure of indemnity is the insurable value of the subject-matter insured."
10.   On the basis of, the above provisions he contended that since the policy in question was a "valued" policy the Commission ought to have allowed the claim for Rs. 10 lakhs and not for Rs. 8 lakhs and odd. We are not prepared to accept this contention
"Valued policy" is defined in S. 29 which has been set out above. The essential ingredients of a "valued policy" are that the value of the subject matter of insurance is mentioned and such value is the "agreed value". If the "agreed value" of the subject matter of insurance is specified in the policy, it would be a "valued policy" but if the value is not mentioned it would be an unvalued policyThe policy in question recites to say You are hereby held covered, subject to conditions of the Company's standard form of marine policy, to the extent of Rs. 10 lakhs on consignment said to contain timber logs."
7.  The policy clearly is an unvalued policy as the "agreed value" of the consignment of timber logs is not mentioned. What is mentioned is that the risk was covered to the extent of Rs. 10 lakhs. Since the policy in question was not a valued, policy the Commission was justified in decreeing the claim of the respondent for a sum of Rs. 8 lakhs and odd.
8. We see no reason to interfere with the order passed by the Commission. The appeal to dismissed. The Bank Guarantee is discharged
Appeal No. 3110/93 disposed of
Appeal No. 4430/93 dismissed
Order accordingly.
