Amar Kumar Sasmal and others v Hrisikesh Sasmal
Supreme Court of India

23 February 1999
C.A. No. 622 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent in this appeal filed a suit in the Court of the Munsif, First Court, Contai, District Midnapore, West Bengal for declaration of title and for permanent injunction bearing Title Suit No. 247 of 1990. The respondent applied for temporary injunction pending the suit. Interim injunction was granted. But the trial court by an order dated 15-12-1990 dismissed the application filed by the respondent and vacated the order of interim injunction which was passed earlier. Against the said order the respondent preferred an appeal before the Assistant District Judge, Second Court and the appellate court reversed the order of the trial court and granted the temporary injunction in favour of the respondent.
2. This order was passed on 4-7-1991. Against the said order the petitioner preferred a revision under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure before the High Court at Calcutta in CO No. 2550 of 1991. The said revision application was dismissed affirming the order of temporary injunction granted by the appellate court in favour of the respondent.
3.  Against the said order of the High Court, the petitioner-defendants have preferred this appeal in this Court.
4.  This Court passed an order on 12-2-1993 suspending the order passed by the first appellate court and the High Court and also granted interim relief in terms of prayer 'B' in the interlocutory application filed in this Court. The said prayer 'B', made by the appellants, is a prayer for grant of injunction against the respondent-plaintiff from ousting the appellants from the possession of the suit property. The abovesaid order of injunction passed by this Court in favour of the appellants on 12-2-1993 was made absolute on 13-9-1993.
5.  In this appeal, we have heard the learned counsel for the defendant-appellants and the learned counsel for the respondent-plaintiff.
6.  From the reading of the plaint, it appears that the respondent-plaintiff sought a declaration of his title and permanent injunction but from the reading of the written statement filed by the present appellants, it appears that they have raised a plea that their father was recorded as bargadar, and hence the defendant-appellants were entitled to be recorded as bargadars. It also appears that they had filed an application as long back as in 1981 for recording them as bargadars before the Revenue Authority. The said application is said to be pending.
7.  Under sub-section (3) of Section 21 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955, it is stated that if any question as to whether a person is or is not a bargadar arises in the course of any suit, case, appeal or other proceedings before any civil or criminal court, the court shall refer the said question to the officer or authority mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 18 for decision and such court shall dispose of the suit, case, appeal or other proceedings in accordance with the decision communicated to it by the officer or authority mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 18 to whom the question was referred.
8.  Inasmuch as the question arises out of the defence raised by the present appellants as to whether the defendants' father and the defendants were entitled to be recorded as bargadar or not, it will naturally become necessary for the trial court to make a reference to the officer or authority concerned under sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the abovesaid Act to decide the said question. As and when such a reference is made, it is obvious that the said reference should be decided by the officer or authority concerned in accordance with law under sub-section (1) of Section 18.
9.  The question now before us is limited to the issue of possession pending disposal of the suit in the trial court. In view of the interim order granted by this Court on 12-2-1993 in terms of prayer 'B' in the interlocutory application filed by the appellants, it is clear that there has been an order of temporary injunction passed by this Court against the respondent-plaintiff restraining the respondent from interfering with the possession of the appellants.
10.  We have considered the question whether the said order should be maintained or vacated on merits but we are of the view that the issue of possession need not be decided on merits. In our view, it would be in the interests of justice if the appellants are allowed to continue in possession, inasmuch as they have been in possession at any rate from the date of the interim order passed by this Court on 12-2-1993. We are of the view that the appellants should continue in possession not in their own right but as receivers of the Court and they shall continue to be in such possession during the pendency of the suit in the trial court.  However, it might be necessary that the appellants should deposit some amount into the trial court for being allowed to remain in possession as receivers so that after the suit is disposed of, certain further orders could be passed adjusting the rights of the parties. As we have no material before us as to what amount is to be deposited by the appellants per annum in respect of the income derived, we direct the trial court to hear the parties on this question, if necessary by taking evidence, oral or documentary and arrive at a figure - which may represent a part of the net annual income - and direct the appellants to deposit the same into the Court every year. The said amount may be invested for a short period in fixed deposit awaiting disposal of the suit within a reasonable period.
11.  We direct the trial court to frame an issue in the suit, if such an issue has not already been framed, on the question as to whether the appellants' father and the appellants can be recorded as bargadars. This issue shall be framed, if not already framed, within a period of one month from the date of the receipt of the order and the same shall be referred to the officer or authority mentioned in sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.
12. Thereafter, the suit will be disposed of in accordance with law in the manner prescribed in sub-section (3) of Section 21. The officer concerned, to whom the matter is referred under subsection (1) of Section 18 read with sub-section (3) of Section 21, to give his decision shall give his decision within a period of four months from the date of the receipt of the reference from the trial court and shall communicate the same to the trial court. After the receipt of the said finding, the trial court shall dispose of the suit within a further period of four months. The appeal is disposed of in terms of the above directions.
Appeal disposed of.
