Bhojappa Hanamanthappa Choudannavar and others v State of Karnataka
Supreme Court of India

21 September 1999
Cr.A. No. 466 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Though this appeal has been filed by special leave in challenge of both the conviction and sentence, we found the necessity to confine to the quantum of sentence. The first appellant herein was the first accused. He was acquitted along with a number of other accused by the trial court.
But the High Court reversed the order of acquittal and convicted the first appellant under Section 304 Part II and Section 323 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment for three years on the first count and to a fine of Rs 500 on the second count. All his co-accused (the remaining appellants) were convicted only under Section 323 of the Indian Penal Code and each of them was sentenced only to a fine of Rs 500.
2. Apparently, that is the reason why the first appellant is now singled out as the rest of the co-accused are reconciled to the verdict passed by the High Court. Though those co-accused have also been arrayed as appellants in the present appeal, no argument was made on their behalf. So we dismiss the appeal as against all those co-accused and proceed to consider only the case of the 1st appellant who will be referred to as the appellant in this order.
3.  After hearing learned counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for the respondent State we are not persuaded to interfere with the conviction of the offence under Section 304 Part II. A brief sketch of the facts is necessary in considering the question of quantum of sentence.
4.  A commotion took place in front of the house of Bhimappa (PW 1) during the night of 10-9-1984. The appellant and his co-accused were involved in assaulting Bhimappa and his brothers-in-law. While the brawl was in full swing PW 1 's daughter Renu Kavva, a twelve-year-old little girl, rushed to the scene presumably to rescue her father whom she would have thought to be in a dangerous situation.
The appellant herein then swished a wooden hammer he was then possessed with, which hit on the head of Renu Kavva, which unfortunately turned out to be fatal. Therefore, the High Court, on the appeal against acquittal, found that the appellant did not intend to inflict the injury which caused her death. We are in agreement with the finding of the High Court that the offence is only under Section 304 Part II IPC.
5.  It is true that a little girl died in the unfortunate incident. But it is also true that the appellant had no ire against that little girl either before or during the occurrence. It was an act done in a rash mood without any intention to cause even grievous hurt to her. Even so, the appellant must pay the penalty for it. There is only one injury which the little girl sustained and probably because the skull bone of the deceased was not grown to sturdiness as in grown-up persons, the strike had resulted in such a calamitous proportion.
6.  Section 304 Part II of the Indian Penal Code prescribes a punishment of imprisonment which may "extend to 10 years or with fine or with both". Learned counsel made a plea that on the fact situation a sentence of fine will be sufficient to meet the ends of justice. Though we too are persuaded to think so, we are not disposed to impose any amount as fine. After considering various aspects we think that a fine of Rs 25,000 is necessary to meet the ends of justice.
7.  In the result we confirm the conviction of the offence under Section 304 Part II, but we alter the sentence to a fine of Rs 25,000. If the appellant fails to remit the fine in the trial court within six weeks from today we direct him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three years. If the fine is realised from the appellant the trial court shall pay the same to PW 1 Bhimappa (the father of Renu Kavva) by way of compensation as provided in Section 357(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
