Collector Of Central Excise, Hyderabad v Galada Continuous Castings Ltd
Supreme Court of India

27 October 1999
C.A. No. 2928 of 1989, Dt. 27 October 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The Revenue challenges the correctness of the interpretation placed by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal on Notification No. 43/75, Clause 2(a) whereof reads thus:
"2(a) Aluminium in any If manufactured from any crude form (including of the following ingots, bars, slabs, materials or a billets, shots, pellets) combination thereof, and castings namely."
2.  The respondents manufacture aluminium bars and the bars are not in crude form. According to the Revenue, therefore, the respondents, bars are not entitled to the benefit of the exemption conferred by the afore-mentioned notification.
3.  The said notification, in Clause 2(a), uses the very language that is employed in Item 27 of the Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. Sub-item (1) of Item 27 also refers to aluminium
"in any crude form (including ingots, bars, blocks, slabs, billets, shots and pellets)."
4.  Our attention was invited by the learned Attorney-General, appearing on behalf of the Revenue, to the judgment of this court inReserve Bank of Indiav.Peerless Co. 1987 Indlaw SC 28121.
5. The issue before the court was "Is a prize less chit a prize chit?" The question had to be answered in the light of a very expensive inclusive definition of prize chit, but the court said that it did not think that by using the word 'includes' in the meaning of prize chit, Parliament intended to so expand the meaning of prize chit as to take in every scheme involving subscribing and refunding of money. The word 'includes', in the context, showed that it was intended not to expand the meaning of prize chit but to cover all transactions or arrangements of the nature of prize chits under different items.
6.  This court there was interpreting the definition of prize chit in the particular statute before it. We are in no doubt as to the meaning to be attributed to the said Item 27 and Clause 2(a) of the said notification. There is no doubt in our mind that, by revision thereof, aluminium bars, among other things, were intended to be treated as aluminium in crude form.
The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.
