Punjab University v Narinder Kumar and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 August 1999
C.As. No. 15011 of 1996 with No. 2571 of 1997, Dt. 12 August 1999.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant Punjab University, Chandigarh had issued Advertisement No. 6/93 inviting applications for various posts in the University, fixing 9-7-1993 as the last date for receiving applications. Among the posts so advertised were two posts of Lecturers in Gandhian Studies. The advertisement prescribed qualifications for various posts. These were under two heads: A for the Essential and B - Desirable/Essential Specialisation etc. Under Head A, there were two sub-paragraphs which read as follows:
"A. ESSENTIAL.
(a) Good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent grade at Master's Degree level in the relevant subject from any Indian university, or an equivalent degree from a foreign university.
(b) Candidates besides fulfilling the above qualifications should have cleared the Joint Preliminary Test (JPT) for the appointment as Lecturers in universities and colleges in the State of Punjab and Union Territory of Chandigarh or eligibility test for Lecturers conducted by UGC, CSIR or similar test accredited by UGC. However, this requirement will not be applicable to candidates:
(i) who have passed UGC/CSIR Jr. F. Examination,
(ii) who have already been awarded Ph.D. Degree,
(iii) who have already been awarded Ph.D., M.Phil. Degree up to 31-3-1994, or
(iv) who will submit their Ph.D., thesis up to 31-12-1993.
Explanation. - The term good academic record would imply that a candidate should possess:
(i) At least 55% marks or an equivalent grade in Master's Degree and
(ii) At least 50% marks at the graduation level.
OR
At least 50% marks in Honours at the graduation level."
2.  Under" B Desirable/Essential Specialisation etc there were various sub-heads dealing with the various subjects in which the posts of Lecturers were advertised. In respect of Lecturers in Gandhian Studies, the following were set out under the sub-head "Desirable":
"B. Desirable/Essential Specialisation etc.
Lecturer in Gandhian Studies;
Desirable.
I. The candidate should have MA Degree in one of the following subjects:
(a) Gandhian and Peace Studies
(b) History
(c) Political Science
(d) Sociology
(e) Economics
(f) Public Administration
II. (a) Research work/Ph.D./M.Phil. in Gandhian and Peace Studies.
(b) Published work on Gandhian and related aspects.
(c) Competence to teach Gandhian Studies to postgraduate students."
3.  Pursuant to this advertisement, various persons applied for the posts of Lecturer in Gandhian Studies, including the first respondent (who is the original writ petitioner) and Respondents 2 and 3. After interviewing 13 candidates for the said post, the Selection Committee recommended the names of Respondents 2 and 3 for the two posts of Lecturers in Gandhian Studies. The name of a third candidate Vinod Kumar Verma, was kept on the waiting list. In the minutes of the Selection Committee, it is recorded as follows:
"It is certified that the selected and empanelled candidates fulfil the qualifications laid down for the post."
4.  The Syndicate of the appellant University, at its meeting held on 1-6-1995, after considering the minutes of the Selection Committee resolved to appoint Respondents 2 and 3 as Lecturers in the Department of Gandhian Studies of the appellant University. In the meanwhile, the first respondent who was one of the candidates for the said post, filed a writ petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana challenging the selection of Respondents 2 and 3 on the ground that these two respondents did not have the qualifications prescribed for the post.
5. A learned Single Judge of the High Court held that these two respondents did not possess the requisite qualification of an MA Degree in a relevant subject. He, therefore, set aside the selections so made and directed readvertisement of these posts. This judgment has been upheld in appeal by the Division Bench of the High Court. Hence, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
6.  The narrow question is whether Respondents 2 and 3 possess the requisite qualification of having a Master's Degree in the relevant subject. As set out earlier, the qualifications under the heading "A - Essential" are general qualifications in which the exact subject of studies is not set out.
7.  The general qualifications which are prescribed under 'A' are common to the Lecturers in all the subjects which are advertised. This also clearly shows that these are general qualifications. The explanation to 'A' also shows that the purpose of 'A' is to set out the level of standard in academic studies.
8.  Sub-clause (a) on which emphasis has been placed by the High Court as well as by the first respondent who appears in person before us, prescribes a good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent grade at Master's Degree level in the relevant subject. This clause deals with a good academic record and the minimum marks which the candidate should have obtained at the Master's Degree level. The words "relevant subject" do not throw any light on the question as to what are the relevant subjects for the post of a Lecturer in any specified subject. Presumably, the subjects at the Master's Degree level have some bearing on the subject for which the Lecturer is being appointed. In the present case, the Lecturer is being appointed in Gandhian Studies. In this context, the column dealing with "Desirable/Essential Qualifications" becomes directly relevant. It is under this column that the University has, in the advertisement, specified the subjects in which MA Degree should have been obtained. These are, therefore, the relevant subjects as far as the MA Degree is concerned. Specific subjects in which MA Degree should have been obtained are separately listed for the post of Lecturers in Gandhian Studies. There it is set out that the candidates should hold an MA Degree in one of the following subjects:
(a) Gandhian and Peace Studies,
(b) History,
(c) Political Science,
(d) Sociology, (e) Economics, and
(f) Public Administration.
9. Obviously, therefore, an MA Degree in any of these subjects is an acceptable qualification provided the degree obtained has the requisite academic standard as prescribed under the general qualifications at 'A'. If we accept the contention of the first respondent that only an MA Degree in Gandhian and Peace Studies is the requisite qualification for applying for the post of a Lecturer in Gandhian Studies, then the rest of the subjects in which an MA Degree is acceptable as set out in the advertisement would be entirely redundant, and there would be no sense in listing those subjects in the advertisement at all. Since the advertisement makes it clear that all the subjects which are set out are relevant subjects for the purposes of the post of Lecturer in Gandhian Studies, we cannot accept the contention of the first respondent that an MA Degree in the other subjects which are listed, apart from Gandhian and Peace Studies, will not make a candidate eligible for the post of Lecturer in Gandhian Studies. The High Court placed emphasis on the general qualifications under A - (a) relating to good academic record. Undoubtedly, the good academic record is required "in the relevant subject". But for the purposes of determining which is the relevant subject, the subsequent part of the advertisement cannot be ignored. The High Court, therefore, was not right in coming to the conclusion that an MA Degree in any of the other subjects listed under the head "Lecturer of Gandhian Studies" would not be an acceptable qualification and the only acceptable qualification would be an MA in Gandhian and Peace Studies.
10.  In the present case, the second respondent has an MA Degree in Ancient History in which she has got 57.3% marks. Respondent 3 has an MA Degree in Political Science with 55.6% marks. Since both Respondents 2 and 3 have the requisite qualifications at the MA level, their selection has to be upheld, since the only ground on which their selection is set aside is that they do not possess an MA Degree in the relevant subject.
11.  We may also note that the Selection Committee had as its members, experts in the subject; and their evaluation of the candidates cannot be faulted when there are no allegations of mala fides.
12.  The first respondent has contended that if the post of a Lecturer in Gandhian Studies is given to a person who has obtained an MA Degree in other subjects, the opportunities available to those like him, who have a specialisation in Gandhian Studies from MA level onwards, get reduced; and this would discourage people from taking a specialisation course in Gandhian Studies at the MA level.
13. This argument, however, addresses itself on the policy relating to prescribing qualifications for the various posts. Such a policy has to be formulated by the University in accordance with the norms laid down by the University Grants Commission or any other expert body that may have been specified under the relevant statutes. We cannot examine such a policy or reframe it.
14.  The appeals are, therefore, allowed and the impugned judgments and orders are set aside. There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
