Raj K. Karnwal v State of Uttar Pradesh and others
Supreme Court of India

8 March 1999
S.L.Ps. (C) No. 8809 of 1998 with No. 596 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In addition to the existing rules of the Uttar Pradesh Excise Licences (Tender-cum-Auction) Rules, 1991 the following procedure will be followed for the issue of hall tickets and for holding auction-sale:
(1) A public notice will be issued inviting those proposing to bid at the forthcoming public auction to obtain hall tickets. Application for hall tickets shall be submitted 10 days before the holding of the auction along with the requisite deposit and any other prescribed documents. All hall tickets shall be issued at least 7 days before the date of the auction.
2. Thereafter, any person who has a grievance about not being given a hall ticket may complain before the Excise Commissioner, U.P. and his grievance shall be decided before the date of the auction.
(2) An attendance register will be kept in the auction pandal at the time of the auction and before the commencement of the auctions, signatures of bidders present will be taken in the register.
(3) A Complaint Cell shall be established at the Headquarters of the Excise Commissioner, U.P. for immediate redressal of complaints in accordance with the rules.
(4) Local administration shall ensure the entry of all persons present at the auction and holding hall tickets to the auction pandal. If a complaint is made by a person holding a hall ticket to the District Magistrate concerned, the concerned Divisional Commissioner or the Excise Commissioner, U.P., regarding denial of entry to the auction pandal on the same day before the close of the auction, the complaint so received shall be enquired into on a priority basis and the enquiry shall be completed within 72 hours of the close of the auction process.
3. The final decision regarding the auction shall be taken only after the completion of the enquiry. The auction shall be considered as provisional during the enquiry.
4.  If any auctions are already scheduled in the month of March 1999 the same shall be postponed, if required, so as to comply with these directions.
5.  The special leave petitions are disposed of accordingly. No orders on the IAs.
Petitions disposed of.
