Kirpal Singh v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

10  May  1999
S.L.P. (Cr.) No. 1448 of 1999 (From the Judgment and Order Dt. 5 February 1999 in Cr.A. No. 536 of 1987 of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh)
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  Mr R. S. Sodhi, learned counsel contended that the petitioner was sentenced to the period already undergone by the trial court on an understanding that the Court would pass such a sentence. Learned counsel submits that the practice of plea-bargaining was adopted in the trial court for that purpose and therefore it was not open to the trial court to enhance the sentence to rigorous imprisonment for 7 years.
2.  Learned counsel in support of the said contention invited our attention to the decision of this Court in Thippaswamy v. State of Karnataka 1982 Indlaw SC 641982 Indlaw SC 64. That is a case where the conviction was passed under Section 304-A IPC and the trial court awarded a fine sentence of Rs.1000 which on appeal by the State was enhanced to rigorous imprisonment for one year by the High Court.
3. This Court pointed out that in a case where there was plea-bargain it was not open to the High Court to unilaterally enhance the sentence and if the High Court felt that the sentence awarded by the trial court was disproportionately low the course which should have been adopted was to remit the case back to the trial court for fresh trial.
4.  But in this case the situation is different. The offence found against the appellant is u/s. 392 of the Indian Penal Code for which the maximum punishment imposable is 14 years and perhaps on the facts of this case the maximum punishment is imprisonment for 10 years. But S. 392 IPC has to be read with S. 397 in certain cases as the section bridles the powers of the court regarding the extent of sentence. The court cannot award a sentence less than 7 years of imprisonment when in a particular case S. 397 is to be read along with S. 392 of the Indian Penal Code.
5.  The petitioner would have succeeded in his plea-bargain by getting the minimum sentence prescribed by law and that is what the High Court has granted. Neither the trial court nor the High Court has jurisdiction to bypass the minimum limit prescribed by law on the premise that a plea-bargain was adopted by the accused. We are unable to agree with the learned counsel that the accused would have thought that the Court would give him punishment even less than what is prescribed by law as the minimum.
For the aforesaid reasons we dismiss this SLP.
Petition dismissed.
