1.  The High Court has rejected the application filed by the appellant under s. 256(2) of the IT Act, 1961, whereby directions were sought from the High Court for getting a statement of case from the Tribunal on the following two questions:
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was legally justified in considering the miscellaneous application of the assessee and rectifying the original order beyond the time-limit prescribed under s. 254(2) of the IT Act, 1961 ?
(2) Without prejudice to the above whether the Tribunal was justified in holding that there was really a mistake apparent from record in the original order ?"
2.  The circumstances under which the said application by the appellant was filed are as follows:
3. The Tribunal passed an order on 12th June, 1978, with reference to the asst. yrs. 1974-75 and 1975-76 with regard to unabsorbed depreciation and development rebate claimed by the assessee. At that time, the Tribunal followed the judgment of this Court in Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Ltd. vs. CIT 1978 Indlaw SC 2411978 Indlaw SC 241. Subsequently, the assessee filed an application under s. 256(2) of the Act relying upon the judgment of this Court in Rajapalayam Mills Ltd. vs. CIT 1978 Indlaw SC 2181978 Indlaw SC 218and contended that the earlier decision of the Tribunal should be modified in view of the ratio of the judgment of this Court in the later case.
4. That contention was accepted and the Tribunal passed an order on 27th October, 1983, changing the earlier order by granting the benefit of development rebate and depreciation claimed by the assessee.
5.  The Revenue, aggrieved by the said order of the Tribunal sought to have the two questions, mentioned earlier, referred to the High Court. The High Court has dismissed the application on the only ground that there was a mistake apparent on the face of the order of the Tribunal passed earlier in 1978 and the question of time-limit in passing the later order did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
6. Both questions raised by the Revenue are questions of law which require to be considered by the High Court on reference. The question whether the Tribunal's earlier order of 1978 suffered from a mistake apparent when it followed the judgment of this Court in Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Co. Ltd.'s case (supra), which was ruling the field at the time is definitely a matter to be considered by the High Court.
7.  In the result, the order of the High Court is set aside. The Tribunal is directed to send a statement of the case to the High Court setting out the two questions mentioned earlier for consideration by the High Court. The appeals are allowed accordingly. No costs.
Appeals allowed.
