1.  This appeal is filed against the judgment and order dated 19-12-1994 passed in Civil Revision Application No. 497 of 1993 by the Nagpur Bench of the High Court of Bombay. By the impugned order, the Court allowed the revision application and set aside the order dated 2-4-1993 passed by the Additional District Judge, Nagpur in Miscellaneous Civil Application No. 575 of 1992 whereby the respondent was required to render accounts in respect of the property referred to in document marked as Exhibit 249.
2.  Admittedly, the case has a chequered history. It is the contention of the appellant that on 7-10-1953, a member of the Atba-E-Malak, father of the appellant filed an application before the Registrar under the M.P. Public Trusts Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") for entering the Trust in the register as a public trust. That application was rejected. Finally, a Special Civil Suit No. 143 of 1967 was filed on 26-9-1967 as provided under Section 8 of the Act for setting aside the findings that the Trust was not a public trust. The trial court dismissed the suit on the ground that the plaintiff had no locus standi. An appeal being Regular Civil Appeal No. 16 of 1987 was allowed by the Additional District Judge, Nagpur and it was held that the Trust was a public trust. Against that judgment and decree, Second Appeal No. 132 of 1992 was filed before the High Court.
3.  In the meantime, the Deputy Charity Commissioner had taken in his register the list of properties of the public trust as per Exhibit 249, the relinquishment deed as public trust properties. As the entry was registered, the respondent filed Contempt Petition No. 178 of 1990 in Civil Appeal No. 498 of 1964 before this Court wherein it was contended that the Deputy Charity Commissioner has flouted the directions issued by this Court by order dated 22-8-1966 in Hasan Nurani Malak v. S. M. Ismail, Asstt. Charity Commr. 1966 Indlaw SC 3081966 Indlaw SC 308.By order dated 12-2-1991, the Court rejected the said contempt application but for protecting the properties, Shri Amiruddin Hasan Noorani Malak (Respondent 1) was appointed as Receiver. The Court further directed as under:
"Since the litigation in respect of the said property is pending in the District Court, it is essential that during its pendency the properties which are stated to belong to the public trust should not be frittered away. With that objective in mind, we had suggested to the parties to evolve a workable formula which would enure till the disposal of the appeal in the District Court. There was some controversy regarding the subject-matter of the suit. Fortunately, the trial court has summed up its conclusions in the judgment wherein reference has been made to certain properties which, in the opinion of the trial court, constituted the subject-matter of dispute. We do not express any opinion in this behalf as the District Court is seized of the controversy, but for the limited purpose of identifying the properties which will be governed by this order, we have referred to trial court's judgment. The learned counsel for the petitioners has very frankly stated that the petitioners will not alienate the properties referred to trial court's order. He has also consented to act as the Receiver of those properties during the pendency of the appeal in the District Court and render accounts to the District Court every three months. By consent, we appoint Shri Amiruddin Hasan Nurani Malak as the Receiver of the properties referred to trial court's judgment. He will render accounts to the District Court every three months and if any direction is necessary hereafter in regard to the management and administration of the said properties, he will approach the District Judge and seek appropriate orders."
4.  Thereafter, by order dated 2-4-1993, Third Additional District Judge, Nagpur directed Respondent 1, Amiruddin S/O Hasan Nurani to render the account of all the properties including the properties covered by Exhibit 249 within a period of one month from the date of the order. The Court held
"On going through, it appears to me when the Hon'ble Supreme Court has referred to trial court's judgment, it had obviously reference to the property in Exhibit 249. A perusal of Exhibit 249 also clearly shows that beside the property which was mentioned in the Deed of 1894, Exhibit 554, several other properties were also mentioned as property of the Trust and the beneficiaries were giving up their rights over the trust properties."
5. That order is set aside by the High Court by the impugned order dated 19-12-1994 by holding that the properties referred to in Exhibit 249 could not form the trust property for which Respondent 1 was not under obligation to render account as a Receiver. Hence the present appeal by special leave.
6.  In our view, the impugned order passed by the learned Judge appears on the face of it contrary to the directions issued by this Court on 12-2-1991 in Contempt Petition No. 178 of 1990. Respondent 1, Amiruddin Hasan Nurani Malak was appointed as a Receiver of the property referred to trial court's judgment in Special Civil Suit No. 143 of 1967. It specifically refers to Exhibit 249 executed in 1931. The learned Additional District Judge after referring as directed by this Court verified the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 and arrived at the conclusion that includes properties mentioned in Exhibit 249. This finding is reversed without referring to trial court's judgment or direction issued by this Court to the effect that
"but for the limited purpose of identifying the properties which will be governed by this order, we have referred to trial court's judgment"
7.  In any set of circumstances, the question involved whether the properties mentioned in Deed Exhibit 249 is "trust property" or not is now concluded by the decision rendered by the Fourth Additional District Judge, Nagpur in Regular Civil Appeal No. 16 of 1987 decided on 1-2-1992. The Additional District Judge set aside the judgment and decree dated 27-3-1967 and arrived at the conclusion that the Trust comprised in the Deed of Settlement dated 9-6-1894 is a public trust. The Court further held that properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 became the property of the Trust and that a perusal of the Relinquishment Deed (Exhibit 249) dated 5-11-1931 clearly shows that all properties belonging to the Trust were relinquished in favour of Khan Bahadur M. E. R. Malak and grandfather of the defendant.
8. The Court held that obviously all these properties were trust properties and it was obligatory upon the Registrar to publish the said list of properties. Against that judgment and decree, Second Appeal No. 497 of 1993 was filed before the High Court. By judgment and order dated 7-10-1996, the said appeal was dismissed by a Division Bench. Admittedly, against the said judgment and decree, SLP (C) No. 25004 of 1996 was filed before this Court which was dismissed by order dated 13-1-1997. Against the said judgment, Review Petition No. 1075 of 1997 was filed before this Court and the same was also dismissed on 1-4-1997. Hence, this issue is now finally concluded and it is not open to contend that all the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 are not the trust properties.
9.  However, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent vehemently submitted that the issue whether the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 are trust properties or not, was not required to be decided in the suit. It is submitted that the prayers in Special Civil Suit No. 143 of 1967 are only limited for setting aside the order passed by the Registrar and for a direction to hold that the properties settled by the Deed of Settlement dated 9-6-1894 is a public trust. Hence, the scope of the suit cannot be widened by including the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 which is a deed executed in the year 1931. He submitted that amendment application filed by the appellant to include the said properties for determination was rejected by the High Court in Civil Revision Application No. 497 of 1993 and hence it was submitted that properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 cannot be held to be trust properties.
10.  As against this, it has been pointed out that the finding given in Civil Revision Application No. 455 of 1971 while rejecting the amendment application clearly reveals that amendment was not necessary for the purpose of determining the real dispute in controversy between the parties. Further, it has been also pointed out that the trial court has raised a number of issues which included the determination of the question whether the properties received by the administrator- cum-manager of the Trust are utilised for the purchase of large properties at Nagpur for the Jamat and for construction of buildings. Other issues were also raised but the respondent objected to it. Objection was allowed. Hence, Civil Revision Application No. 539 of 1977 was filed before the High Court which was allowed by the Court by holding that observations made in the order made in Revision Application No. 457 of 1971 upon which the respondent relies cannot be read in isolation as the plaintiff's case was whether the public trust was created and it was permissible for the plaintiff to allege and prove how various properties including the accretions were dealt with and administered, therefore, to that extent findings on those issues were necessary for deciding basic issues viz.
whether public trust was created. If the plaintiff has alleged that not only the original properties mentioned in the trust deed but even the subsequently acquired properties were treated and administered as public trust properties and the defendant has denied this fact, it could not be said that the issues were wrongly framed or were unnecessary. The Court also rejected the contention on the ground that as the revision application was allowed and the amendment application was rejected, it would amount to variation of the earlier order. The Court held that it will necessitate adducing of evidence about these properties also but that is inevitable and cannot be helped so long as the scope of the suit is not widened. The Court, therefore, allowed the revision application and the trial court was directed to frame all issues and then proceed further. SLP filed by the respondent against the said judgment and order was rejected.
Hence, it would not be open to the respondent to contend contrary to the findings given in the aforesaid revision application and hence the decision rendered by the trial court on the issues framed and determined cannot be faulted at this stage by contending that the scope of the suit was limited. In this view of the matter, there is no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondent that the question whether the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 are trust properties or not still requires to be decided.
11.  Further, this contention is not open to the respondent because as stated above, the Additional District Judge specifically arrived at the conclusion that properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 were trust properties. Second appeal filed against the said finding was dismissed by the High Court. SLP is also dismissed by this Court. Therefore, it is not open to the appellant to contend now that properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 are not trust properties. In Second Appeal No. 132 of 1992 the Court held that the subject-matter of the suit comprised properties shown in Schedules A, B and C of the Relinquishment Deed Exhibit 249 which was before the Registrar along with the application under Section 5 of the M.P. Public Trusts Act.
12. The Court further observed that the tenor of the document (Exhibit 249) implied that the property belonged to the Jamat and was a necessary pointer that the property therein was a trust property. The Court held that what was significant was by accepting such document, even Hasan Nurani, the defendant agreed that the members of the Jamat were interested in the property. In this view of the matter, it is clear that the finding given by the Additional District Judge, Nagpur to the effect that the properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 were trust properties has become final as it is confirmed in second appeal and the SLP filed against the said judgment has been rejected. Therefore, also, it is not open to the respondent to contend that properties mentioned in Exhibit 249 are not the "public trust properties."
13.  In the result, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order in Civil Revision Application No. 497 of 1993 passed by the High Court is set aside and the order passed by the Third Additional District Judge, Nagpur on 2-4-1993 in Miscellaneous Civil Application No. 574 of 1992 is restored.
14.  In view of this order, Civil Appeal No. 1711 of 1995 stands allowed accordingly. Further, in view of the aforesaid orders, separate orders would be required to be passed in Interlocutory Application No. 4 in Civil Appeal No. 1710 of 1995 and in Contempt Petition No. 6 of 1997.
15.  It is, therefore, directed that Interlocutory Application No. 4 in CA No. 1710 of 1995 and Contempt Petition No. 6 of 1997 be listed in due course.
Ordered accordingly.
Order accordingly.
