Income Tax Officer v Saradbhai M. Lakhani
Supreme Court of India

12 February 1999
C.A. Nos. 837 & 838 of 1999
The Judgment was delivered by: B N KIRPAL, J.
BY THE COURT.
Special leave granted.
Heard the learned Attorney-General for the appellant.
1.  This is an appeal against the judgment of the Gujarat High Court which had allowed a writ petition filed by the respondent who had challenged the notice issued under s. 148 of the IT Act, 1961, whereby the respondent's assessment in respect of the year 1988-89 was sought to be reopened.
2.  The reason for reopening of the assessment was that the Gujarat High Court in Banyan and Berry vs. CIT 1995 Indlaw GUJ 1371995 Indlaw GUJ 137 had held that after dissolution of the partnership firm, the assessment could be only in the hands of the erstwhile partners.
3.  The income was computed on the basis of the award of the arbitrator in favour of firm. The amount received was apportioned amongst the partners and it is on this basis that the income was sought to be assessed in the hands of the partners.
4.  The High Court quashed the notice under s. 148 by observing that in the absence of mention of the judgment of the Gujarat High Court in Banyan and Berry's case (supra), it was not open to the ITO to justify the order by reference to the said decision.
5.  It is evident that the aforesaid view of the High Court is not correct. This Court has held that on the basis of the information which is received by the ITO, reassessment proceedings can be initiated. The information which was received by the ITO was the decision of the Gujarat High Court in Banyan and Berry's case (supra).
6. When the ITO became aware of this decision, he could initiate the proceedings under s. 147(b) as has been held by this Court in A. L. A. Firm vs. CIT 1991 Indlaw SC 9201991 Indlaw SC 920.
7.  For the aforesaid reasons, we hold that the High Court was not right in allowing the writ petition filed by the respondent. Accordingly, the appeals are allowed and the judgment of the High Court is set aside the effect of which would be that the writ petition filed by the respondent would stand dismissed. No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.
