BY THE COURT
1.  The question raised in these three appeals, relating to three different sets of assessment years, are common. They read thus:
"(1) Whether the Tribunal is right in law and on facts in deleting the addition under s. 40A(5) of the IT Act, 1961, in respect of premium paid for the purchase of deferred annuity policies in respect of two managing directors ?
(ii) Whether the Tribunal is right in distinguishing the decision of the Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs. CIT 1993 Indlaw GUJ 182
2.  It is difficult to understand why the Tribunal declined to refer these questions to the High Court. The High Court took the view that they need not be referred because the issue was settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in CIT vs. L. W. Russel 1964 Indlaw SC 290 .
3.  Learned counsel for the appellant-Revenue submitted that the decision in L.W. Russel's case (supra), aforementioned concluded the matter insofar as it related to the employee while the present proceedings related to the availability of the deduction insofar as the employer was concerned. He also submitted that the Gujarat High Court, in a matter relating to the employer, Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs. CIT 1993 Indlaw GUJ 182 had taken a view which favoured the Revenue.
4. There was, therefore, a question of law to be considered and the High Court ought to have called upon the Tribunal to refer the questions to it for determination. Learned counsel for the assessee, fairly, did not dispute that, in any event, the questions of law arose which required determination by the High Court.
5.  We make it clear that we do not express any view on the questions but, clearly, the questions are questions of law and their consideration by the High Court is requisite.
6.  The appeals are allowed. The orders under appeal are set aside. The applications made by the Revenue under s. 256(2) of the IT Act are allowed. The Tribunal is directed to refer the questions to the High Court for consideration, having drawn up the requisite statement of cases. No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
