Commissioner of Income Tax v Purwar General Mills
Supreme Court of India

11 February 1999
C.A. No. 3647 of 1993
The Judgment was delivered by: WADHWA, J.
BY THE COURT
1.  An application for registration of a firm in Forms Nos. 11 and 11A along with the original partnership deed and copy thereof, were filed in the office of the ITO on 31st March, 1980. The deed showed three partners, one of them being Prem Lata, wife of Om Prasad Purwar, each partner having 1/3rd share. The ITO took the view that Prem Lata representing an HUF could not do so as she could not claim to be the manager of the undivided family when her husband was alive. He also expressed the opinion that there could not be a smaller HUF within the larger undivided family when there was no partition as such. In that view, the ITO refused grant of registration. That order was confirmed on appeal by the AAC.
2.  On further appeal, the Tribunal opined that in the case of a member of the HUF representing the undivided family, it was not necessary that such member should be a Karta and that member should not be treated as benamidar within the ambit of s. 185 of the IT Act as it stood then. Hence, the Tribunal held that registration could be granted inasmuch as Prem Lata as an individual was shown to be a partner in the partnership deed and she was entitled to a 1/3rd share. The Tribunal also observed that there was no material difference whether the HUF was represented by any member of the family or the Karta. In that view, the appeal was allowed by the Tribunal.
3.  The Revenue applied to the Tribunal to refer the following questions to the High Court:
"1. Whether the Hon'ble Tribunal was legally correct in allowing registration of the firm, particularly when Smt. Prem Lata is alleged to have joined the firm as partner in the capacity of manager of an HUF which has not been recognised under s. 171 ?
2. Whether, the Tribunal was legally correct in allowing registration to the firm when Smt. Prem Lata is benamidar of bigger HUF ?"
4. The Tribunal rejected the application. The Revenue filed an application under s. 256(2) of the IT Act. The High Court held that no statable questions of law arose in the case and rejected the application of the Revenue. It is that order which is challenged in this appeal by the CIT.
5.  In the facts and circumstances of the case, the questions raised by the Revenue are not questions of law. Even the framing of the questions is in such a manner that it does not set out the facts clearly. Such questions cannot be referred by the Tribunal to the High Court.
6.  In the circumstances, we do not find any merit in the appeal. It is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
