Commissioner of Sales Tax v Rewa Coal Fields Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

22 April 1999
C.A. No. 3319 of 1981
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  By the order dated 9-4-1997 this appeal was directed to be placed before a larger Bench, CST v. Rewa Coal Fields Ltd. 1997 Indlaw SC 2171. This was because the respondent contended that the point at issue was concluded by the principles laid down in Tata Engg. and Locomotive Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar 1994 Indlaw SC 6551994 Indlaw SC 655.
The aforesaid was a case under the Bihar Finance Act, 1981 and the question, according to the Division Bench which made the order of reference, was whether the law laid down by this Court in J.K Cotton Spg. and Wvg. Mills Co. Ltd. v. STO  1964 Indlaw SC 2111964 Indlaw SC 211 and Indian Copper Corpn. Ltd. v. Commr. of Commercial taxes,1964 Indlaw SC 4361964 Indlaw SC 436 would apply in full force to this appeal under the M.P. General sales tax Act, 1958
2.  We must state, at the outset, that learned counsel for the respondents has not, even after being reminded of the order of reference, relied upon the judgment in Tata Engg and Locomotive Co. Ltd. v. State of Bihar  1994 Indlaw SC 6551994 Indlaw SC 655 and, therefore, the order of reference to a larger Bench has become redundant. However, since we have heard the matter, it is appropriate that we decide it.
3.  What we are concerned with is the definition of "raw material" in S. 2(l) of the M.P. General Sales Tax Act ("the Act"). It reads thus:
"2. (l) 'raw material' means an article used as an ingredient in any manufactured goods or an article consumed in the process of manufacture and includes fuel and lubricants required for the process of manufacture....;"
4. To analyse the definition, "raw material" covers: 
(1) an article used as an ingredient in manufactured goods, 
(2) an article consumed in the process of manufacture, and 
(3) fuel and lubricants required for the process of manufacture.
5.  The respondent assessee operates a coal mine, which is a manufacturing activity for the purposes of the said Act. It sought registration for the purposes of S. 8 of the Act, which deals with the set-off or refund of tax in respect of tax-paid goods in certain circumstances, of the following on the ground that they were raw materials consumed in the course of manufacture, covered by the afore-quoted definition : timber, kerosene oil, drilling bits, hewing implements of all kinds, dry cells, torches, cement and lime and electrical bulbs. The Sales Tax Officer and the Commissioner of Sales Tax declined to register these as raw materials. The Commissioner found that the timber was used in the mine to prop up its walls. It was only a supporting device and it was not consumed but remained within the mine.
6. It could not, therefore, be treated as a raw material, and it was of no consequence that it was not salvaged by the respondent after the mine was closed. Kerosene oil was required for lanterns for illumination purposes and not as a fuel to power any machine. Hence, it could not be treated as a raw material. Drilling bits were neither instantaneously consumed nor did they form part of the finished goods in any manner Hewing implements were used to cut down large pieces of the mine walls and surface and their life was perhaps the longest out of the list. Dry cells, torches and cells and electrical bulbs were used only for illuminating the inside of the mine. Cement and lime were used to seal leakages and plaster holes in the mines. It was more in the nature of a building material. The High Court took the contrary view. It said the Commissioner had interpreted the definition of raw material too narrowly. We cannot agree, given that the definition requires that the raw material should be (1) consumed (2) in the process of manufacture.
7.  Learned counsel for the assessee referred to various judgments, Anwarkhan Mahboob Co. v. State of Bombay (now Maharashtra) 1960 Indlaw SC 2391960 Indlaw SC 239, Indian Copper Corpn. Ltd. v. Commr. of Commercial Taxes 1964 Indlaw SC 4361964 Indlaw SC 436, Union of India v. V. M. Salgaoncar and Bros. (P) Ltd. 1998 Indlaw SC 1545 and CCE v. Ballarpur Industries Ltd. 1989 Indlaw SC 768none of which is apposite to the precise definition with which we are concerned.
8. It seems to us clear that, drilling bits apart, none of the articles aforementioned can qualify to be articles "consumed in the process of manufacture" or, to put it in a different way, consumed in the mining of the coal. They may be used for purposes incidental to the mining, but are not integral thereto.
9.  So far as drilling bits are concerned, they are used to bore holes in the walls of the mine; the holes are stuffed with explosives and the detonation thereof yields the coal. Their utility is quickly exhausted. It can, therefore, be said that they are consumed in the mining of the coal. To that extent alone can the assessee succeed.
10.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, except to the extent that it covers drilling bits. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
