Appropriate Authority (It Deptt.) and Others v M. Arifulla and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 February 1999
C.As. Nos. 811-15 of 1994
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals are against an order of a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court confirming in turn the order of a Single Judge of that Court allowing a writ petition filed by the respondents herein against an order passed by the appropriate authority under Section 269-UC(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short "the Act") in exercise of the right to purchase a property under the provisions of the Act.
2. The contention of the respondents before the High Court was that the vendors were co-owners and not joint owners and when for the purpose of Section 269-UC the property is valued, the value of the share of each co-owner should be considered in order to decide whether the transaction falls within the ambit of Section 269-UC. According to them, the total consideration is Rs. 14 lakhs and the value of the share of each of them is much less than Rs. 5 lakhs and the section is not attracted.
3.  That contention was accepted by a Single Judge of the High Court who followed the judgment of the same Court in Appropriate Authority v. J. S. A. Raghava Reddy 1992 Indlaw KAR 115 and allowed the writ petition. The Division Bench took the same view and followed the judgment in Raghava Reddy case.
4.  It is contended by learned counsel for the appellant that the facts in Raghava Reddy case 1992 Indlaw KAR 115 are entirely different and in the present case there is nothing to show that there was a division between the respondents before the sale agreement was entered and, therefore, the ruling in Raghava Reddy case 1986 Indlaw SC 1721986 Indlaw SC 1721986 Indlaw SC 172 that a property devolving under Section 8 of the Hindu Succession Act, is the individual property of the person who inherits the same and not that of the HUE In fact, in the special leave petition, it is admitted that Respondents 2 to 5 inherited the property in question from the said T. M. Doraiswami. Hence, they held it as tenants-in-common and not as joint tenants.
5.  In the circumstances, the finding of the High Court that the respondents are only co-owners and not joint owners and the value of the share of each of the respondents should have been taken into account before applying the provisions of Section 269-UC, is correct. We find no merit in the appeals. The appeals are dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
