Shambhu Prasad Agarwal and others v Bhola Ram Agarwal
Supreme Court of India

25 August 1999
C.A. No. 74 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
This appeal is by heirs of the legatee Matadin Agarwal.
1.  One Maina Devi, wife of late Baidyanath Agrawal executed a will on 14-6-1976 nominating her nephew Matadin Agarwal to be the owner of her house, landed properties and other immovable properties. On 23-9-1981, Maina Devi died. In the year 1982, Matadin Agarwal filed a probate petition (Probate Case No. 1 of 1982) which was converted into Title Suit No. 1 of 1985. In the probate petition, Matadin Agarwal claimed grant of probate in his favour. On 13-7-1987, Matadin Agarwal died. On the death of Matadin Agarwal, his heirs who are appellants before us, filed an application in Title Suit No. 1 of 1985 for their substitution in place of Matadin Agarwal.
2. They also filed another application for amendment of the petition. In the amendment application, it was prayed that instead of grant of probate the legal heirs may be granted letters of administration. These applications filed by the appellants herein were rejected by the court. The revision filed by them was also dismissed by the High Court. It is against these orders, the appellants are before us.
3.  Learned counsel appearing for the appellants urged that the view taken by both the courts below is erroneous inasmuch as the appellants being the heirs of the legatee were entitled to be substituted and to pray for issue of letters of administration. However, this is contested by the learned counsel for the respondent.
4.  We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.  We find that it is not disputed that Matadin Agarwal was a legatee under the will. It is true that Matadin Agarwal ought to have applied for issue of letters of administration and not for probate. However, this did not debar his heirs to get the probate petition amended. The trial court rejected both the applications of the appellants on the ground that since the probate petition filed by the legatee related to his personal right, therefore no right accrued to the appellants for their substitution in his place.
6. This view, according to us, is not correct. Matadin Agarwal, as stated above, was a legatee and not an executor under the will. It is true that where an executor dies, his heirs cannot be substituted because the executor possessed personal right, but this is not applicable where the heirs of a legatee apply for issue of letters of administration. It is not disputed that today the appellants can file a petition for issue of letter of administration. Since considerable time has elapsed, we feel that the interest of justice demands that the proceedings should come to an end as early as possible and we should not dismiss this appeal merely on highly technical ground.
7.  For the aforesaid reason, we set aside the orders under challenge and send the case back to the trial court. We permit the appellants to be substituted in the proceedings and also permit them to amend the petition. It goes without saying that after the remand, it will be open to the parties to take such plea as may be available to them under the law. Since the matter is pending for a considerable time, we direct the lower court to decide the matter expeditiously. The appeal is allowed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
