Singareni Collieries Company Limited v Andelingaiah and Another
Supreme Court of India

23 September 1999
C.A. No. 7799/1997, Dt. 23 September 1999.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Having heard the learned counsel for the parties we find that on the peculiar facts of this case Respondent 1 seems to have been tossed from pillar to post. Respondent 1 was working at the relevant time in 1986 as 'badli' filler (mazdoor) with the appellant Company, which admittedly is a Central Government company, though administered by the State authorities. Respondent 1 was charge-sheeted on November 10, 1986 for alleged misconduct and after domestic inquiry was dismissed from service on May 13, 1987. His appeal to the General Manager failed. Thereafter he directly approached the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in writ petition. He was permitted to withdraw the writ petition presumably because he could not move the High Court directly but had remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short "the Act"). Then he went to the State Labour Court at Hyderabad under Section 2-A sub-section (2) of the State amendment to the Act. The State Labour Court by an order dated November 12, 1992 dismissed the industrial dispute on the ground that it had no jurisdiction as the appropriate Government in this case was the Central Government. Respondent 1, once again went to the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
2. A learned single Judge of the High Court by order dated December 16, 1996 remanded the proceedings for a fresh decision to the Labour Court taking the view that res judicata had no application to the present case. It was obviously a remand to the State Labour Court. The learned single Judge also observed that the State Labour Court had jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute. The appellant unsuccessfully carried the matter in appeal and thereafter on obtaining leave to appeal before US.
3.  The chequered history of this litigation between the parties uptill now shows that eventhough more than 12 years have elapsed since the dismissal of Respondent 1 from the service of the appellant Company, no forum has been found to decide his dispute on its merits.We, therefore suggested to the learned counsel for the appellant that if the order appeal is modified and the dispute is directed to be resolved by the Central Labour Court functioning in Hyderabad under the Act, any objection would survive for the appellant. He fairly stated that he would like to have the dispute decided by the Central Labour Court on merits, looking to the chequered history of this litigation.
4.  Learned counsel for Respondent 1 also fairly stated that if there is a forum available to adjudicate his dispute at Hyderabad he will also have to objection.
5.  We, therefore, without going into the wider question about the applicability of Section 2-A sub-section (2) of the Act as amended by the Andhra Pradesh State Legislature and whether under the said amended provision a direct application would lie to the State Labour Court by an employee of a company like the appellant, modify the impugned order of the learned single Judge as confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court and direct that the dispute of Respondent 1 centering round his alleged dismissal dated May 13, 1987 shall be adjudicated upon by the Central Labour Court functioning at Hyderabad, on merits after hearing them at its earliest convenience looking to the long period of more than a decade that has elapsed since the dispute against dismissal was raised.
6.  Pursuant to the present order Respondent 1 will be entitled to file appropriate application under Section 2-A sub-section (2) of the Act, before the Central Labour Court at Hyderabad within three months from today. Once Respondent 1 files appropriate application, as aforesaid, before the Central Labour Court at Hyderabad, the said Court shall see to it that the proceedings are decided on merits after hearing the parties at the earliest and preferably within a period of one year from the date of receipt of such application.
7. We make it clear that the Central Labour Court shall decide the dispute on merits, without considering the question about res judicata or delay in filing the proceedings, meaning thereby, the dispute has to be decided on merits and not on any technical ground.
8.  A copy of this order shall be sent by the office of this Court to the Presiding Officer, Central Labour Court at Hyderabad for information and for doing the needful in this in connection.
The civil appeal is disposed of accordingly. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
