1.  The appellant was tried in the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Karnal on an allegation that during the night intervening 21/22-2-1984 while he was crossing Yamuna river from the Uttar Pradesh side he was carrying with him 30 Kg. of poppy husk and thereby he had committed an offence punishable under S. 15 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
2.  In order to prove its case the prosecution had examined sub-Inspector Ram Krishan S.H.O. Police Station, Indri who had gone near the river along with Head Constable Sahab Singh for the purpose of patrolling. The prosecution had also examined Head Constable Sahab Singh and relied upon the recovery memo, the report of the chemical examiner and the link evidence in the form of affidavits.
3.  The trial Court believed the evidence of the two witnesses and further held that the defence raised by the accused that he was falsely involved at the instance of Constable Krishan Lal was an afterthought. The learned Additional Judge therefore, convicted the accused under S. 15 of the N.D.P.S. Act and sentenced him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to pay fine of Rs. 1 lac.
4.  The High Court after re-appreciating the evidence agreed with the findings recorded by the trial Court and confirmed the conviction and sentence of the appellant. It was submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant that in this case requirement of S. 52 was not complied with inasmuch as the accused and the seized articles were not forwarded to the Officer empowered under S. 53 of the Act. We find no substance in this submission because the person who had arrested the appellant and seized the articles was himself an Officer-in-Charge of the nearest Police Station. It was also contended that the requirement of S. 57 was not complied with inasmuch as no full report of the particulars of arrest and seizure was made by the Sub-Inspector Ram Krishan to his superior officer.
5.  It is true that there is no positive evidence on record to show that such a report was made. But it is also true that in cross-examination of the witness not a single question was put to find out whether he had made any report to his superior officer or not. There is no material on record which would indicate that this provision was not complied with. Moreover, as pointed out by the High Court this provision is not mandatory. Hence, its non-compliance by itself cannot vitiate the conviction of the appellant. 
It was next contended that the Investigating Officer in this case had no power to investigate as he was not authorised under the Act to investigate offences arising under the Act. The High Court has rightly pointed out that in this case provision contained in S. 74 would apply as the Investigating Officer was himself a Station House Officer of the Police Station having jurisdiction over the area and as such authorised to investigate the offence within his area.
6.  Therefore, this contention also deserved to be rejected. It was further contended that no independent person was kept present at the time of arrest of the appellant and seizure of the articles. This aspect was also considered by the Courts below and in spite of independent person was not being kept present, the Court thought it fit to place reliance upon the evidence of the investigating officer Ram Krishan and Head Constable Sahab Singh. The appellant was found carrying poppy husk at mid night and that too in the river bed. The village was 1/2 furlong away. It appears from the evidence of Ram Krishan that nobody had come forward to act as an independent witness to the seizure memo.  Therefore, not keeping an independent person present at that time does not reflect adversely upon the other prosecution evidence.
It was submitted that Mewa Singh who had gone to the village for this purpose should have examined as a witness. Sub-Inspector Ram Krishan has stated that Mewa Singh could not get anyone to come at that time. We find no good reason to disbelieve him.
7.  It was then urged that the Seal on the gunny bag when examined in the Court was found broken and, therefore, there was no guarantee as to what was found from the gunny bag. Even this submission does not deserve to be accepted because according to the evidence on record, from the material which was found from the gunny bag a sample was taken and the chemical examiner had reported that it was powder of poppy husk. Merely from the circumstance that the seal was found broken, we cannot jump to the conclusion that the material in the gunny bag was substituted. Moreover, the bag was handed over to Malkhana in good condition much earlier.No attempt was made to draw attention of the trial Court and request it to record a finding if the seal was tampered with.
8.  As we do not find any substance in any of the contentions raised on behalf of the appellant, the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
