1.  The appellant was issued an eligibility certificate under the provisions of an exemption notification dated 9-2-1977 issued in exercise of the power conferred by S. 10 of the Madhya Pradesh Sthaniya Kshetra Me Mal Ke Pravesh Par Kar Adhiniyam, 1976 The said certificate granted to the appellant an exemption for raw materials required by it in the process of manufacture. In the words of the judgment of the High Court.
"The raw material, as per the certificate, included for exemption was limestone, laterite and iron ore, gypsum, pozzolanic materials such as coal ash, cal slinder, brick bats and calcine clay, etc., all types of coal, lubricants and gunny bags. Later, the certificate was amended to include consumable goods including spares and ancillaries ...."
2. The period of the exemption under the said certificate commenced on 21-10-1982 and concluded on 20-10-1987.
3.  On 25-3-1991, long after the period specified in the said certificate had expired, the appellant was issued a notice by the District Industries Centre of the first respondent. The notice was on the subject of "review of the entry tax exemption case". The notice recited that the said certificate had been granted to the appellant, and it stated:
4. In these certificates other items have been specified in addition to raw materials. Therefore, the case of your unit is under consideration for review by the District Grant Committee. The next meeting of the District Grant Committee will be held on 15-4-1991 at 3 p.m. in the District Industries Centre. You can present your case in writing or by appearing in person."
5.  Upon this notice an order was passed on 30-10-1991. It stated :" The following items mentioned in Sl. Nos. 7 and 8 in the entry tax exemption certificate ... are deleted from the date of issue of the eligibility certificate.
"At Serial No. 7 gunny bags were mentionedThe said order dated 30-10-1991 was impugned by the appellant in a writ petition filed in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. The High Court's judgment records that the contention of the appellant was that"
". There is no finding of the High Court on this contention but, on another contention, the High Court thought it appropriate to order that the matter be placed again before the authorities of the first respondent. Against the judgment and order of the High Court, the appellant is here by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that had the High Court dealt with the aforesaid contention, it would surely have been decided in favour of the appellant because the very same issue had been dealt with by the High Court, and, incidentally, by the same Bench, about a month earlier. This judgment of the High Court is in K.P. Enterprises v. Divisional Dy. CST.  1996 Indlaw MP 115The High Court there said:
"
The special leave petition filed by the State against this judgment and order was dismissed by this Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant referred to the decision of this Court in Central Areca Nut & Cocoa Marketing & Processing Coop. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka  1997 Indlaw SC 2917. That decision was in relation to an exemption notification that had been struck down. This Court said : "
6. Learned counsel for the appellant informed us that now the Department has indeed taken some steps to recover the tax relatable to the above period. It is also significant that none appears for the respondent-writ petitioners and that the State of Karnataka is supporting the appellant.
".
To the same effect are observations in the judgment of this Court , reproduced as an order connected to the judgment in State of Rajasthan v. Mahaveer Oil Industries 1999 Indlaw SC 373 in State of Rajasthan v. Gopal Oil Mills  1995 Indlaw SC 253 thus :
Learned counsel for the State submitted that it became necessary to review the said certificate because it had been subsequently got amended at a subordinate level to include gunny bags. There is no warrant for the submission. As the High Court noted, the said certificate specified gunny bags from the very beginning. In any event, the case now sought to be made out would have been a case of fraud which would have been specified in the notice to review. As we have seen, the notice for review did not so state. It did not even mention which items in the said certificate were sought to be excluded on the ground that they had been "specified in addition to raw materials."
7.  There was, in our view, no jurisdiction for reviewing the said certificate long after the term thereof had expired and, therefore, long after its benefit had been availed by the appellant or at all. The view taken by the High Court in the judgment to which we have referred to is correct, and is borne out by the decisions of this Court aforementioned.
8.  We note in conclusion that the appeal has been argued only upon this point on behalf of the appellant.
9.  The appeal is allowed. The judgment and order under appeal is set aside. The writ petition filed by the appellant is allowed and the order dated 30-10-1991 passed by the District Industries Centre of the first respondent is quashed.
10. The 1st respondent shall pay to the appellant the costs of the appeal.
Appeal allowed.
