Research Foundation For Science and another v Union of India and another
Supreme Court of India

7 February 2000
W.P. (C) No. 657 of 1995 with S.L.P. (C) No. 16175 of 1997 with IA No. 3 in C.A. No. 7660 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Pursuant to the orders dated 10-12-1999, an affidavit of Shri M.S. Azad, Under Secretary, Ministry of Labour has been filed. We are not satisfied with the contents of the said affidavit because the number of industries stated to be operating in different States which are processing hazardous wastes as given in the said affidavit do not coincide with the number of such industries as indicated by the Ministry of Environment.
2. It is obvious that Shri Azad has taken no trouble to personally try and find out from reliable sources as to the correctness of the information received, nor has any cross-checking been done either with the Central Pollution Control Board or the Ministry of Environment.
3.  Mr Altaf Ahmed, ASG appearing for the Ministry of Environment and the High Power Committee submits that the particulars of such units will be handed over to Mr P.P. Malhotra, Senior Advocate appearing for the Ministry of Labour. The Ministry of Labour will depute responsible officers to ascertain correct facts and then file an affidavit as required by this Court's order dated 10-12-1999. Particulars will be given by the Ministry of Environment within a week and the affidavit be filed by the Ministry of Labour within four weeks thereafter.
4.  Mr Altaf Ahmed states that within four weeks a further affidavit will be filed indicating the latest position in compliance with the orders passed by this Court. The Central Pollution Control Board may also file an affidavit within four weeks with regard to the allegations which were made by Greenpeace concerning the hazardous waste being offloaded at Alang in Gujarat.
List after five weeks.
IA No. 3 in CA No. 7660 of 1997.
5.  Issue notice to the Union of India through the Ministry of Environment. Mr A.D.N. Rao, Advocate accepts notice. Reply be filed within four weeks and rejoinder within one week thereafter. List after five weeks.
Order accordingly.
