State of Tripura v Manoranjan Chakraborty and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 November 2000
C.As. Nos. 4638 to 4666 of 1990 (Appeals by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 5 December 1989, of the High Court of Gauhati (Agartala Bench) in Civil Rules Nos. 39, 40, 74, 83 and 85 of 1987, 53 to 57, 37, 12, 14 to 18 and 92 of 1988, 4 of 1986 and 30 to 34 and 53 to 57 of 1989).
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The High Court had by the impugned judgment struck down the provisos to s. 20(1) and s. 21(2) of the Tripura Sales Tax Act, 1976, which had provided that no appeal/revision against an order would be entertained by the prescribed authority/Commissioner unless the amount of tax assessed or the penalty levied is paid, discretion being given to the authority for permitting payment of not less than 50 per cent of the tax assessed or the penalty levied.
2.  The aforesaid ss. 20(1) and 21(2) along with the relevant provisos read as follows:
"20 Appeal. - (1) Any dealer objecting an order of assessment or penalty passed under this Act, may, within thirty days from the date of the service of such order, appeal to the prescribed authority against such assessment or penalty :
Provided that no appeal shall be entertained by the said authority unless he is satisfied that the amount of tax assessed or the penalty levied has been paid:
Provided further that the authority before whom an appeal has been filed may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct the appellant to pay any lesser amount which shall not be less than fifty per cent of the tax assessed or fifty per cent of the penalty levied and, on payment of the amount so directed, entertain the appeal."
" 21. (2) In the case of any order other than an order to which sub-s. (1) applies, passed by any person appointed under sub-s. (1) of s. 4 to assist him, the Commissioner may, either on his own motion or on a petition by a dealer for revision, call for the record of any proceeding under this Act in which any such order has been passed and may make such enquiry or cause such enquiry to be made, and subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such orders thereon, not being an order prejudicial to the dealer, as he thinks fit. Provided that no petition for revision by a dealer shall be admitted by the Commissioner unless at least fifty per cent of the amount of tax assessed, or as the case may be, fifty per cent of the amount of penalty levied has been paid by the dealer where the order against which revision is filed relates to assessment of tax or imposition of penalty."
3.  As we see it, the point in issue is no longer res integra. This Court in Gujarat Agro Industries Co. Ltd. v. Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad 1999 Indlaw SC 1551 dealing with an analogous provision, where discretion to waive pre-deposit was limited only to the extent of 25 per cent of the tax, was upheld by this Court. To the same effect is the decision of this Court in Shyam Kishore v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi 1992 Indlaw SC 416.
4.  For the reasons contained in the said decisions, we hold that the impugned provisions are valid. It is, of course, clear that if gross injustice is done and it can be shown that for good reason the court should interfere, then notwithstanding the alternative remedy which may be available by way of an appeal u/s. 20 or revision under section 21, a writ court can in an appropriate case exercise its jurisdiction to do substantive justice. Normally of course the provisions of the Act would have to be complied with, but the availability of the writ jurisdiction should dispel any doubt which a citizen has against a high-handed or palpable illegal order which may be passed by the assessing authority.
5.  For the aforesaid reasons, these appeals are allowed and the judgment of the High Court is set aside. No costs.
Appeals allowed.
