Assistant Commissioner (Anti-Evasion-I) v Swaraj Mazda Limited
Supreme Court of India

12 January 2000
C.A. No. 4966 of 1997 with C.As. Nos. 4967 to 4969 of 1997 (C.A. No. 4966 of 1997 is by special leave from the judgment and order Dt. 4 April 1996, of the Rajasthan Taxation Tribunal in S.B. Sales Tax Revision Petitions Nos. 55, 35, 72 and 49 of 1995 (R.T.T. Nos. 193, 222, 194 and 34 of 1995)).
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.   The judgment dated April 4, 1996, of the Rajasthan Taxation Tribunal consisting of MILAP CHANDRA JAIN, J., Chairman, and R. K. NAIR, Technical Member, in Assistant Commissioner (Anti-Evasion) v. Mahindra Nissan Allwyn Ltd. to the extent relevant, is as follows:
"The above listed four revision petitions were filed u/s. 15 of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954 (hereafter referred to as "the 1954 Act") in the Rajasthan High Court which stood transferred to this Tribunal in terms of ss. 7 and 15 of the Rajasthan Taxation Tribunal Act. All of them are directed against judgment dated June 7, 1994 of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Tribunal, as it was then known and which is now known as the Rajasthan Tax Board (hereafter referred to as "the Board") by which the appeals Nos. 88/92/ST/Jaipur and 62/92/ST/Jaipur of the present non-petitioners were allowed and the cross appeals Nos. 312/93/ST/Jaipur and 313/93/ST/Jaipur of the present petitioners were dismissed. As the facts are similar and the point of law the same these revision petitions are being disposed of together by this judgment.
The facts in brief are that the State Government by Notification No. F.4(8)FD Gr. VI/87-19 dated March 5, 1987 in exercise of powers conferred by s. 5 of the 1954 Act notified that with immediate effect the rate of tax payable by a dealer in light commercial vehicles would be 4.5 per cent. The non-petitioners being dealers in vehicles manufactured under industrial licence for light commercial vehicles issued to their principals by the Secretariate for Industrial Approvals, Department of Industrial Development, Ministry of Industry of the Government of India were accordingly assessed for the payment of sales tax in the relevant period in accordance with the notification referred to. This notification was superseded on March 8, 1988.By Notification No. F.4(64)F.D.Gr. IV/77-56 dated September 6, 1977 the State Government in exercise of powers conferred by s. 5 of the 1954 Act notified the rate of tax payable by a dealer on motor vehicles including chassis of motor vehicles, motor bodies of all shapes and designs (including motor vans, motor tankers, motor caravans, motor trucks and motor buses) whether built on chassis or separately, and all varieties of trailers by whatever name known to be 10 per cent.
On January 8, 1985 the rate of tax applicable to fuel efficient motor cars of engine capacity not exceeding 1000 cc was notified as 6 per cent and on January 8, 1987 the tax applicable on motor cars of engine capacity not exceeding 1100 cc was made 6 per cent. That is, the engine capacity was increased and the requirement of fuel efficiency was removed.
On June 17, 1985 the rate of tax payable in respect of heavy commercial motor vehicles (without bodies) of 8, 000 kg. gross weight or above was made 4.5 per cent.
That is to say at the time relevant to our present purposes, the rate of tax applicable to motor vehicles, not being light commercial vehicles or motor cars with engine capacity not exceeding 1100 cc, or heavy commercial motor vehicles (without bodies) of gross weight of 8, 000 kg. or above was 10 per cent.
The Commercial Taxes Officer (Anti-Evasion-I), Jaipur, [CTO (AE) for short] reopened the assessments of the non-petitioners in exercise of powers u/s. 12 of the 1954 Act which pertains to reassessment in cases which escaped assessment or were cases of under-assessment, etc., and holding that the goods in question were not light commercial vehicles as their gross vehicle weight (GVW) was greater than that prescribed for light motor vehicles (LMV) under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (MV Act) and were, therefore, taxable at 10 per cent. He accordingly raised a demand on account of tax differential at 5.5 per cent surcharge, and penalty u/s. 16(1)(i) of the 1954 Act.The case of the non-petitioners before us as well as before the authorities below was basically two-fold. Firstly, that the Anti-Evasion Wing had no jurisdiction as under administrative circulars of the Commissioner, Commercial Taxes, cases of evasion arising out of disputes regarding classification and rate of tax applicable have to be forwarded to the regular assessing authority having jurisdiction who did the original assessment for redetermination. Secondly, the goods in question were "light commercial vehicles" as commonly understood in general parlance and were described as such in the industrial licence under which the goods were being manufactured and that light commercial vehicles were granted exemptions under the Central Excise Act and the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act and the goods in question were accepted as eligible for such exemptions. As the term "light commercial vehicle" was not defined in the 1954 Act, the meaning assigned to it by common or general parlance and by the trade must be accepted as laid down by the Supreme Court in Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan 1980 Indlaw SC 262 and in Indo International Industries v. Commissioner of Sales Tax 1981 Indlaw SC 186.
These contentions were not accepted by the CTO (AE). The Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) II, Commercial Taxes, Jaipur [DC (Appeals), for short] struck down the penalty but upheld the assessment of the CTO (AE). On second appeal the Board accepting the contentions of the non-petitioners set aside the orders of the DC (Appeals) and the CTO (AE) and held that the goods in question were light commercial vehicles taxable at 4 per cent during the relevant period and that the CTO (AE) had no jurisdiction in the matter and ought to have either referred it to the regular CTO having jurisdiction or to the Additional Commissioner under section 12A of the 1954 Act to clarify the rate of tax applicable.On behalf of the petitioners the basic contention is that the goods in question not being light motor vehicles as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act are not light commercial vehicles.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have carefully considered the relevant law and the rulings cited and perused the records of the CTO (AE).
The finding of the Board that the CTO (AE) has no jurisdiction has no basis in our view.
As regards whether the goods in question are light commercial vehicles or not the facts need to be seen first.
The facts as available on record regarding Swaraj Mazda are that on September 28, 1984 the Government of India, Ministry of Industrial Development Secretariate for Industrial Approvals issued an industrial licence to M/s. Swaraj Vehicles Ltd. of Ropar (Punjab) to manufacture 10, 000 light commercial vehicles of payload of 3.5 tonnes annually. The non-petitioner Swaraj Mazda markets buses and trucks manufactured under this licence through their authorised dealer in Jaipur and the models are known as "Swaraj Mazda T 3500". The GVW of its trucks is 5790/5920 kg. Under the Central Excise Rules fuel efficient light commercial vehicles with the Ministry of Industry certifying them to be fuel efficient had been granted certain exemptions. Swaraj Mazda T 3500 had been duly certified as fuel efficient light commercial vehicles. The Government of Punjab is also said to have taxed the light commercial vehicles at concessional rates.
The facts as on record relating to Mahindra Nissan Allwyn Ltd., are similar. On April 26, 1984 the Government of India, Ministry of Industrial Development Secretariate for Industrial Approvals issued an industrial licence to M/s. Allwyn Nissan Ltd., of Hyderabad, A.P. to manufacture 10, 000 light commercial vehicles of payload of 3 tonnes annually. The non-petitioner Mahindra Nissan Allwyn market a range of vehicles including buses, trucks and vans manufactured under this licence through their depot in Jaipur. The GVW of its vehicles is 5350/5950 kg. The Andhra Pradesh Government have specifically extended by name concessional rates of general sales tax and central sales tax to light commercial vehicles manufactured by Allwyn Nissan.Admittedly, the term "light commercial vehicle" is not defined in any statute. The law applicable to motor vehicles generally is the MV Act. That Act does not define light commercial vehicle. "Light motor vehicle" is defined in sub-s. (13) of s. 2 of M.V. Act, 1939, which was then in force as follows:
"2. Definitions. - In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, -
(13) 'light motor vehicle' means a transport vehicle or omnibus the registered laden weight of which, or a motor car or tractor the unladen weight of which, does not exceed 4, 000 kilograms; ......"
2.  The basis for classification is GVW. The goods in question exceed the specified GVW and are therefore, not light motor vehicles (LMV) as defined in the MV Act.
3.  The basis for classification adopted by the Ministry of Industry is payload, i.e., the load carried and not the GVW. Therefore, the definition of LMV in the MV Act is not applicable.
4.  Can it then be said that the term "light commercial vehicle" as employed in the State Government's notification dated March 5, 1987 be treated as synonymous with LMV as defined in the MV Act ? If so, why then employ a different term ? LMVs are separately provided for as noted earlier under the 1954 Act in terms of the notifications dated September 6, 1977 and January 8, 1987 and the rate of tax applicable was 10 per cent and 6 per cent respectively in the relevant period. If the rate of tax at 4.5 per cent on light commercial vehicles is to be taken to be on LMVs it would obviously create an anomaly and it is obviously not the case of the petitioners that LMVs were taxable at 4.5 per cent. Then what is ? It is obvious therefore, that light commercial vehicles do not need to be LMVs as defined in the MV Act and the certification of the Ministry of Industry which licensed the production of light commercial vehicles must be accepted. That is how the trade as well as those who regulate the production of those goods including the Government of India, Ministry of Industry and the Central Excise authorities understand it and that must be how it should be generally understood. This is precisely the approach adopted by the apex Court in Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan 1980 Indlaw SC 262, and in Indo International Industries v. Commissioner of Sales Tax, Uttar Pradesh, 1981 Indlaw SC 186.We, therefore, hold that the goods in question are light commercial vehicles for the purposes of the State Government's Notification No. F.4(8) FD. Gr. VI/87-19 dated March 5, 1987 and the rate of tax payable was 4.5 per cent on these goods in the relevant period.
In the light of the above the revision petitions are dismissed.
5.  No order as to costs. A copy of this judgment be kept on each file."
The department preferred appeals to the Supreme Court.
ORDER
6.   By special leave the sales tax authorities of the State of Rajasthan have impugned the correctness of the judgment delivered by the Rajasthan Taxation Tribunal in relation to the meaning of the words "light commercial vehicles" used in a notification dated March 5, 1987, issued under the provisions of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954. By reason thereof, sales tax is payable at the rate of 4.5 per cent on light commercial vehicles whereas on other vehicles it is payable at the rate of 10 per cent. The Tribunal rejected the contention on behalf of the sales tax authorities that the words "light commercial vehicles" had to be interpreted in the context of the definitions in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and that a light commercial vehicle was a light motor vehicle within the meaning of the Motor Vehicles Act which was intended to be used for commercial purposes.
7.  In other words, only a light motor vehicle that was intended to be used for commercial purposes and did not exceed 4, 000 kilograms in weight fell, according to the sales tax authorities, within the scope of the words "light commercial vehicles" and was entitled to the benefit of the aforesaid notification. The light commercial vehicles that are manufactured by the respondents weigh more than 4, 000 kilograms. The Tribunal rejected the contention on behalf of the sales tax authorities that the respondents' light commercial vehicles were not entitled to the benefit of the said notification.
8.   Before us, learned counsel for the sales tax authorities repeated the argument that was advanced before the Tribunal. In his submission, only a light motor vehicle as defined in the Motor Vehicles Act, that was to be used for commercial purposes was entitled to the rate specified in the said notification.
9.   The respondents, as the Tribunal found, manufacture light commercial vehicles pursuant to licences granted by the Government of India. These licences specifically mention "light commercial vehicles". The said notification also refers to "light commercial vehicles". It does not refer to light motor vehicles which are used for commercial purposes. It applies, therefore, to the respondents' light commercial vehicles. The Tribunal was right in saying that the trade and the Government of India well understood what the words "light commercial vehicles" meant. These are the words used by the said notification issued under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act and they must be similarly read. There is no justification for importing the definitions of the Motor Vehicles Act to construe them.
10.   If the contentions of the sales tax authorities were to be accepted, it would mean that the same vehicle would be taxed at the rate of 10 per cent if it was intended to be used for a private purpose but at the rate of 4.5 per cent if it was intended to be used for commercial purposes. If so, one would have expected the sales tax authorities to require, by the said notification or otherwise, the purchaser of the vehicle to declare how he proposed to use it, and what the consequence of use other than that declared would be. There is no such requirement.
11.   It appears to us that the sales tax authorities who issued the said notification knew very well what vehicles they were granting the rate of 4.5 per cent to. It is only those who enforce the said notification who take a contrary view to enhance sales tax revenues.
The appeals are dismissed with costs.
Appeals dismissed.
