Fali Firoz Shah Bomanji v State of Maharashtra and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 April 2000
C.A. No. 2637 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant has challenged the order of the High Court dated 4-8-1998 dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant rejecting the claim of the appellant that he is the title-holder of the land in question, which is the subject-matter of acquisition proceedings under Section 126 of the MRTP Act read with Section 6 of the Acquisition Act.
2.  The issue for consideration is whether the appellant has any right to claim benefit under the circular dated 9-2-1988 issued by the Government. This circular gave an offer to the holders of the land that in case they surrender 65% of their land free of any encumbrances with absolute title, then the Government would permit such holder to utilise 35% of that land for development as per the scheme. The appellant's case is he agreed with all such terms and conditions and is fully qualified in terms of the said circular. The submission for the appellant is that the High Court did not examine either the circular or the lease under which the appellant is assigned and recorded the finding without disclosing any plausible reason against the appellant.
3. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent submits that as the appellant does not have any title over the land, hence the High Court has rightly examined the matter and concluded against the appellant.
4.  Neither is it necessary nor do we want to enter into the merits of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties. We find that the High Court, without properly scrutinising the materials for adjudicating and without recording any reason, dismissed the writ petition.
5. Before concluding, it was necessary to examine the terms of the lease deed and assignment if any. The finding that the lease deed is for a definite period is stoutly denied. As we have said, we would not like to enter into this realm. But we find that there is non-application of mind and hence the order has to be set aside.
6.  Accordingly, the case is sent back to the High Court for it to examine the contentions of the parties with reference to the lease deed, assignments etc.
7. We accordingly set aside the judgment and order dated 4-8-1988 passed by the High Court and direct the High Court to reconsider the contentions of the parties and dispose of them in accordance with law.
8.  We make it clear that any observation made either in the impugned judgment of the High Court or made by us in setting aside the same is without prejudice to the rights of the parties.
The appeal is accordingly allowed. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
