State of W.B. and Others v Jindal India Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

16 February 2000
C.A. No. 7334 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The judgment and order under challenge by special leave was passed by the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal upon a writ petition filed by the respondents, which had been transferred to it for hearing and final disposal.
2.  Between 6-8-1991 and 23-9-1991 the first respondent brought into the Calcutta Metropolitan Area 551.05 MT of what it described as steel scrap in the declaration that it was required to make under the provisions of Section 13 of the Taxes on Entry of Goods into Calcutta Metropolitan Area Act, 1972. Steel scrap being not exigible to tax, the consignment was cleared without the first respondent being required to make any payment on that account. The first respondent was then served with a notice under Section 14(3) of the said Act seeking to reopen the assessment on the basis that what had been cleared was not steel scrap but other articles manufactured from iron or steel, falling under Entry 53(d)(ix).
3. Ultimately, the assessment in this behalf was completed and the first respondent was called upon to make payment of a sum of Rs. 1,00,054.00/-. The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court at Calcutta challenging the said demand. The writ petition stood transferred to the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal constituted under the provisions of the West Bengal Taxation Tribunal Act. By the impugned judgment, the demand was quashed. According to the Tribunal, the first respondent having made a declaration as required by Section 13 and the Inspector of Entry Tax at the checkpost concerned having inspected and verified the goods and been satisfied that the goods were steel scrap, which was exempt, the proceeding under Section 14(3) could not have been commenced.
4.  Section 13 of the Act requires every dealer of specified goods to deliver to the prescribed authority a declaration relating to goods proposed to be brought into the Calcutta Metropolitan Area before their entry. Section 14(1) states that where a declaration has been made under Section 13, the prescribed authority shall verify the goods in such manner as he may consider necessary and assess the tax leviable on the entry of such goods. Section 14(3) states:
"14. (3) Where any specified goods have been brought into the Calcutta Metropolitan Area without the payment of any tax leviable thereon under this Act, the prescribed authority shall assess the tax leviable under this Act on such goods and it may also impose on the dealer, in the prescribed manner, a penalty, not exceeding ten times the tax assessed by it:
Provided that such assessment shall be made after inspection and verification of such goods, but where such goods are not available for inspection and examination by reason of the fact that such goods have been disposed of, concealed or mixed with any other goods, such assessment shall be made, in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed, to the best of the ability of the prescribed authority:
Provided further that no penalty shall be imposed under this sub-section except after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard."
5.  The Tribunal, in our view, cannot be faulted for its conclusion that Section 14(3) did not authorise the reopening as aforestated. What, however, was not pointed out to the Tribunal was Section 17. Section 17(1) reads thus:
"17. Short-levied tax. - (1) Where tax levied and collected under this Act in respect of the entry of any specified goods into the Calcutta Metropolitan Area has been short-levied through inadvertence, error or misconstruction on the part of the prescribed authority or through misstatement of the dealer as to the quantity or description or value of such goods or for any other reason, or, when any such tax, after having been levied and collected, has been erroneously refunded, the dealer on whom the tax was so short-levied or the person to whom such refund was erroneously made, shall pay the deficiency or repay the amount erroneously refunded to him, as the case may be, within three months from the date on which demand is made for the payment of the amount so short-levied or the amount erroneously refunded."
6. Section 17(1) contemplates reopening of assessments when there has been a short levy by reason of inadvertence, error or misconstruction on the part of the prescribed authority or by reason of misstatement of the dealer, as to quantity, description or value, or for any other reason. In our view, the provisions of Section 17(1) are very wide and gave authority to the appellant to reopen the assessment that was made upon the first respondent. The fact that the reopening was said to be under Section 14(3) and not under Section 17 can make no difference; the misstatement of the appropriate section would not invalidate the reopening, power to do so being there.
7.  In the circumstances, the judgment and order of the Tribunal must be quashed. But the matter should, in our view, go back to the assessing authority for the purposes of determining whether the goods that were brought in by the first respondent fell within the scope of Entry 53(d)(ix) of the Schedule to the Act or whether they were steel scrap. The parties shall be at liberty to lead such evidence as they may consider appropriate in this behalf before the assessing authority.
8.  The appeal is allowed. The judgment and order under appeal is set aside. The assessment made on 24-2-1994 is set aside and the matter is remanded to the assessing authority as stated above.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
