State of Tamil Nadu v Krishnan and Another
Supreme Court of India

20 September 2000
Cr.A. No. 393 of 1993
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by special leave is directed against an order of acquittal recorded by the High Court of Madras dated 30-10-1992. The trial court (Special Judge), Tiruchirapalli tried the respondents for offences under Section 161 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and under Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and side judgment and order dated 15-10-1986 convicted and sentenced them for the said offences. They were sentenced to undergo one year rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.500 each and in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months.
2.  We have perused the judgment of the High Court and our attention has also been drawn to some parts of the evidence. In our considered opinion, the view taken by the High Court, cannot be said to be even unreasonable, let alone perverse. The very factum of demand of bribe and the circumstances under which the said demand was made, as alleged by the prosecution, is suspect.
3.  According to the prosecution case, it was Respondent 1 who detained PWs 2 and 3 at the police station, stating that unless Gemini (PW 7), who was wanted in another case of distilling illicit arrack, was produced, they would not be released. PW 3 was, however, let off with a direction to bring Gemini (PW 7) to the police station, and, in the meanwhile, PW 2 was detained at the police station. PW 3 returned to the police station and reported to Respondent 1 that PW 1, who also was running a licensed arrack shop, and PW 2 could help him to secure PW 7 Gemini. PW 7 Gemini was thereafter identified and apprehended by the police party. PWs 2 and 3, according to the prosecution case, despite the earlier assurance of being released, were, however, not released even after presence of Gemini, PW 7 had been secured.
4.  The very fact that demand of bribe was allegedly made initially to secure release of PWs 2 and 3, becomes suspect once we consider the manner in which the prosecution case has unfolded itself.
5.  That apart, it is an admitted case that the amount of Rs.4000, tainted money, which is alleged to have been demanded, was recovered from under a pair of trousers from the cot in Room No. 19 at Tilak Lodge by the trap party. According to Respondent 1, he was in the bathroom and, when he came out, he found PWs 1, 2 and 3 sitting on the cot when the raid party suddenly appeared and picked up the amount of Rs.4000 from under the pair of trousers. The fact that PWs 1, 2 and 3 were already sitting on the cot where the pair of trousers were lying from underneath which the amount was recovered is not disputed.
6. Under these circumstances, it does probabilise the defence version given by the respondents that bribe money was planted by PWs 1, 2 and 3, who were engaged in illicit distillation and sale of arrack, to falsely trap the respondents, who were serving in the Prohibition Wing of the police, by placing the amount under the trousers of Respondent 1.
7.  In our opinion, the prosecution failed to prove the case against the respondents beyond a reasonable doubt and we need not detain ourselves to discuss other evidence or even the effect of negative phenolphthalein test. This appeal must fail. It, accordingly, is dismissed. The respondents are on bail. Their bail bonds shall stand discharged.
Appeal dismissed.
