Icici Limited v Parasrampuria Synthetics Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

10  May  2000
C.As. Nos. 3381-82 of 2000 In Ia No. 1 In S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 6048-49 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave is granted.
1.  The appellant is one of the creditors of the first respondent Parasrampuria Synthetics Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "PSL"). Invoking the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies Act (for short "SICA"), PSL approached BIFR seeking a declaration that it is a sick company. On 17-3-1999, BIFR declared PSL as a sick company. Against that order of BIFR, an appeal is filed by the appellant before AAFIF (hereinafter referred to as "the Tribunal"), which is now pending. Two orders of the Tribunal - first passed on 28-9-1999 in MA No. 61 of 1999 which relates to taking on record the documents filed by the appellant and the second passed on 13-10-1999 in MA No. 33 of 1999, which, inter alia, relates to granting of permission to the appellant to proceed with Suit No. 3287 of 1997 filed by it against PSL and its guarantors for recovery of loan advanced by it - were questioned by PSL in Writ Petition No. 1517 of 1999 before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore.
On 14-2-2000 the High Court passed the following interim order :
"When the matter is taken up Mr. Mehta prays for adjournment. List on 21-2-2000 on condition that there shall be a stay of further proceedings before the Tribunal till that day."
2.  On 23-2-2000 the High Court modified the said order by passing the following order :
"Heard on admission. Admit. No notice is necessary to the other side as the respondents are represented.
The interim relief granted earlier to continue. However, the parties are free to approach BIFR, if they want."
3.  Aggrieved by the said two orders of the High Court, the appellant filed these appeals by special leave.
On 17-4-2000 this Court passed the following order :
"Notice.
Stay of the High Court in the meanwhile. Further proceedings in the High Court are also stayed.
The petitioner will be at liberty to proceed with the sale of the assets."
4. PSL filed IA No. 1 of 2000 to modify the said order in this Court.
5.  The learned counsel for the parties have consented to address their arguments in the appeals and we have heard them accordingly.
6.  The contentions of Mr. G. L. Sanghi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for PSL, are :
(1) the Tribunal is not having a judicial member and in spite of the direction of the High Court no judicial member has been appointed, so the Tribunal cannot be allowed to proceed with the appeal;
(2) the Tribunal is proceeding in a manner which amounts to denial of giving fair hearing to PSL, therefore, the Tribunal should not be allowed to proceed in the matter;
(3) PSL consented for sale of the properties on the understanding that no permission will be granted to the appellant to proceed with the suit and as the permission to proceed with the suit is granted the consent given must be deemed to have been withdrawn and, therefore, sale of the properties has to be stayed; and
(4) if the suit is allowed to proceed it will result in two sales taking place, one by the receiver appointed by the court and another by the authority pursuant to the order of the Appellate Tribunal and this will cause prejudice to PSL.
7.  Mr. C. S. Vaidyanathan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant argues that the Tribunal's constitution is not the subject-matter of the orders impugned in the writ petition and that in regard to the fair procedure we may give appropriate directions to the Tribunal but the hearing of the appeal may not be stayed as it has become part-heard. With regard to the permission granted to the appellant to proceed with the suit the learned counsel invited our attention to a para of the order and submits that it contains sufficient safeguards for PSL and that stay of suit will not be in the interest of any of the parties as the interest on loan amounting to lakhs of rupees will be adding up. Mr. K. K. Venugopal, the learned Senior Counsel, who appears for the lead bank supported the case of the appellant and stressed the point that by sale of properties at least some burden of interest would be reduced.
8.  On the aforesaid submissions, the only point which falls for our consideration is that in view of orders passed by the Tribunal, which are the subject-matter of writ petition and in view of the interim orders passed by the High Court, what appropriate order be passed by this Court to safeguard the rights of all the parties and to meet the ends of justice.
9.  We have given our anxious consideration to the various submissions made by the learned counsel. We do not propose to express any opinion on the question of there being no judicial member in the Tribunal as it is not the subject-matter of the said two orders, impugned in writ petition before the High Court. Suffice it to say that on that ground it will not be just and proper to stay the hearing of the appeal before the Tribunal and it may proceed with the hearing of the appeal and dispose of it in accordance with law subject, of course, to the directions contained herein.
10.  Regarding the hearing of the appeal and the procedure to be adopted by the Tribunal, we are of the view that it will not be in the interest of justice to stay hearing of the appeal. However, the Tribunal is directed to grant a period of one week to PSL to file its objections to the affidavit of the appellant for taking the documents on record and after considering the objections the Tribunal may pass appropriate orders in regard to those documents.
11.  Insofar as the sale of the properties is concerned which has also been permitted by the interim order of this Court, we see no justifiable reason to interdict the sale of properties. The sale of the properties as ordered by the Tribunal may go on.
12.  With regard to the permission granted by the Tribunal to proceed with the suit, in our view, the rights of PSL are not prejudiced as the apprehension expressed by the learned counsel that sales will be conducted by two authorities - one by an authority under the order of the Tribunal and the other by the Receiver under the order of the court - will not be in the interest of PSL, is not tenable. The order of the Tribunal granting permission to the appellant to proceed with the suit, provides as under :
"ICICI is permitted to proceed with Suit No. 3287 of 1997 against PSL and its guarantors in the Hon'ble Bombay High Court subject to the condition that if any decree is obtained, and if its claim is not satisfied by its share in the sale proceeds in pursuance of clause (b) above, such decree can only be executed with prior consent as may be necessary under Section 22(1) of SICA."
13.  From the perusal of the clause it is evident that if a decree is passed in favour of the appellant, further permission has to be obtained under Section 22(1) of the Act for execution of the decree. At that stage the conduct of the sale of properties by the Court Receiver can be prescribed appropriately.
14.  It is needless to mention that any order passed by the Tribunal will be subject to the result of the writ petition.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly. No order as to costs.
Appeals disposed of.
