Ashok Kumar Singh and Others v State of Bihar and Others
Supreme Court of India

7 September 2000
C.A. No. 4472 of 1991
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In this civil appeal, the appellants, who are science graduates, have challenged the correctness of the judgment of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court in CWJC No. 5145 of 1984. This writ petition had been filed when the Board in exercise of its power under Section 79(c) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 framed certain regulations determining the service conditions, creating the cadre of Junior. Engineer and further providing that only the diploma-holders with certain years of experience would be eligible to usurp the said post of Junior Engineer.
2.  The High Court by the impugned judgment has considered the contentions raised by the science graduates in attacking the validity of the aforesaid regulation and the High Court has come to the conclusion that the power exercised by the Board in providing the regulation for appointment of Junior Engineer (JTO) cadre cannot be held to be arbitrary or irrational merely because it contemplates that only the diploma-holders would be entitled to get those posts and not the ordinary science graduates. We see no infirmity with the said conclusion of the High Court requiring our interference in this appeal.
3.  The High Court appears to have also considered the allegation of the science graduates that they have been deprived of the promotional avenue and the High Court has recorded a finding that this allegation also is not correct, inasmuch as the science graduates have their promotional avenues in the cadre of operators/technicians and, on the other hand, the High Court has come to the conclusion that the promotion of these science graduates would be quicker under the changed circumstances.
4.  Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned counsel appearing for the appellants, however, in course of his arguments, raised a contention that these promotional channels available to the science graduates are not being given to them and in fact are now being available to the diploma-holders.
5. This grievance, if at all correct, may give rise to a fresh cause of action and it would not be open for us to delve into that problem and answer one way or the other, at this juncture.
6.  It would be open for the science graduates to move the appropriate forum, if they are so advised and if there remains a real grievance to be ventilated.
The appeal is dismissed with the aforesaid observation.
Appeal dismissed.
