Messrs Orissa Construction Corporation Limited v Dayanidhi Sahoo
Supreme Court of India

30 November 2000
C.A. No(s).7671/1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent had been employed in the establishment of the appellant and his services came to an end in the year 1993. He filed a writ petition before the High Court stating that he had worked with the appellants' establishment for eight years and his services could not be terminated in the manner in which it were terminated. The writ petition was allowed with a direction that the respondent shall not be discontinued and shall be regularised as and when vacancy arises and while continuing as such he shall be paid as his counter-part is paid in the regular establishment or in the workcharged establishment.
2. In this appeal against the order made by the High Court two contentions are put forward:
3. Firstly, that the High Court fell in error in following the decision of this Court in Managing Director, Orissa Construction Corporation and others vs. Shyam Sundar Jena and others, without examining whether the facts therein are similar or not.
4. Secondly, it is contended that the respondent could not have been given emoluments as directed by the High Court.
5.  So far as the first contention is concerned when the High Court felt that the facts arising out of the present case are identical to those in Shyam Sunder Jena's case (supra) we fail to understand as to how the appellants can still contend that that decision is not applicable. As in the present case and in that case also the employees were working at different projects. When one project was over he was engaged in the other project under the management of the appellant. Thus, appellant should appoint the respondent in any of the projects further carried out by it.
6.  In that view of the matter, we find no substance in the contention and reject the same.It is not clear from the order made by the High Court as to what is the work done by the respondent and whether the same is comparable with the work done by those in the workcharged establishment. In that view of the matter without examining the question, the High Court could not direct that he should be paid salary/emoluments as are paid in the workcharged establishment and that part of the order is set aside. In other aspects the order made by the High Court is maintained. The order of the High Court is modified in the above terms. The appeal is allowed in part accordingly.
Appeal partly allowed.
