G. Kamala Rao v K. Jawahar Reddy and Another
Supreme Court of India

17 January 2000
C.A. No. 409 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  On a suit being filed by the appellant, the trial court had passed an ex parte injunction order under Order 39 Rule 1 CPC against the present respondents.
2. The case of the appellant before the trial court, thereafter, was that the injunction which had been granted was violated by the respondents and for this reason an application under Order 39 Rule 2-A CPC was filed by the appellant. The trial court vide its order dated 18-8-1999 allowed the application under Order 39 Rule 2-A and imposed a fine of Rs. 1000/-. It was also further directed that the tenants should vacate the premises within three months of the said order.
3.  The respondents herein then moved the High Court and filed a civil miscellaneous appeal. By the impugned judgment, the High Court observed that it was not inclined to go into the merits of the rival contentions because the application under Order 39 CPC was still pending, but at the same time it directed that the impugned order of the trial court would be kept in abeyance.
4.  We fail to understand the logic of the High Court's order. When an application under Order 39 Rule 2-A has been decided on merits and an appeal against the said order has been admitted, we would expect the High Court to decide the appeal on merits rather than avoiding a decision thereon and at the same time directing that the order of the trial court should be held in abeyance. The effect of stating that the order should be held in abeyance would, in fact, tantamount to the High Court allowing the appeal without, at the same time, deciding the same on merits.
5.  We, accordingly, allow this appeal, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and direct the High Court to decide CMA No. 2391 of 1999 on merits as expeditiously as possible.
6.  The parties are at liberty to approach the High Court for appropriate interim orders. Status quo as of today shall be maintained for a period of three months.
Appeal allowed.
