Wallace Flour Mills Company Limited v Montblanc Investment Private Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

10 January 2000
C.A. No. 147 of 2000 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 18380 of 1998)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted
1.  We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as learned counsel for respondent No. 1, who is the only contesting respondent. Respondent No. 2, though mentioned as contesting respondent in the appeal, is an ex-arbitrator and is no longer a contesting respondent.
2.  Learned counsel for the appellant fairly states that he withdraws all allegations against Shri Prakash V. Mehta, who is respondent No. 2 in the present proceedings.
On 13th December, 1999 we had passed the following order:
"At the joint request of learned counsel for the parties, adjourned to 10-1-2000 to enable them to suggest if it is possible to have an agreed name of a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or High Court stationed at Bombay to be the sole Arbitrator."
3.  We are happy to note that the contesting parties have agreed to the sole Arbitration of Hon'ble Justice Sujata V. Manohar, retired Judge of this Court, who is stationed at Mumbai. Accordingly the said learned Arbitrator, subject to her consent will now act as the sole Arbitrator to resolve the dispute between the parties. There is no dispute between the parties that these proceedings will be governed by the Arbitration Act, 1940. Therefore, the learned Arbitrator will proceed accordingly to adjudicate the dispute placed for her arbitration.
4.  The remuneration of the learned Arbitrator will be fixed by her after hearing the parties and will be borne by both the parties equally. The initial expenses of the arbitration also may be fixed by the learned Arbitrator after hearing the parties and may be so deposited by both the sides in equal proportion.
5.  If any contention is raised by the parties before the learned Arbitrator that the award may be a reasoned award or not, it will be for the learned Arbitrator, to take her own decision in here discretion. The procedure for arbitration, including the time and place thereof, will be fixed by the learned Arbitrator after hearing the parties.
6.  If any objection is raised regarding the evidence of any of the witnesses to be led by either party, it will be for the learned Arbitrator to decide whether such evidence should permitted to be led or not.
7.  The parties have suggested that the learned Arbitrator may be requested to complete the arbitration proceedings within four months of entering upon arbitration by the learned Arbitrator. We accordingly request the learned Arbitrator to complete the arbitration proceedings within that time. It will be open to the learned Arbitrator to extend the time for completing the said proceedings, if required, by consent of parties.
8.  It is made clear that we have not made any observation on the merits of the controversy between the parties.The impugned order of the High Court as set aside and is substituted by the present order.The Civil Appeal is disposed of accordingly.No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
