Neelam Kanwar v Devinder Singh Kanwar
Supreme Court of India

25 July 2000
Transfer Petition (Cr.) No. 5 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the averments in para 6 of the preliminary objections may be treated as deleted.
2.  We heard the counsel for all parties at length. The transfer prayed for is in respect of Criminal Complaint No. 68 of 1994 pending before the Court of Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, UT Chandigarh. That complaint was filed under Section 500 IPC by the first respondent's father (who is admittedly no more now).
3. The first respondent submits that he wants to pursue the complaint. An argument has been addressed that the first respondent has no right to pursue the complaint. We do not express any opinion on that aspect now, since that can be raised before the court where the case would be pending.
4.  The petitioner is the wife of the first respondent. The second respondent is the father of the petitioner and the third respondent is the sister of the petitioner. In the complaint the second and third respondents were also arrayed as accused.
5. According to the petitioner she is residing in Mumbai and therefore it is greatly inconvenient for her to go all the way to Chandigarh for defending this action against her. Hence, it is prayed that the case may be transferred to the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mumbai.
6.  The petition is opposed by the first respondent mainly on the ground that if transfer is allowed he will have to travel all the way from Chandigarh to Mumbai. This submission is made irrespective of a description made in the petition that the first respondent has a permanent residence at Mumbai.
7. Even assuming that the first respondent is not residing in the aforesaid place shown as his permanent residence but at Chandigarh, we are mindful of the fact that the petitioner is a lady and the first respondent is a male and therefore conveniencewise a transfer to the place where the lady is residing would be preferred by this Court unless it is shown that there are special reasons not to do so. No such special reason is shown.
8.  We, therefore, order that Criminal Complaint No. 68 of 1994 on the file of Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class, UT Chandigarh be transferred to the file of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mumbai.
Transfer Petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.
