Executive Engineer, Shimla Electrical Division v Presiding Officer, H. P. Labour Court and Another
Supreme Court of India

9 August 2000
C.A. No. 7800/1997, Dt. 9 August 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Having heard learned for the parties, we do not think on the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, that any interference is called for in the present proceedings under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
2.  Respondent No. 2 who was admittedly sent for apprenticeship training as a Lineman in 1982, successfully completed the said training in 1985. Admittedly, he is not a Matriculate but he has read up to Class VIII standard. So far as his claim to be appointed as a T-Mate is concerned, there is no dispute between the parties that as per the existing recruitment rules, on expiry of six years, i.e. by 1991, respondent No. 2 could have become an Assistant Lineman on available vacancy and within a further period of four years, he would have become a regular Lineman in 1995. The Labour Court, before whom the dispute was raised, has directed the appellant-Board to treat him as a regular Lineman only by October 15, 1996.
3. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, therefore, we do not find any reason to interfere with the decision of the High Court upholding the said award in the writ petition. Learned Counsel for respondent No. 2 fairly stated that though the Labour Court has recommended and left it to the appellant-Board to give earlier promotion with all other incidental benefits, respondent No. 2 is satisfied if he is treated as regular Lineman with effect from October 15, 1996, as directed by the Labour Court.
We record this statement and close this proceeding. The appellant-Board will now work out all the monetary benefits available to respondent No. 2, pursuant to the present judgment, within four months from today and the same will be made available to respondent No. 2.
4.  The appeal is disposed of accordingly. Interim stay granted on August 14, 1997 will stand vacated. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
