Trilochan Singh v Kanta Devi and Others
Supreme Court of India

3 January 2000
C.A. No. 2 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Civil Appeal No. 2 of 2000 (arising out of SLP (C) No. 19168 of 1998)
Leave granted.
2.  We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as the learned counsel for the Insurance Company which is the main contesting party. By their consent the appeal is being disposed of finally. Rest of the respondent claimants are already served.
3.  The appellant who was the owner of the offending vehicle got his appeal against the award dismissed on account of non-deposit of Rs. 25, 000/- which was the statutory requirement for entertaining the appeal.
4.  In our view, looking to the facts and circumstances of the case especially when he was a retired army personnel and also in view of the further fact that the respondent Insurance Company has already paid the full amount to the claimants and the question of the Insurance Company's realising the amount from the appellant in case the appellant fails in his appeal arises for consideration, interest of justice will be served if the impugned order is set aside on the condition that the appellant deposit an amount of Rs. 50, 000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) in addition to the already deposited amount of Rs. 10, 000/- in the High Court within six weeks from today.
5. Subject to deposit of this additional amount of Rs. 50, 000/- by the appellant which will abide by the final result in the appeal, the appeal will be restored to the file of the High Court with a request to proceed with the same in accordance with law on merits in case the appellant deposits the additional amount of Rs. 50, 000/- within six weeks from today. If such deposit is not made, the appeal will stand dismissed as already ordered by the High Court. We express no opinion on the merits of the case.
6.  The civil appeal is allowed accordingly with no order as to costs.
SLPs (C) Nos. ... of 1998 (CCs Nos. 8821-22)
Delay condoned.
7.  In view of the aforesaid order in the civil appeal these special leave petitions do not survive and are disposed of as such.
Appeal allowed.
