Director, Medical Education Lucknow and Others v Dr. Swapnil Chauhan
Supreme Court of India

10 February 2000
C.A. No. 1684 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent after qualifying in PGMEE in 1994 was allotted a seat in the diploma course in Gynaecology and Obstetrics (hereinafter "diploma (G and O)") in Motilal Nehru Medical College, Allahabad which she joined in May 1994. She had also sought admission for MS (Gynaecology and Obstetrics) (hereinafter MS (G and O)) at the time of applying for admission. It appears that a seat in MS (G and O) fell vacant because of the resignation of one of the candidates on 1-2-1995. The respondent claimed admission to MS (G and O) against that vacancy. That request having been declined, she filed a writ petition.
2. The writ petition was allowed and the appellants were directed to admit the respondent in MS (G and O) course in the session 1994-97 for the vacancy caused by the resignation of Dr. Anupam Bansal within two weeks. This direction was made by the High Court on 11-9-1996, admittedly, much after the course in MS (G and O) for session 1994-97 had commenced. The appellants approached this Court and submitted that the direction given by the High Court on 11-9-1996 to admit the respondent in MS (G and O) course for the session 1994-97 runs in the teeth of the judgment given by this Court in State of U.P. v. Dr. Anupam Gupta 1992 Indlaw SC 3341992 Indlaw SC 334and could not be sustained. In the special leave petition, on 22-3-1996, the following order was made:
"Issue notice. The notice shall state that the matter would appear to be covered by the judgment of this Court in State of U.P. v. Dr. Anupam Gupta 1992 Indlaw SC 3341992 Indlaw SC 334and the SLP might be disposed of accordingly."
3.  Subsequently, since the respondent had been granted time repeatedly to file the counter-affidavit and had not filed it, leave was granted and the interim stay earlier granted was continued.
4.  Learned counsel for the respondent filed, in this Court, an application, being IA No. 2 of 1997 complaining that though the respondent had studied for diploma (G and O), she was not being permitted to appear even in the examination for diploma (G and O). That application was allowed and by an order of this Court dated 4-4-1997, it was directed that the respondent be allowed to appear in the diploma (G and O) examination to be held in March/April 1997, provided she satisfies all other requirements for the purpose. It is conceded before us that the respondent has since appeared in the diploma (G and O) examination and been declared successful.
5.  According to learned counsel for the respondent since the study course of diploma (G and O) and MS (G and O) is to a great extent identical and she was already preparing her thesis, she should be permitted to appear in the examination for MS (G and O) as she had got admission in MS (G and O) course pursuant to the directions of the High Court with effect from 29-3-1996 and had also pursued the diploma course. The argument is misconceived. The respondent continued to study in MS course only till 4-1-1997 whereafter because of the stay order granted by this Court, she was not permitted to pursue that course. She has, therefore, not even put in one-year course of study in MS. According to the Medical Council of India the minimum period of training for the award of MD/MS courses from the year 1993 onwards is three calendar years. The relevant provision reads:
"Period of training
The prescribed minimum period of training for award of various postgraduate degrees/diplomas shall be as follows:
1. MD/MS, from the year 1993 onwards, the minimum period of training for obtaining these degrees shall be three calendar years and the candidates can be admitted to this training after their registration with the Medical Council of India.
2. No exemption shall be given from this period of training of three years either for doing housemanship or for any other experience or diploma."
6.  The above provision makes it abundantly clear that no credit can be given to the respondent for the period of study for diploma for obtaining MD/MS. Three calendar years' minimum training is an essential requisite for the award of postgraduate degree of MD/MS, which the respondent does not possess. That being the position, the request of the respondent is wholly untenable.
7.  Since the direction given by the High Court in the writ petition to grant admission to the respondent for the session 1994-97 on 11-9-1996 runs in the teeth of the judgment in Dr. Anupam Gupta cases we allow this appeal and set aside that direction. The appeal, therefore, succeeds and is allowed. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
