Praveen Kumar and Others v Suresh Chand and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 August 2000
C.A. No. 4567 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1. The appellants filed an application under Order 9 Rule 13 of the Civil Procedure Code for setting aside the ex parte decree. The case of the appellants is that the process was not duly served on them and the process-server played fraud and forged the signatures of the appellants.
2.  The trial court permitted the signatures to be testified by the handwriting expert who gave the same opinion. The trial court relying upon the opinion of the handwriting expert came to the conclusion that the appellants had not been duly served hence allowed the application and set aside the ex parte decree. Against that the respondent preferred a revision in the High Court.
3. The High Court set aside the findings of the trial court and held that the appellants have been served. This decision of the High Court is challenged before us.
4.  Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we find that on the question whether there was service on the appellants or not, the High Court fell into error. When the trial court after taking into consideration the evidence on the record including the opinion of the handwriting expert came to the conclusion that there was no service and allowed the application, then the High Court could only under its revisional power have interfered if the trial court committed any jurisdictional error, or its decision would have resulted in any manifest injustice.
5. The trial court not having committed any such error the High Court should not have interfered with the finding recorded by it. On the other hand the High Court entered into weighing the evidence and recording that the trial court should not have found no service, only because the handwriting expert says so.Hence, the High Court should not have interfered with the finding of fact recorded by the trial court.
6.  Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed and the impugned order dated 3-11-1998 of the High Court is set aside and that of the trial court restored. The appeal is remanded back to the trial court to proceed with the suit expeditiously as the matter is old.
Order accordingly.
