Renuka Anantrai Vora and others v Kirtikumar Fulchand Vora and another
Supreme Court of India

19 April 2000
C.A. No. 1525 of 1986 with IA No. 5 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. IA No. 4 for substituting legal representative for deceased Respondent 2 is allowed.
2. This appeal is taken up along with IA No. 5. All the parties to this appeal have agreed to settle their dispute by referring the same for arbitration. In pursuance of this agreement, the proposed term of reference is also filed before us today in substitution of the earlier consent terms. The parties have agreed for Hon'ble Mr Justice (retd.) S.P. Kurdukar be appointed as the sole arbitrator.
3. It seems that the parties have earlier approached Hon'ble Mr Justice S.P. Kurdukar for his consent. But there seems small reservation so far as Hon'ble Mr Justice S.P. Kurdukar is concerned which is revealed through his letter dated 
24-2-2000 which is annexed as Annexure A-2 to the application IA No. 5. The relevant portion is quoted hereunder:
"However, Mr V.N. Ganpule told me that notwithstanding the fact that I was a Member of the Bench which passed the order dated 22-8- 1997, all the parties still unanimously agree and confirm that they have "no objection' whatsoever to appoint me as an arbitrator and they will not raise any objection whatsoever in this regard at any stage of the proceedings. I am writing these few lines with a view to make my position very clear.
I also wish that these facts may be brought to the notice of the Hon'ble Supreme Court to avoid any embarrassment. The Hon'ble Court may be requested to note these facts in its order."
4. The parties have reiterated even before us that they have no objection notwithstanding the said facts.
Accordingly, we appoint Mr Justice (retd.) S.P. Kurdukar as the sole arbitrator to adjudicate all list of disputes, which the parties have jointly filed today. The arbitrator will preferably complete the arbitration proceedings within a period of six months from the date the parties communicate the present order before him. The draft minutes and the list of disputes jointly fded today will be the part of this order.
5. In terms of this, the present Civil Appeal No. 1525 of 1986 along with IA No. 5 is disposed of. In view of this IAs Nos. 2 and 3 have become infructuous and are dismissed as such. Costs on the parties.
Draft minutes and list of disputes
"1. The parties hereto agree to submit the list of disputes mentioned hereunder to the sole Arbitrator Shri Justice (retd.) S.P. Kurdukar, the retired Judge of the Supreme Court under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
2. The arbitration proceedings to be held in Mumbai.
3. The costs, expenses and fees of the arbitrator shall be borne and paid by each party in equal proportion.
4. Each party is entitled to appoint her/his advocate and shall bear his/her advocate's fee separately.
5. The award be declared within six months of reference made to the arbitrator with order as to costs. However the time be extended by mutual consent."
LIST OF DISPUTES:
"1. What are the properties left by the deceased Fulchand Vora at the time of his death i.e. July 29, 1979.
2. To determine all the issues involved in Suit No. 103 of 1998 pending in the Bombay High Court as well as in all other proceedings pending between Kantilal Fulchand Vora and parties hereto, including Suit No. 240 of 1998 in respect of the alleged properties of deceased Fulchand Vora pending in the Court of Civil Judge at Bhavnagar, filed by Kantilal against the parties hereto and others.
3. Whether Kantilal Fulchand's claim, if any, in the properties is tenable and within time; and if so, to what extent is its value and how and in what manner the said properties be divided and/or its value be made and how the same be distributed amongst the heirs of the deceased.
4. Who, in terms of the Supreme Court's order dated 9-2-2000, is entitled to the property of the deceased Respondent 2 Jaskorben Fulchand Vora."
Appeal disposed of.
