Harish Kumar v State of Haryana and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 November 2000
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.11982/1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Leave granted in both the Special Leave Petitions.
1. 
Both the appellants claim that the selection made in pursuance to the advertisement dated 30.11.1996 on the ten posts of Additional Ahlmads by the District and Sessions Judge, as per their merit list, they ought to have been selected.
2.  Initially some of the petitioners challenged the very selection on various grounds through a writ petition. High Court held appointment of respondent Nos.3 to 12 in the writ petition 12360 of 1997 except respondent Nos.6 and 12 was validly made and other appointments, viz. from respondent Nos.13 to 23 being 2 in excess to the posts advertised not validly made.  Hence their appointments falling under this was quashed. Being aggrieved by this order of the High Court, the appellants have preferred these aforesaid appeals. For the purpose of disposal of these two appeals, we are not entering into the merits for the reasons which are recorded hereunder.
3.  When the matter was taken up earlier on 3.11.2000 we passed the following order:
"Learned counsel appearing for District Judge states that confusion has arisen on account of there being three Rakesh Kumar. He would like to file a short affidavit specially to clarify this and with reference to the claim of Harish Kumar. Both are petitioners, one is in SLP(c) No.16875/98 and another in SLP(c) 11982/98. He may file the same within one week. List all these matters on 17th November, 2000."
4.  There seems to be some dispute regarding Rakesh Kumar 3 as there are three Rakesh Kumar in the list prepared of the candidates who have secured 10 or above marks in the objective type test conducted for the recruitment to the posts of Additional Ahlmad.
In pursuance to this order dated 3.11.2000, an affidavit has been filed by the District & Sessions Judge. The fact which emerges from it, is that the appellant-Harish Kumar is found to be at serial No.2 while the appellant-Rakesh Kumar is at serial No.7.
5. In pursuance to the said affidavit, they are within the qualified list for appointment. Without entering into other questions which may be involved in the appeals, in view of the said affidavit we direct that so far as these appellants, if they have yet been not appointed, they are entitled to be appointed from the due date when they ought to have been appointed i.e. when others were appointed.
with the aforesaid direction, we allowe these two appeals with no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
