Mirza Wajahad Baig and Others v Sharanappa and Others
Supreme Court of India

7 April 2000
C.As. Nos. 2488-89 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
1.  We have heard learned counsel for the appellants as well as learned counsel for the sole contesting respondent being Respondent 1. Respondents 2 and 3 are formal parties. Respondent 4 is also a formal party.
2.  The short question is whether the High Court was justified in interfering in second appeal when Respondent 4 3 in these appeals was not served and also without keeping in view the limited jurisdiction under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. A mere look at the impugned decision brings out these vital defects in the judgments under appeal.
3. It is also necessary to note that the said appellant applied for getting the order recalled on the ground that he was not served in those proceedings. Even that application was dismissed. There is no dispute between the parties that Appellant 3 was tried to be served at his Hyderabad address when he was residing at Gulbarga.
4.  For all these reasons, therefore, we deem it fit to allow these appeals, set aside the impugned order of the High Court in Second Appeal No. 1155 of 1992 as well as the rejection of the application for recall of the order in second appeal and restore Second Appeal No. 1155 of 1992 on the file of the High Court with a request to redecide the same after hearing the parties concerned and in accordance with law and keeping in view the limited jurisdiction under Section 100 CPC.
5.  As the second appeal will be of 1992 we request the High Court to decide the remanded proceedings expeditiously and preferably within a period of three months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
6.  A copy of this order shall be sent by the Registrar of this Court to the Registrar of the High Court for placing it before Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the High Court for information and necessary action.
7.  Learned counsel for the appellants undertakes to appear before the High Court in the remanded proceedings. We direct them to file appearance in the remanded appeal within four weeks from today.
8.  We make it clear that we do not make any observations on the merits of the controversy between the parties.
The civil appeals are allowed accordingly. No costs.
Appeals allowed.
