Joginder Singh Arneja v National Co-Operative Consumers Federation of
Supreme Court of India

16 March 2000
I.A. No. 1 in C.A. No. 2315/1995, Dt. 16 March 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is interlocutory application for clarification of an order and judgment passed by this Court on January 9, 1995 in Civil Appeal No. 2315/1995.
2.  Against the termination of service, the appellant filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Delhi, which was dismissed. The appellant thereafter preferred the present appeal. When the matter came up for hearing, this Court was of the opinion that in view of special facts and circumstances, the appellant may be paid a lumpsum amount of Rs. 3,50,000. Relevant portion of the order is extracted below.
"We direct the Federation to pay a sum of Rs. 3,50,000 to the appellant in full and final settlement of all his claims against the Federation. Mr. Singh states that the amount shall be paid to the appellant within six months from today. In case the amount is not paid within the period of six months, it shall carry an interest of 12% per annum thereafter.
We make it clear that this order shall not be a precedent for any other case as we have passed the same keeping in view the special facts and circumstances of this case. The amount of Rs. 3,50,000 shall be spread over the period of service for the purposes of payment of income tax. We also make it clear that in addition to the sum of Rs. 3,50,000 the appellant shall be entitled to any other dues which are admissible to him under the Rules of the Federation."
3.  In pursuance to the said order, a sum of Rs. 3,50,000 was paid to the appellant by the respondent. However, the appellant interpreted the order as if the order of termination has been set aside and he has been reinstated in service. With this view in mind the appellant took proceeding for recovery of provident fund, gratuity and other retiral benefits.
It is in this context, the respondent has filed this application for clarification that since order of termination of service remained untouched, the appellant is not entitled to any benefits as claimed by him.When the matter came up today, there has been a settlement between the appellant and the respondent as a result of which the respondent shall further pay a sum of Rs. 36, 000 to the appellant within one month from today. The Appellant shall withdraw all proceedings relating to provident fund, gratuity and other retiral benefits. The appellant hereinafter shall not claim or entitlement to aforesaid benefits.
4.  The interlocutory application stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms. This order was passed in the presence and concurrence of the appellant, who was identified by his counsel.
Applications disposed of.
