Ajanta Pharma Limited, Mumbai v Amarjit Singh Bhatty and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 December 2000
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.19004/1999
The order of the court was as follows:
1. The subject matter of these proceedings consists of three rooms over which the petitioner claims right pursuant to a sale conducted under the order of the court. In another suit instituted in 1995 an order was passed on 7.5.1997 for appointment of a receiver and that appointment covered the subject matter of the present proceedings also. Aggrieved by the order dated 7.5.1997 the petitioner, who was not a party in the 1995 suit, moved a motion of notice u/s. 151 of the Civil Procedure Code. It was dismissed by a learned Single Judge Nijjar, J. holding that the remedy available to the petitioner was to file an appeal after obtaining leave.
2. Instead of availing himself of that remedy the petitioner has chosen to challenge the order passed by the learned Single Judge in a Letters Patent Appeal (L.P.A.) before a Division Bench. The impugned order had been passed by the Division Bench, which reads thus:
"We have perused the record and heard learned counsel for the parties. The order dated 22nd July 1997 passed by one of us Kapadia, J. in Suit No. 794 of 1995 also prima facie suggests that three rooms of the property stood excluded. Be that as it may, the appropriate remedy for the Appellants is to file a suit, if so permissible in law. The points sought to be urged in the Notice of Motion were rightly not entertained by the learned Single Judge. There is no substance in the Appeal. The Appeal is accordingly dismissed."
The observations of the Division Bench that the appropriate remedy for the petitioner is to file a suit, if so permissible in law, cannot be concurred by us now, for, the learned Single Judge suggested that the course open to the petitioner is one of appeal directly challenging the order dated 7.5.1997. That apart, even the respondent has not challenged the order passed by S.S. Nijjar, J. dated 7.5.1999 against which the L.P.A. was preferred by the petitioner.When we suggested to Mr. R.F. Nariman, learned senior counsel who argued for the petitioner as to what prevented the petitioner from availing himself of the remedy of appeal as indicated by the learned Single Judge in the order dated 7.5.1999, it was submitted that the petitioner was pursuing his remedy u/s. 151 CPC. notwithstanding the fact that ..3/- :3: other remedy of appeal was available to him. He submitted if an appeal is preferred at this distance of time there is likelihood of that appeal being further delayed and that will result in the consequence of the order dated 7.5.1997 to remain in force which petitioner terms to be the result of fraud perpetrated by parties of 1995 suit.
4. Learned counsel for the respondent fairly conceded that if any appeal is filed by the petitioner against order dated  7.5.1997 after obtaining leave from the court respondent will not challenge that appeal on the ground of its maintainability or on the ground that same is barred by limitation. This is recorded. If any such appeal is to be filed petitioner may have to file application u/s. 5 of the Limitation Act showing the present proceedings as the cause for explaining the delay. As the said fact is the reality and that would not be objected by the respondent, the High Court will hear the appeal and dispose it of on merits as expeditiously as possible.
With these observations Special Leave Petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.
