Doddaiah v T. N. Siddalingappa (Dead) By Lrs. and another
Supreme Court of India

28 September 2000
C.A. No. 5559 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant applied for occupancy right in respect of certain land and the application was filed before the Land Tribunal concerned within the prescribed time. When the appellant discovered some mistake in accordance with the description of the land he applied for and got those mistakes corrected. The Land Tribunal granted the occupancy right prayed for, but the appellate authority reversed the decision and dismissed the claim made by the appellant. A revision was filed before the High Court against the order of the appellate authority. Now, that revision stands dismissed by the impugned order rendered by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka.
2.  The only ground which the learned Single Judge appears to have considered is regarding the power of the Tribunal to grant amendment of the application. The view of the learned Single Judge was that the Tribunal had no such power.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant invited our attention to Section 48-A(3) of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act. It reads thus:
"48-A. (3) The form of the application, the form of the notices, the manner of publishing or serving the notices and all other matters connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed. The Tribunal may for valid and sufficient reasons permit the tenant to amend the application."
4.  What is incorporated in parenthesis would clearly spell out that the Tribunal has the power to allow amendment of the application. Apparently the High Court has overlooked the said limb of the sub-section. Hence the conclusion reached by the High Court is unsupportable.
5.  We have noticed that the High Court has not adverted to any other contentions or grounds raised by the appellant in the revision petition. As the revision was dismissed only on the abovesaid ground we deem it necessary that the High Court must dispose of the revision petition afresh on merits. The application should be treated as it was amended subsequently.
6. We, therefore, set aside the impugned order of the High Court and remit the revision back to the High Court for disposal afresh in accordance with law.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
