Maharashtra General Kamgar Union v Solid Containers Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

30 March 2000
C.A.J. C.A. No. 1824 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The commencement of the present Industrial dispute being the subject-matter of this appeal by the grant of special leave relates back to the year 1985 and fifteen (15) long years have passed without however, conferment of any benefit to any of the parties.
2. Fortunately, however, during the course of hearing the well-merited gesture of Mr.G.B.Pai, the learned Senior Advocate for the respondent has let to a happy end to the controversy in the matter. The Appeal thus is being dispose of by consent of the parties in the manner following:
"A. By consent of the parties, the impugned order dated 23.6.1995 of the High Court passed on L.P.A. No. 12 of 1991 in Writ Petition No. 252 of 1990 as well as the orders passed by the Courts below i.e. by the Industrial Court and by the learned Single Judge of the High Court in W.P. No. 252 of 1990 are set aside.
B. The proceedings are closed subject to the following directions by consent of the parties:
I. Learned Senior Counsel for the respondent-Management has produced before us a list of 24 employees who, according to the respondent-Management will be entitled to get monetary benefit towards full and final satisfaction of their claims in the present proceedings.
II. We are informed by learned counsel for the appellant that in addition to 24 listed employees there may be three more. If that is so, the said monetary benefits will also be made available to the three employees along with the 24 listed employees who will be paid towards full and final satisfaction of their claims in the present proceedings a sum of Rs. 1 lac each by the respondent-Management on due verification and identification by the respective unions before the representative of the Management within eight weeks from today.
III. The amount of Rs. 1 lac payable to each of the 24 listed employees along with the three more employees on due identification shall be paid by way of Bank drafts drawn in favour of each of them"
No costs.
Apppeal disposed of.
