Om Prakash Chugh v State of Haryana and Others
Supreme Court of India

1 February 2000
Cr.A. Nos. 110-111 of 2000 with Special Leave Petn. (Cri.) No ....... of 2000 (arising out of S.L.P. (Cri.) Nos. 1696-1697 of 1999 with @ Cri. M.P. No. 6739 of 1998), Dt. 1 February 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  An incident happened on 2nd July, 1997 about which there appears to be two rival versions. One version had come in the form of F.I.R. No. 452 of 1997, Police Station-City Sonepat (Haryana). We are told that investigation in that case is continuing. The appellant is the father of one Vinod who died in the incident which happened on 2-7-1997. The appellant filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sonepat on 10-7-1997 alleging that his son was shot dead by the persons shown as accused therein. After narrating his own version of the incident appellant made a prayer at the final end that action under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as 'the Code') may be resorted to. Additionally, he prayed that investigation may be entrusted to the Central Bureau of Investigation (C.B.I.) or any other investigating agency which is totally independent of the local police. An order was passed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate on 18-3-1998 directing the C.B.I. to conduct investigation into allegations set out in the said complaint.
2.  In the meanwhile appellant filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh for issuing necessary directions to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and also for directing the C.B.I. to take up investigation in the cases involving F.I.R. No. 452 of 1997 and also the complaint which he filed before the C.B.I. The High Court disposed of the said original petition by order dated 3-4-1998 upholding that there is no necessity of entrusting the investigation to the C.B.I. or any other agency.
3.  Thereafter a Revision was filed before the Sessions Court, Sonepat in challenge of the order passed by the Magistrate dated 18-3-1998. The Sessions Judge disposed of Revision by setting aside the above-mentioned order of the Chief Judicial Magistrate. These appeals are in challenge of the judgment of the High Court mentioned above and the order passed by the Sessions Court dated 2-5-1998.
4.  As we were considering the sustainability of the plea that a Magistrate while forwarding a complaint under Section 156(3) of the Code can direct the investigation to be taken up by any agency other than the police station to which complaint was to be forwarded, learned senior counsel Mr. Sushil Kumar arguing for the appellant submitted that appellant is not presently pressing for the prayer that investigation should be ordered by the Magistrate to be taken up by the C.B.I. or other agency. This is recorded. Hence, we are not considering that legal aspect in these appeals.
5.  The complaint filed by the appellant before the Magistrate should necessarily be forwarded to the Officer-in-charge of the police station concerned as provided in Section 156 of the Code. Such officer has to register an F.I.R. on the allegations contained in the complaint. If there is an aggrieved person on account of the investigation so carried on by the local police he can approach either the State Government or the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for appropriate orders in the matter.
6. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi, learned senior counsel arguing for the State of Haryana submitted that if the appellant entertains any genuine grievance that fair and proper investigation would not be conducted by the local police he can approach the Government and then Government will pass appropriate orders after taking into account all the relevant factors. This submission is also recorded.
7.  The above are not enough to dispose of these appeals. We have come across from the judgment of the learned single Judge of the High Court that remarks have been made on the averments contained in the complaint as well as the case involved in F.I.R. No. 452 of 1997.
8. We are of the considered view that the High Court should not have made such comments on the averments contained in the complaint as the same remains only in the embryo stage because the complaint has not yet been forwarded by the Magistrate to the police as contemplated in Section 156(3) of the Code. Even that apart, any finding on the merits of the case at a stage when investigation is pending would cause prejudice to the investigating agency as well as the accused concerned. Those observations and remarks made by the learned single Judge in the impugned judgment are not warranted, particularly since the stage was too premature. We make it clear that we have not gone into the allegations made in the complaint or the materials collected by the investigating agency in respect of F.I.R. No. 452 of 1997. We refrain from expressing any opinion at this stage as the investigation into them must be held in the fairest manner possible. We, therefore, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court.
9.  In view of the aforesaid directions Shri Sushil Kumar, learned senior counsel submitted that SLP (Crl.) ........ /2000 (@ CC (Crl.) 6739) may be permitted to be withdrawn. That SLP is accordingly dismissed as withdrawn.
Appeals are accordingly disposed of.
Appeals disposed of.
