M.D., M.P.S.Seed Certifi.Agency and Anr v Dharmeshwar Jhade and Others
Supreme Court of India

28 November 2000
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.15311/1999
The Order of the court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The appeals have been preferred against the judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur dated 6.7.99 passed in LPA.No.146/1997 allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 28.4.97. The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition filed by the writ petitioner who is the first respondent in the appeals. The impugned order is dated 2.8.86 in which three persons were appointed as Seed Certification Inspectors (Junior Grade) in the pay scale of Rs.900-1450/- w.e.f. 1.8.96.
2.  The order shows that they were appointed temporarily in the Agency in regular pay scale. Three names were found in the said order and the name of writ petitioner (1st :2: respondent in the appeal) stand at Serial No.3. The first name is that of Mr.O.P. Sharma who is the appellant before us in the connected civil appeal arising out of SLP(C)No.16675/99. The second name is that of Mr. M.S. Rajput. The grievancae of the writ petitioner in the writ petition was that though he was appointed on 1.7.84 and Mr.O.P. Sharma was appointed on 5.10.84 and M.S. Rajpur on 5.6.85 but that the writ petitioner was shown at Sl.No.3 rather than at Sl.No.1.
3.  We do not propose to go into the order of learned Single Judge or by the Division Bench of the High Court inasmuch as it appears to us that the case will have to be decided on the basis of the result of the D.P.C.conducted on 13.1.86 and the method by which the D.P.C. evaluated the merits of the candidates.
The said proceedings show that at the time of regularisation in 1986 the process of evaluation of merit took place and marks were given for the experience during the period he worked as trainee, for qualification, for written test and for interview. The writ petitioner (first respondent)secured 59.50 marks. Mr. M.S. Rajput secured 59.75 marks and Mr.O.P. Sharma secured 74% marks each of which are the total of the various marks :3: awarded under the abovesaid different parameters. The Selection Committee mentioned that it was their unanimous opinion that the ranking of the candidate should be that O.P. Sharma will stand at Serial No.1, M.S. Rajput at Serial No. 2 and Mr. D.S. Jhade will stand at Serial No.3.
4.  A contention has been raised before us that the appellant must be treated to have been appointed on 1.7.84 earlier than the appoinment of other two persons mentioned above. We find from the record that the initial appointment was on consolidated salary paid from the contingency fund.
5.  At the time of initial appointment the writ petitioner entered into an agreement that he was put on training and at the end of the training period if "selected" he would be put on a scale of pay. In the light of the above facts, it is obvious that the initial appointment was not in the nature of the temporary appointment and there is no question of regularisation of services from that date.
6.  The initial appointment was only as trainee and the salary was paid only as lumpsum from the contingency fund and it was subject to the reqular selection at the end of the training period. The record before us :4: therefore shows that a D.P.C. was conducted for the purpose of regular selection and the length of experience as a trainee was also one of the parameters which was considered and marks were awarded.In the circumstances, the basis of the writ petition namely that the appellant was senior to the other two persons falls to the ground in view of the record produced before us. The appeals are allowed.
7.  The judggment of the Division Bench of the High Court is set aside and the writ petition stands dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.
