Prasad Dattatraya Prabhune v Suresh Narottamdas Parmar and Another
Supreme Court of India

15 September 2000
C.A. No. 5060 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The notice on the special leave petition stated that the matter might be disposed of at this stage by an order setting aside the order under challenge and restoring the revision application to the High Court to be heard and disposed of afresh.
2.  The respondents were the plaintiffs in a suit before the Civil Judge, Senior Division, Pune. The appellant filed an application for framing of additional issues in the suit. The learned Civil Judge, Senior Division, rejected the application. There against, the appellant filed a civil revision application in the High Court.
3. It appears that the matter was heard on 26-10-1999, when counsel on behalf of the appellant stated that no reply had been filed by the other side to the application for framing additional issues. On that basis, the learned Single Judge hearing the civil revision application ordered notice to issue. On the next day, counsel for the appellant went to the learned Single Judge and stated that he was in error and that a short reply had been filed by the other side to the application for framing additional issues. The learned Single Judge, thereupon, recalled the order of notice; he then stated that he found no question of jurisdiction involved and rejected the civil revision application.
4.  We are of the view, in the circumstances, that the interests of justice require the civil revision application to be heard and disposed of on merits.
5.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the order under challenge is set aside insofar as it rejects the civil revision application. The civil revision application (No. 1257 of 1999) is restored to the file of the High Court to be heard and disposed of on merits. This shall be done expeditiously. The parties shall have liberty to apply to the High Court for a fixed date of hearing.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
