Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and others v Anil Kumar Singh and others
Supreme Court of India

6 December 2000
C.As. No. 11785 of 1996 with No. 11786 of 1996 and S.L.P. (C) No. 5184 of 1997
The order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The employer Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is in appeal against the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Writ Petition No. 782 of 1995 which was upheld in appeal by the Division Bench. The respondents had been appointed on contractual basis and just before the expiry of the contractual period, they approached the High Court with the prayer that their services should not be terminated until the posts are filled up by a process of regular recruitment. The learned Single Judge by his order dated 6-4-1995 disposed of the writ petition following an earlier judgment of the said Court in S.P. Upadhyay case directing that the writ petitioners should be allowed to continue till the posts are filled up by process of regular recruitment, and those petitioners should be allowed to compete with other candidates if they apply for selection and if they are otherwise not disqualified. The High Court also took additional care by indicating that the writ petitioners cannot claim any additional advantage by virtue of their experience by working for the contractual period.
2.  In the aforesaid premises, we do not find any infirmity with the said judgment of the High Court to be interfered with by this Court. The expression "if they are otherwise not disqualified" would obviously mean they must have the necessary qualifications, as required, under the relevant rules for being appointed as a teacher and then they have to compete along with others for adjudication of their merit for being appointed. The apprehension of the employer that the impugned judgment directs condonation of the age is wholly unfounded.
3.  In the aforesaid premises, we do not find any justification for interference with the direction given by the High Court. Civil appeals are accordingly dismissed.
4.  Since the appeals stand disposed of, the results of the selection already made may be published.
IAs Nos. 3-4
5.  These are two applications for intervention by 7 teachers, who had filed writ petitions before the High Court and the High Court had given similar direction as the one which the Commissioner, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan assailed in this Court which was the subject-matter in CA No. 11785 of 1996. Because of an interim direction of this Court dated 2-9-1996 staying the operation of the order by the High Court, it appears that after the period of contract was over there has been no continuance of these intervenors. The intervenors had filed the applications for being impleaded as intervenors and to have the benefit of the judgment of this Court in CA No. 11785 of 1996 which we have disposed of today.
6. Since they are similarly situated as the respondents in the aforesaid civil appeal, the applications for intervention stand allowed. We further direct that our judgment in CA No. 11785 of 1996 would govern the case of these intervenors.
SLP (C) No. 5184 of 1997
Delay condoned.
7.  This is a special leave petition by Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan. Special leave petition stands disposed of in terms of the judgment in CA No. 11785 of 1996.
Appeals dismissed.
