Gautam Nagar Residents Association v Karmika and Others
Supreme Court of India

22 November 2000
C.As. Nos. 5050-51 of 1997 With No. 5052 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:-
Civil Appeals Nos. 5050-51 of 1997
1. The Residents Association is in appeal against an interlocutory order of grant of injunction. This Court however upon consideration of the facts on 21-7-1997 was pleased to grant leave and pass an interim order of maintenance of status quo with a further specific order restraining the respondents from making any construction therein. The land in question, according to Mr. Venugopal, the learned Senior Counsel appearing in support of the appeals  is a "children's playground" and has been described in the municipal record as a "park". The respondents herein however described the same as a part of the park and not a park itself and contended though as a matter of fact, it was shown in the master plan as a shopping centre for the locality. Be that as it may, we do not think it appropriate to go into the issue at this stage, more so, when two suits are pending between parties before the learned Senior Sub-Judge, Delhi.
2. In the normal course of events, this Court would not have entertained the appeal by reason of the same being against an interlocutory order but having regard to the importance of the issue, more so, an effort of having construction within an open and encircled area, this Court has passed the order of status quo and admitted the appeals.
3. Without however dilating on the merits of the matter in view of the pendency of the suits, we deem it fit and expedient to dispose of the appeals with a direction to the learned trial Judge to dispose of the matters within a period of nine months from the date of the communication of this order. In the event one of the suits is pending before the learned Additional District Judge, the learned Additional District Judge will do well in clubbing up the suits pending before another Judicial Officer and dispose of the same upon such clubbing within the time-frame as mentioned above.
4. Let it be recorded that we have not gone into any of the issues and it would be open to the court to deal with the matter as it may deem fit and proper in accordance with law. The parties are, however, directed to render all possible assistance and cooperation in the matter of the expeditious disposal of the suits in terms of this order. The learned Judge is also directed not to grant adjournment of the matter unless the same is of indispensable necessity.
5. Interim order passed by this Court shall remain in operation till the disposal of both the suits. The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
CA No. 5052 of 1997
6. In view of the order passed in Civil Appeals Nos. 5050-51 of 1997, no separate order is necessary. This appeal is also disposed of on the same terms.
Appeals disposed of.
