C.V. Ranga Venkatesh v Union of India and Another
Supreme Court of India

23 March 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.4090/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard Mr. S.Nanda Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Altaf Ahmad, learned Additional Solicitor General for the respondent. Learned Additional Solicitor General draws our attention to the averments in paragraph 4 of the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent No.2. The said paragraph reads as follows:
"I say that the issue regarding raising of income limit for dependency from the existing Rs. 500/- per month to Rs. 1500/- per month as given in para 114.15 of the report containing the recommendation of the Fifth Central Pay Commission was examined in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the same was referred for obtaining approval of the Department of Expenditure, Implementation Cell, through the Integrated Finance Division. As the decision regarding enhancement of dependency limit under C.G.H.S. has not been taken so far by the Implementation Cell, Department of Expenditure, the Income limit for dependency under C.G.H.S. continues to be Rs.500/- per month as on date."
2.  Shri Altaf Ahmad submits that the matter is pending with the Department of Expenditure and a decision is expected to be taken shortly. He further submits that if the financial limit for the purpose of determination of dependency under the C.G.H.S. Rules is enhanced and the parents of the petitioner are accepted as his dependents then it will be possible to extend the facilities under the C.G.H.S. Scheme to them at Calcutta.
3.  Considering the submissions made by the learned Additional Solicitor General, as noted earlier, we dispose of the special leave petition by passing the order that in case the prescribed income limit for the purpose of dependency under the C.G.H.S. Rule is enhanced, the request of the petitioner for extending the benefit of C.G.H.S. scheme to his parents at Calcutta will be considered by the competent authority and appropriate order passed expeditiously.The SLP is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.
