North East Finance Corporation Ltd. and Anr v U.O.I. and Others
Supreme Court of India

10 April 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.14808/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
This Court on 9th January, 2001 passed the following Order:
"........learned counsel for the petitioner states, which is also incorporated in I.A. No.10, he wants to be discharged as in spite of letters written by him to the petitioner, he is not responding learned counsel for the parties states that this matter is being adjourned time and again which is affecting many of the depositors as no relief is being given in view of the pendency of this matter in this Court. However, in view of the said application, we direct the Registrar to issue fresh notice to the petitioner stating his counsel has withdrawn from the case hence he may, if he is so advised, engage another counsel. The Registry shall give next date of hearing after six weeks from today. The notice shall also state that in case after service of notice he does not choose to appear or through counsel, the Court will proceed to examine his petition and decide the matter."
1.  As learned counsel for the petitioner Mr.Parijat Sinha was not getting response we ordered the Registry to sent notices to the petitioner. As per office report dated 12th March, 2001, the unserved registered covers containing notices from both the petitioners have been received back with the postal remarks `no such firm is existed at present', `not known' respectively. Notice was also issued to District and Sessions Judge which has also been received back unserved with the postal remark `no such company or corporation in the name and style in Tibet Road Area nor there is any such person named-Ashok Dey carrying on business at Tibet Road, Gangtok.
2.  The matter was taken up today again. There is none to press this petition. In view of the aforesaid fact the Special Leave Petition is dismissed for non prosecution. Costs on the parties.On the basis of oral prayer made by the learned counsel for the applicant in I.As. Nos.5, 11 and 12 in this SLP we order it may be treated to be in the writ petition Nos.577, 578 and 579/2000.
3. W.P.(C) Nos. 577, 578 and 579/2000 Issue notice returnable within six weeks.
4.  T.C.(C) Nos. 28, 32 and 33/2000 List these Transferred Cases after service is complete along with other T.Ps. W.P.(C) No. 119/2000 may also be listed when these petitions are listed next. The service may be completed within the aforesaid period, in case service in these petitions is incomplete. No one is present to press this petition on behalf of the Union of India list this matter when these connected matters are listed next. List after summer vacation.
Order accordingly.
