Aps Star Industries Ltd v Commissioner Of Customs, Mumbai
Supreme Court of India

9 August 2001
C.A. No. 2142 of 1999 with C.A. No. 3542 of 2000, Dt. 9 August 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The only question involved in these cases relates to the applicability of the Exemption Notification 26/88 which, according to the appellant, is applicable in regard to the imports made by it.
2.  The appellant had imported two NOMOCO Centreless Grinding Machines from West Germany and had sought clearance of the goods as grinding machines and claimed benefit of the said notification. According to the appellant, the description of the goods fell under Item No. 2 of the said Notification No. 26/88 which item reads as follows:
"Outer diameter centreless grinder for spherical or cylindrical or taper or needle or rollers and/or bearing races."
3.  The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the decision of the Assistant Collector given after examining the relevant drawings to the effect that the machines in question did not fall in that category under Notification No. 26/88 is correct and observed that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of the said notification. Hence, these appeals.
4.  This Court inAditya Mills Ltd.v.Union of India, 1988 Indlaw SC 8911988 Indlaw SC 891 and in Collector of Customs, Bombay v.Swastic Woollens (P) Ltd. and Others, 1988 Indlaw SC 1611988 Indlaw SC 161, has held that an appeal provided under Section 130E of the Customs Act is essentially to enable this Court to oversee that the subordinate Tribunals act within the law. If the Tribunal and the authorities subordinate to it have considered all relevant factors and then come to abona fideconclusion and pass a speaking order with regard to the nature of the goods imported and the entry under which the same fall, then it would not be within the jurisdiction of this Court to upset that finding of fact.
5.  In the present case, the machines imported were examined and the finding of fact arrived at by the customs authorities and accepted by the Tribunal was that the machines in question were not entitled to the benefit of the Exemption Notification No. 26/88 as they did not answer the description contained in item No. 2 therein.
6. We are not satisfied that any principles of natural justice were in any way violated or that the authorities concerned did not act bona fide.
7.  For the aforesaid reasons, these appeals are dismissed. No order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
