State of Orissa and others v Surya Rana
Supreme Court of India

18 April 2001
Civil Appeal No. 1926 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. These two appeals by the State of Orissa raise a common question. Though they are disposed of by separate judgments the reasoning of the two is the same. We shall now refer to the facts giving rise to these appeals.
2. Under the Orissa Land Ceiling Act one Sadasiba Naik of village Lipinda was declared to possess surplus land. The Orissa Land Reforms (General) Rules, 1965 (for short the 'Rules'), inter alia, provided for settlement of the excess land. The relevant rule is Rule 38A claiming to be a landless poor. The husband of the respondent in Civil Appeal No.1926 of 1997 and the respondent in Civil Appeal No.1927 of 1997 applied some time in March, 1977 for allotment of land in their favour and under Rule 38A (2)(a) of the said Rules patta was granted in their favour and possession of the land was also delivered to them in 1986. It appears, these allotments give rise to cause for complaints to the villagers and objections were filed by the villagers in 1991 against the said grant. The Revenue Authority investigated into the matter and in exercise of the power under clause (b) of sub-rule 10 of Rule 38A, the Revenue Divisional Commissioner after making necessary enquiry cancelled the patta in favour of the said persons by order dated November 15, 1994. They challenged the said order of the Revenue Divisional Commissioner in Writ Petition No.OJC.No.5149 of 1995 and OJC No.5150 of 1995 respectively. The High Court took the view that cancellation of patta by the Revenue Divisional Commissioner after a long lapse of about 13 years would not be a proper exercise of power conferred upon him under the Rules.
3. He, therefore, quashed that order by the orders under challenge in these appeals.
4. Mr. Radhe Shyam Jena the learned counsel appearing for the appellants contends that the patta was obtained by the respondents by misrepresentation and playing fraud.
5. Therefore, the question of reasonable time would not apply to such a case so as to perpetuate the fraud played by the respondents. As the respondents though served are not represented by counsel, we requested Mr. Naik to represent them as an amicus. The learned amicus argued that the facts discloses that at least insofar as the case of Ghasiram Rana is concerned he was not in possession of any land on the date of grant of patta but came into possession of the land on the death of his father. Therefore patta ought not to have been cancelled in the case of said Ghasiram Rana.
6. The power exercised by the Commissioner under clause (bb) of sub-rule 10(a) of Rule 38A which reads as follows:
"(bb) The Revenue Divisional Commissioner may at any time revise the order of the settlement of lands passed by the Revenue Officer, Subdivisional Officer, Addl. District Magistrate or Collector, whether in exercise of original appellate or revisional jurisdiction under this rule."
7. The said clause confers power on the Revenue Divisional Commissioner to revise the order of the settlement of land passed by the Revenue Officer. No period of limitation is prescribed. There is nothing in the Act or the Rules prescribing the time limit for exercise of the power under the said clause. It is well settled by a catina of decisions of this Court that where the statutory power has been conferred and no time limit is fixed while exercising of that power, the power should be exercised in a reasonable time. What would be the reasonable time has to be determined on the facts of each case. But this is on the ground of the finality of the litigation that once a grant or an order has been made is allowed to rest without challenge for a long length of time. Public policy demands that the persons whould take the matter as settled. This principle of finality of litigation is based on public policy, but this principle would have no application to a case where the exercise of power is warranted on account of fraud played by a party and who seeks to derive benefit of his own fraud. It would also be against the public policy to allow a person to retain the ill gotten benefit as a resuslt of misrepresentation or fraud. In such a case, in our view, the principle of finality of litigation will have to yield. Basically, order obtained by fraud is a nullity. It has no legal sanctity and if that be so, it can be so declared where it comes to the light of the authorities.
8. In passing the order the Revenue Divisional Commissioner has merely followed the said principle. That this is so is found from the observations of this Court in S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu (dead) by Lrs. Vs. Jagannath (dead) by Lrs. & Ors. (1994 (1) SCC 1 1993 Indlaw SC 739) and State of Orissa & Ors. Vs. Brundaban Sharma & Anr. (1995 SUPPL. (3) SCC 249 1994 Indlaw SC 1304). The High Court though has noted the section but did not consider the same in the correct perspective. We are, therefore, unable to sustain the orders under appeal. They are accordingly set aside. The appeals are allowed. The order of the Commissioner is restored. Having regard to the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed
