Mohini Hemant Jadia v Hemant Ghanshyamlal Jadia and Others
Supreme Court of India

10 October 2001
Cr.A. No. 616 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant in this case is the wife of the first respondent, a Chartered Accountant. The matrimonial life of the appellant and the first respondent has been under rough weather for a few years and the parties are now engaged in civil litigation before a Family Court.
2. When the appellant filed a petition before the Family Court for a decree of restitution of conjugal rights under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, she also moved an interlocutory application for injuncting the husband from interfering with her right to stay in the matrimonial house.
3.  That interlocutory application was resisted by the first respondent for which, it appears, he has relied on a document styling it as "family arrangement". According to the appellant, the said document is the result of forgery. The appellant, therefore, filed a complaint before the Court of a Judicial Magistrate of First Class alleging offences under Sections 465, 466 and 467 of the Indian Penal Code.
4.  The Magistrate took cognizance of the said offences and issued process against the first respondent. On receipt of the said summons, the first respondent moved the Sessions Court in revision, but that revision was dismissed.
5. He then moved the High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the summons. A learned Single Judge of the High Court quashed the criminal proceedings as per the impugned judgment.
6.  We do not feel the necessity to go into the rival contentions regarding the forgery aspect of the document. We may point out that the Family Court, if called upon to decide the genuineness of the said document, may have to enter on findings either in favour of the first respondent or against him.
7.  The question of initiating criminal proceedings in respect of the said document would arise, if the Family Court reaches a finding that the said document is forged. Without prejudice to the right of any person aggrieved (if the Family Court enters upon a finding that the said document is forged) for initiating proceedings against the persons concerned. We dispose of this appeal.
Appeal disposed of.
