State of Uttar Pradesh and Others v L.I.C. and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 April 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.12874/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
1.  This Court on 30th October, 2000 passed the following order: `So far as the houses of the Life Insurance Corporation of India which have been requisitioned by the State of Uttar Pradesh is concerned, they have since been released in favour of the LIC. This position is admitted by counsel for both sides.
2.  However, it will be necessary to further monitor the construction of the quarters for the District Judge who was appointed in the new District. This Court has already passed several orders for acquiring land and for the sanctioning of the budget for the above said purpose. The latest position is clarified by an affidavit of the Registrar General of the High Court of Allahabad dated 18th October, 2000. The annexure to the Affidavit is a letter addressed by the District Judge, Auraiyya, to the Registrar General of the High Court of Allahabad.
3.  It is stated in the affidavit that part of the construction has come upto roof level.
4.  A further affidavit will be filed by the Registrar General of the High Court of Allahabad by the next date of hearing, mentioning the progress made in the case.
5.  We would think that this matter should be listed after 3 months only to monitor what is the work that is done. In pursuance of the same an Affidavit was filed by the Registrar General of the High Court of Allahabad which led to the passing of this Court's Order dated 5th February, 2001, which reads as follow:
6. As per office report, the Registrar General of Allahabad High Court has not submitted the report as required by this Court. Let a fresh intimation be sent to the Registrar General for complying with this Court's order by submitting the fresh affidavit in respect of the latest development on the land in question. List after six weeks. The requisite report may be submitted within four weeks.' Finally, now we have perused the Affidavit of the Registrar General dated 20th February, 2001.
7. According to the said affidavit, the construction of the residence of District Judge is complete by 85%. 95% construction is complete with reference to the Servant Quarters(two). 95% work is complete for Barrack and Overhead Tank. 80% work is complete with Earth Filing Work. 70% work is complete in respect of Tube well Work and 40% work is complete of Boundary Wall Work.
8.  According to this affidavit, it seems the construction as desired is almost complete. In view of this no further order is necessary by this Court. The present Special Leave Petition is disposed of in terms of the aforesaid orders and the order passed today.
Petition disposed of.
