K.K. Verma v State of Jammu and Kashmir and Others
Supreme Court of India

26 February 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.9292/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The father of the respondent No. 4 was granted lease in respect of plot Nos. 27A and 28A situated at Roulki, Bhakshi Nagar, Jammu on monthly rent of Rs.30/-.
2.  The lease provided that on a notice being given the lessee would vacate the premises. Subsequently, the State of Jammu determined the lease. On 16.5.1973 the Estate Officer proceeded against respondent No.4 for eviction under the J and K Public Premises (Eviction of Un-authorised Occupants) Act. The Estate Officer after hearing respondent No. 4 passed order of eviction stating that respondent No.4 is an authorised occupant.
3.  Subsequently the said order preferred by Respondent No.4 was set aside by learned District Judge. The Estate Officer again passed an order of eviction on 31.12.1981 stating that respondent was an unauthorised occupant.
4.  After passing the said order the State Government on 21st July, 1982 allotted the premises in favour of the appellant herein on payment of Rs.25, 000/- per kanal.
5.  Respondent no 4 thereafter filed an appeal before the District Judge challenging the order of eviction passed by the Estate Officer. The said appeal was dismissed by the learned District Judge. Thereafter respondent no.4 filed two writ petitions challenging the orders of the learned District Judge rejecting his appeal as well as the order of allotment passed in favour of the petitioner. The learned Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition. Respondent no.4 thereafter preferred two Letters Patent Appeals before the Division Bench of the High Court. The High Court did not interfere with the appeal preferred by respondent no.4, to the extent that it was directed against the order of eviction and have been found to be an unauthorised occupant.
6. So far as the other Letters Patent Appeal relating to allotment in favour of the appellant is concerned, the same was set aside and the matter was sent back to Revenue Secretary for consideration afresh. However, it is relevant to notice even if the appeal preferred by the respondent was dismissed at the Latter Patent Appeal stage, it was directed that the order of eviction be not executed till the matter is decided by the Revenue Secretary. Against this order the appellant is in appeal before us.
7.  We have heard learned counsel. On perusal of the record we find that the proceedings to the extent initiated against respondent no.4 under the Public Premises Act, has attained finality.
Once the Letter Patent Appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench, the appeal of respondent no.4 should not be considered till the matter is decided by the Revenue Secretary. The order passed by the High Court is erroneous to the extent it was not correct in directing respondent No.4 not to be dispossessed from the land in dispute till the matter of allotment is decided by the Revenue Secretary.
8. For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside that part of the order passed by the High Court to the extent directing Respondent No. 4 be not dispossessed from possession till the matter of allotment is decided by the Revenue Secretary .
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
