Leave granted.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant was arrested along with two other co-accused persons by the police of Police Station, Sadar Karnal, on 7-5-1999 at the check-post in front of police post. Ramba (Karnal), alleging that when a maruti car was checked, a dead body was in the back seat. The appellant was brought to police station and First Information Report No. 231/99 under Sections 302, 201, 34 and 120-B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 was registered. The Investigating Officer produced the appellant along with other two co-accused persons in the Court of ACJM, Karnal and requested for police remand, which was granted for five days on 8-5-1999. The appellant was brought to Delhi along with the co-accused on 12-5-1999. It is alleged that they pointed out the place of incident - House No. D-846, New Friends Colony, New Delhi; the Investigating Officer of police station, Sadar Karnal, approached Delhi Police with the letter of Superintendent of Police for registering another F.I.R. as the murder and criminal conspiracy are alleged to have occurred within the jurisdiction of Police Station, New Friends Colony, New Delhi.
2. Accordingly F.I.R. No. 479/99 was registered in Police Station, New Friends Colony, New Delhi. Since 90 days were over and charge-sheet had not been filed, a petition was filed under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. in the Court of ACJM, Karnal, for releasing on bail. He was ordered to be released on bail on 6-8-1999. On 7-8-1999, instead of releasing the appellant and other co-accused from Karnal Jail, they were handed over to Delhi Police. The appellant was produced before the learned Magistrate, New Delhi. He was remanded along with other two co-accused persons to judicial custody in Tihar Jail. A petition filed for grant of bail under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. by the appellant was rejected by the learned Magistrate, New Delhi on 1-9-1999. Further, the bail application filed by the appellant in the Court of Addl. Sessions Judge, New Delhi, under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. was also rejected.
3.  Thereafter, the appellant filed Criminal Misc. (Main) No. 3296/99 under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. for grant of bail before the High Court. The same also was dismissed. Hence, this appeal. The learned senior counsel for the appellant urged that two F.I.Rs. cannot be registered in respect of the same offences, one at Karnal and another at New Delhi; when the appellant was granted statutory bail under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. by the learned ACJM, Karnal and when he was about to be released, purposely one more F.I.R. was registered at New Delhi to deprive him of bail granted by ACJM, Karnal; he was handed over to Delhi Police. According to the learned counsel, both the Courts at Karnal and New Delhi cannot continue the proceedings parallely in respect of the same offences. He further submitted that from the date of first arrest, 90 days having expired and the charge-sheet having not been filed, application filed by the appellant under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. should have been allowed by the High Court. In opposition, the learned counsel for the State (NCT) of Delhi made submissions supporting the impugned order. According to him, 90 days' period not having expired from the date of arrest by Delhi Police, the appellant was not entitled for statutory bail under Section 167(2) of the Cr. P.C. He also added that the proceedings are going on only in New Delhi Court and not in the Court at Karnal.
4.  We have considered the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties. The petition filed for release of the appellant on bail under Section 167(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code was rejected by the learned Magistrate and the learned Additional Sessions Judge at New Delhi. The High Court was also not satisfied that there was any merit in the application. In the meantime, charge-sheet has been filed in F.I.R. Case No. 479/99 and the case has been committed to the Court of Session.
5. In the circumstances, we are not inclined to order release of the appellant on bail in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India. It is open to the appellant to file an application for regular bail stating all the facts and urging all available grounds. If such an application is filed, the same will be disposed of by the Court expeditiously in accordance with law.
On the facts and in the circumstances of the case discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, we are of the view that the criminal case instituted in the Court of the ACJM, Karnal should not continue since the case relating to the same incident is pending in the Sessions Court at Delhi and the same will continue in accordance with law.
6.  Therefore, the learned ACJM, Karnal shall pass order dropping the criminal case arising from the F.I.R. No. 231/99 under Sections 302, 201, 34 and 120-B, Indian Penal Code, 1860 in the Police Station, Sadar Karnal within two weeks of receipt of copy of this order.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
