Saheb Singh v Lt. Governor, Delhi and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 October 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.17389/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  This court while issuing notice on 20th November, 2000 passed the following order:
"Issue notice to the respondents to show cause why the matter should not be remanded to the High Court for dealing with the various points raised in the writ petition."
2.  It is contended on behalf of the appellant that in the writ petition, among other reliefs, the appellant had sought for a declaration that Rule 4(5) of Delhi Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Rules, 1959 is invalid.  Further it is also contended that the High Court without considering any of the grounds of attack, based on which the validity of the said Rule was questioned or considering the other grounds raised in the writ petition, dismissed the same by merely observing that there was no merit in the writ petition.
3.  Per contra, Mr. T.L.V.Iyer, learned senior counsel for the respondents, pointed out that the appellant having fought a long drawn litigation before various revenue fora, had filed the writ petition before the High Court which was rightly dismissed as being devoid of any merit.
4.  Having considered the arguments of learned counsel advanced on behalf of the parties, we are of the opinion that it would have been more appropriate if the High Court had addressed itself to various grounds raised in the writ petition and decide the writ petition by a reasoned order; more so because of the fact that there was a challenge to the validity of the abovementioned Rule.
5. In the said view of the matter, on this short ground, we allow this appeal, set aside the impugned order and remand the matter to the High Court to be decided afresh in accordance with law. We, however, make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the grounds raised by the appellant in his writ petition.
6.  Learned counsel for the respondent contended that since the matter has been pending for a long time, in the interest of justice the same should be disposed of as early as possible. Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of this case, we request the High Court to expedite the hearing of this appeal.
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
