Mathai Joseph v Ettumanoor Service Co-Operative Bank Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 September 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.19167/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant's father took a loan of Rs. 1000/- from respondent No. 1 on 20th August, 1970. Upon his failure to pay the same, the Bank institutued arbitration proceeding and got an award in its favour. In execution thereof, land between one acre and 37 cents was put to auction and the Bank had purchased the same.
2.  After the sale, respondent No. 1 had instituted a suit for declaration that the land belongs to it and it was for the recovery of possession of the land and for mesne profits that the suit was filed. The suit was decreed by the trial court and upheld by the High Court.
3. So far Rs. 5,000/- has been paid by the appellant to the respondent/decree holder. The land in question had been sold in auction and purchased by respondent No. 1. The land is, however, still in the possession of the appellant herein. It is stated that the mortgage value of the land today is more than Rs. 10 lakhs.
4.  In these proceedings, the appellant is willing to pay, in addition to Rs. 5,000/- which is stated to have been paid, such an amount as the Court may direct and thus redeem the mortgage.
5.  It is quite evident that this is a case of an unequal battle between David and Goliath. For a loan of Rs. 1000/- the outstanding stated to be due as of today notwithstanding the receipt of Rs.5,000/-, is stated to be Rs. 1,49,242/- which claim of the respondent is, to say the least, shocking and clearly untenable.
6. We are not satisfied in the present case, where the sale of the immovable property which is today stated to be worth Rs.10 lacs that the sale for a paltry sum of about Rs.2,000/- in the year 1978 should have been accepted. The Bank itself being a decree holder has purchased the property and appears to have taken unfair advantage of the circumstances in which the appellant was placed.
7.  In exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 142, we are of the opinion that justice would be done by directing the appellant to pay within six weeks from today a sum of Rs. 25,000/- to respondent No. 1. On such payment being made, the sale in favour of respondent No. 1 of the land in question would stand set aside and the documents of title/mortgage would be handed back by respondent No. 1 to the appellant. The appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Appeal disposed of.
