Messrs Farmakal v Commnr. of Income Tax, Indore
Supreme Court of India

9 November 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.6959/2001
The Order of the court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant filed an application under Section 256 (2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961  before the High Court seeking a direction to the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal to draw a statement of the facts of the case and refer the questions set out therein for the opinion of the High Court.
2.  The application has been rejected by the High Court forming an opinion that the questions were of fact and not of law.
3.  There were 7 questions set out in the application filed by the appellant whereon a reference was sought for.
4.  During the course of hearing before this Court, the learned counsel for the appellant has given up some of the questions and recast the principal questions so as to narrow down their scope. The questions of law now suggested are as under:
"1. Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case there is any basis in law for addition of the two sums of Rs.50, 000/- as income of the assesssee in the relevant year? 2. Whether the mere omission on the part of the assessee to include the sum of Rs.50, 000/- withdrawn from the bank in his cash book can lead to the inference in law that the amount represented his income? 3. Whether the mere finding that the cash book was unreliable can justify in law the addition of the two sums as income without any independent evidence?"
5.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.We are satisfied that the questions now suggested fall within the scope of the questions which were set out in the application filed by the appellant before the High Court and the appellant is not suggesting any new question. The questions so framed are questions of law and do arise out of the facts of the case found by the Tribunal.
6. The appeal is allowed. The judgment of the High Court is set aside. The Tribunal is directed to draw a statement of the facts of the case and refer the above said, three questions for the opinion of the High Court in accordance with law.
Appeal allowed.
