Abid Hatim Merchant (Dead) Through LRs. v Janab Salebhai Saheb Saifuddin and Others
Supreme Court of India

30 July 2001
I.A.No. 4 In C.A. No.5682/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This application has been taken up by Salebhai Saheb Saifuddin and Others being I.A.No.4 for a direction to grant necessary approval to the applicant to carry out construction as per the amended plans as sanctioned by the Bombay Municipal Corporation.
2.  In the normal course of events, this Court is not inclined to pass any order in a disposed of appeal, but by reason of the peculiar factual situation, this Court thinks it fit, in the interest of justice, to deal with the application on its merits.
3.  Be it placed on record that the Bombay Municipal Corporation have already granted sanction to the amended plans submitted by the applicants and in terms of the new policy, an additional F.S.I. is available to the concerned site, by reason whereof the built-up area would be more than as was shown in the plan furnished and produced in the Court during the course of hearing of the Appeal.
4.  Learned Advocate appearing in support of the application submitted that the propriety of the situation demanded the applicants to move this Court by reason of the availability of additional F.S.I. as mentioned above, since the original plan without the additional F.S.I. is already on record of this Court.
5. We do feel it expedient to record our appreciation for the gesture of the applicants. Considering, however, the submissions made on behalf of the parties and by reason of the enhancement of the F.S.I., being made available by the Municipal Corporation of Bombay, presently, the applicants are directed to make available a portion of the excess space made available, to the Sanatorium as has already been submitted in the plan annexed to the instant petition (I.A.No.4). The applicant is also however, directed to make an additional payment of 50% of the rent to the Sanatorium payable in accordance with the terms already agreed and approved in terms of the earlier Order dated 3rd February, 2000.
6.  The application stands disposed of on the above terms. The learned Advocate appearing for respondents has not filed any counter affidavit but it is placed on record that he not admitted the allegations in the petition. There shall be no order as to costs.
Application disposed of.
