Subhash Ranjan Roy v Land Acquisition Collector and Anr
Supreme Court of India

29 January 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.10078-10079/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  These appeals arise out of certain land acquisition proceedings. The total area of the land acquired measured about 2100 sq. mtrs. The Land Acquisition Collector and the Land Acquisition Judge, Reference Court awarded the compensation as follows:
2. Particulars Compensation awarded Compensation awarded by L.A. Collector by L.A. Judge Land Rs.50,000 per kani Rs.55,000 per kani Building Rs.29,988/- Rs.90,000/- Trees and Plants Rs.20,473/- Rs.61,419/- In addition, certain other statutory amounts due have also been awarded. The matter was carried in appeal to the High Court. The High Court took the view that while the standard adopted by the Reference Court with regard to land and building would be appropriate but so far as the trees and plants are concerned reduced the same on two principles.
3.  Firstly when compensation had been paid on the basis of the nature of the land, bearing in mind that there are fruit yielding trees standing on the land and when that aspect goes into ascertaining value of the land, it would not be appropriate to give again compensation in that regard. Secondly, the Reference Court had adopted the rule of thumb in enhancing the compensation from 20,473/- to Rs.61,419/- stating that ordinarily the Land Acquisition Officer would grant only 1/3rd of the real value to which the parties would be entitled.Of course, the proper course to be adopted by the High Court would have been if a proper multiplier is applied to the garden land in which fruit trees are situated the whole basis of compensation would have been different. When the reference Court which has the experience of granting such compensation in regard to land in that area has knowledge of these matters adopted a particular principle and granted the compensation on the facts and circumstances of that particular case , we do not think the High Court was justified in interfering with the same.
4.  No doubt it is true that this Court in State of Haryana Vs. Gurcharan Singh and Another -1995 Supp(2)SCC 637 stated that market value of land having fruit bearing trees should not be determined separately for the land and the trees but a suitable multiplier should be adopted. While the High Court noticed this aspect of the matter did not take note of the latter part of the judgment of this Court and that is how the High Court fell into error. Now instead of re-assessing the whole matter it would be appropriate to uphold the order made by the Reference Court and set aside the order made by the High Court to the extent of restoring the order made by the Reference Court. Ordered accordingly. The appeals are allowed accordingly.
Appeals allowed.
