Messrs Singareni Colleries v Vinod Chandra and Others
Supreme Court of India

11 April 2001
The order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant herein has filed this appeal against the Judgment and Order dated 11th September, 1997 passed by the High Court, in writ appeal, through which it set aside the order of learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition of the respondents.
2.  The short question raised in this appeal is, whether the Errata issued by the State Government rectifying the mistake committed in Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act'), through which additional land was included, requires hearing under Section 5-A of the said Act. The respondent filed the writ petition challenging the land acquisition proceedings seeking relief.
"The Writ Petition is filed to obtain a declaration in the nature of a writ of mandamus that the notification under Section . 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act i.e., G.O.
Ft. No.198 dated 03-05-1994 Energy and Forests (Pr.1) Department is illegal, inoperative and unenforceable and ultra vires of the powers of the respondents under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter referred to as `The Act')."
3.  The short facts are, before initiating the land acquisition proceedings for acquiring the disputed property, there was a negotiated settlement, under which a consensus was arrived at, the respondent showed willingness in terms of the said settlement. As per the said settlement, the respondent was informed that acquisition would be for approximate area of 3050 sq. mtrs.known as "Mehar Manzil". In consequence thereof, a Notification under Section 4(1) was issued on the 3rd May, 1994. Thereafter, enquiry under Section 5-A was also initiated. The respondent filed objections to that to which we are not concerned for the purpose of disposal of the present appeal. Thereafter, the State Government issued the aforesaid Errata under Section 4(1) Notification on 9th May, 1995 simultaneously with Sec.6 notification by publishing the same in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette on the same day. As per this Errata, the area of acquisition was increased from 3050 sq. mtr. to 3780 sq.mtr.
4.  The case of the respondents is, this Errata was not in conformity with the agreed terms, hence, this increase of area by more than 700 sq. mtr. was neither under the settlement nor it was valid. This inclusion was unjustified and illegal. According to the reply filed on behalf of the appellant in the said writ petition, the first Section 4(1) Notification gave only approximate area hence, the Errata which refers to the larger area could not be said to be illegal as it does not constitute a fresh Notification. The main objections on behalf of the respondents is that the Errata which covers a very large area for which, no opportunity was given to the respondents to file any objection under Section 5-A, though in the said writ petition apart from taking other objections seeking quashing of the entire acquisition proceedings.
5.  The learned Single Judge, after considering the submissions, recorded the following findings :
"Therefore, the purpose of notification under Section 4(1) is limited. The purpose is to put the owner of the land, proposed to be acquired, on alert to enable him to put forth his objection. Once the locality is identified the owner can put his objections.In the instant case, it is admitted fact that the petitioners knew that their specific property was to be acquired. The dispute now is only about the excess area of the land than what was notified in the first notification.
If the land more than what was notified earlier is ultimately included in the declaration, the petitioners would be at liberty to claim compensation in respect of the whole of the area and also in respect of other relevant factors specified in Section 23 of the Act including the damage likely to be substantiated in consequence of acquisition of proposed area to the remaining part of the property. However this is really immaterial for the purpose of this writ petition because as pointed out earlier the petitioners are challenging the notification in respect of which there is absolutely no defect whatsoever pointed out even by the petitioners .
themselves. The petitioners are referring to the subsequent errata which according to them was unjustified for challenging the impugned notification. Such challenge is difficult to understand."
Accordingly, the writ petition of the respondents was dismissed.
6.  Aggrieved by the same, the respondent filed the writ appeal before the High Court. The High Court allowed the writ appeal, consequently, allowed the writ petition of the respondents by holding that the Errata declared under Section 6 of the Act as published in the Gazette on the 9th May, 1995 is quashed in respect of 3780 sq.mtr. of land. The reason for allowing the writ petition by the writ appeal court is recorded hereunder:
"Section 6 of the act provides for publication of different declarations from time to time in respect of different parcels of land covered by the same notification under Section 4(1) of the Act. Therefore, when a large extent is covered by draft notification under Section 4(1) of the Act, different declarations under Section 6 can be made in respect of different parcels of land covered by 4(1) notification. So, it is clear that declaration cannot be made in respect of land for which there is no valid 4(1) notification.In the instant case, although Errata to 4(1) notification relates back to the date of original notification, still 5-A enquiry was conducted giving opportunity to the appellants only in respect of 3050 sq. metres and not in respect of additional extent of 700 sq. metres, and no valid declaration under Section 6 can be made in respect of the entire land.
What emerges from the above discussion is that declaration can be made only in respect of a part of the land covered by 4(1) notification or the Government can withdraw a parcel of land covered by 4(1) notification by publishing a notification of withdrawal under Section 48 of the Act, and not a declaration for a larger extent of land and the Court has no power to validate a lesser extent of land covered by the said declaration in the absence of a provision in the Act."
7.  It is this decision which is the subject matter of challenge before us. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submits with vehemence, no illegality is committed while issuing the Errata, as the Errata dates back to the original notification under Section 4(1) as has also been recorded by the Appellate Court and since once the opportunity under Section 5-A was given to the respondents, thus no illegality could be construed to have fallen on account of not giving any opportunity. For supporting this submission, he relied on the decision of this Court reported in State of T.N. & Anr. - Vs.- Mahalakshmi Ammal & Ors. wherein this Court has held:
"It is true that the Government having realised that the lands were initially notified to be acquired but did not cover the survey numbers being situated in the adjacent villages, the errata notification was published and included to the lands in Surveys Nos.2/5, 2/11 and 2/12. Once errata was published, it dates back to the date of initial Section 4(1) notification, namely, 26-6-1978. It cannot be considered to be a fresh notification issued under Section 4(1). It is not in dispute that the respondents, in fact, filed their objections to the notice issued under Section 5-A and Rule 3 of the rules made by the State Government."
8.  The submission is, in this case also an Errata was made subsequently and this Court held, it would relate back to the original notification under Section 4(1). Hence, no prejudice is caused to the appellants. We find in the said paragraph, this Court further records:
"But the fact remains that the respondents had the opportunity and, in fact, they did participate in Section 5-A enquiry. Therefore, the declaration made under Section 6 does not get vitiated."
9.  The said decision would have no application to the facts of the present case. In the present case it is not in dispute, after the issuance of the Errata as aforesaid for the extended area of land, any opportunity was granted to the petitioner for filing the objections. We find in Delhi Administration -Vs. Gurdip Singh Uban & Ors. this Court has held with reference to the objections under Section 5-A that even if the purpose of the notification is accepted as a public purpose, the acquisition of the objectors' land need not necessarily could be for the fulfilment of that public purpose as it relates to a particular piece of land belonging to the objectors. In effect it held notwithstanding objections with reference to public purpose, there may be special fact and situations as to why the objectors' land should be excluded from the purview of the notification. Such an objection is a personal objection with reference to his land in any notification for acquisition, which is entitled apart from the objection that acquisition is not for public purpose.
10.  Again, with reference to the right of filing objections under Section 5-A, this Court in the case of Munshi Singh & Ors.-Vs.- U.O.I. has held :
"Section 5-A embodies a very just and wholesome principle that a person whose property is being or is intended to be acquired should have a proper and reasonable opportunity of persuading the authorities concerned the acquisition of the property belonging to that person should not be made.
"
11. In view of this and also as we have said earlier, right of filing objections under Section 5-A cannot be taken away even with reference to any Errata, if through it, it extends to additional land without giving an opportunity to the person affected. In the present case, on the facts, as we have recorded and which is not in dispute, after issuance of the aforesaid Errata notification to the extent of extended land, no opportunity was given nor could it be given to the respondents, as that Errata notification under Section 4(1) simultaneously is published with Section 6 notification. Thus the question of filing an objection under Section 5-A does not arise. For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any error in the judgment of the High Court that acquisition of land to an extent which is covered by the Errata cannot be upheld. However, the submission is, by reading the operative portion of the impugned Appellate Court's judgment, it looks as if the Court has quashed the entire acquisition proceedings.
12.  The submission by learned counsel for the appellants is that in no case, for the aforesaid reasons, the total acquisition could be quashed, as in original notification covering area of 3050 sq.mtr., there is no illegality nor possibly it could be said. In fact, learned Single Judge of the High Court has dismissed the writ petition of the respondents finding the acquisition to be valid.We do not find that the High Court has quashed the entire acquisition proceedings. It may possibly has led to the confusion by the last paragraph of the order of the judgment. It is quoted hereunder:
"Accordingly, the writ petition and the writ appeal area allowed and the draft declaration under Section 6 of the Act as published in the Gazette on 19.5.95 is quashed in respect of 3750 sq. metres of land, but in the circumstances, each party is directed to bear their own costs."
13.  We have no hesitation to interpret this last paragraph of the impugned judgment by holding that the Appellate Court quashed only the extended land as covered by the Errata as included in Section 6 notification published in the Gazette on the 9th May, 1995. It is true, Section 6 refers to the total area of 3750 sq. mtr. but it referred to show the illegality by including the entire area of acquisition in other words include even the area covered by the Errata. We have no hesitation to hold, it is only to the extent of the area covered by the Errata which is held to be illegal and not the original Section 4(1) notification to the extent of 3050/- sq.mtr.
14.  However, we make it clear that any observation made in this judgment is without prejudice to the rights of the parties in any pending proceeding. The appeal is partly allowed. Costs on the parties.
Appeal Partly Allowed.
