Texmaco Limited v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.10757/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  A writ petition (C.W.P. No. 2990/2001) has been filed by the petitioner seeking a writ, order or direction to respondent No. 2 to revoke/cancel notification of award dated 1.5.2001 arising out of contract dated 29.1.2001 in favour of Respondent No. 3, M/s. Hindustan Engineering & Industries Ltd.
2. Along with the writ petition, an application for interim relief was also filed. The writ petition has been admitted to hearing by the High Court. It is awaiting adjudication there. The High Court vide order dated 6.6.2001 refused to grant interim relief. This special leave petition has been filed against refusal to grant the interim relief.
3.  In the counter-affidavit filed by the contesting respondents in this Court, it has been stated that a formal agreement has already been entered into between respondent No .2 and respondent No. 3 on 7.6.2001, after refusal of grant of stay by the High Court. It is also stated that NOA has been issued in favour of respondent No. 3, M/s. Hindustan Engineering & Industries Ltd. after clearance by the World Bank.
4. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently argued about the alleged non-eligibility of respondent No. 3, M/s.Hindustan Engineering & Industries Ltd. to be given the contract and urged that grant of contract is against public interest. He wanted us to look into the merits of the entire issue raised in the writ petition but we must decline that invitation. It would not be proper for us to go into merits of the writ petition which is pending adjudication in the High Court.
5.  In this special leave petition, at this stage, we are only concerned with the question whether the refusal of stay by the High Court after admission of the writ petition suffers from such irregularity or illegality which may render the exercise of discretion by the High Court as either perverse or unreasonable or illegal. After hearing Mr. K.K.Venugopal at length we do not find that any fault can be found with the discretion exercised by the High Court in refusing stay on 6.6.2001. The special leave petition, therefore, merits dismissal.
6.  We hasten to add that we are not expressing any opinion on the merits of the writ petition as any such expression may prejudice the case of either party. The arguments which Mr. K.K. Venugopal have addressed or the contentions raised by the petitioner in the special leave petition or in the rejoinder filed in this Court, are available to be raised in the High Court and the High Court would consider all those pleas as and when raised on their own merits uninfluenced by the dismissal of special leave petition by this Court.
7.  Keeping in view the nature of controversy and high stakes involved, it would be appropriate that the writ petition is heard and disposed of by the High Court as expeditiously as possible. Learned counsel for the parties assures us that they will complete pleadings in the High Court within 10 days.
8.  After doing so, we permit learned counsel for the petitioner to make a mention to Hon'ble the Chief Justice of the High Court for fixation of an early date of hearing of the writ petition. We hope that the matter would be heard as far as possible within six weeks by the High Court and we request it to do so.
9.  With the aforesaid observations the special leave petition is dismissed. No costs.
Petition dismissed.
