Surendra Kumar Sahoo v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

29 October 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.14096/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The appellant who is an OBC passed matriculation examination in 1984. Respondent No.5 passed the matriculation in 1995. The Department of Posts, through the Assistant Superintendent of Post Office, called for the names from the employment exchange for filling up the post of Extra Departmental Delivery Agent. According to the qualifications which were prescribed, the minimum educational qualification for such a post was 8th standard but it was stipulated that preference may be given to the candidates who had matriculation qualification.
2.  The appellant was selected while Respondent No.5 was not. On an application filed by Respondent No.5 before the Adminstrative Tribunal, the selection of the appellant was set aside. The Tribunal was of the view that what should have been taken into consideration was the marks obtained in the matriculation examination. This order has been upheld by the High Court. Hence this appeal.
3.  In the circular which provides for the minimum qualification with regard to the higher post of ED sub-post master, it is provided that matriculation is the minimum qualification and the selection should be based on the marks secured in the matriculation or equivalent examination. This provision is not provided in case of recruitment to the post to which the appellant was selected. The minimum qualification, as we have already noticed, was only 8th standard but preference was to be given to the candidates who had matriculation qualification. It appears that the selection committee took into account the fact that the appellant was an OBC and, therefore, gave preference to him.
4.  In our opinion, when no other criteria was stipulated, taking into consideration the fact that the appellant was an OBC while the other candidate was not would be in consonance with the provisions of Article 46 of the Constitution of India and the orders of the Tribunal and the High Court are clearly unwarranted. Apart from the fact that the appellant and Respondent No.5 had not taken the matriculation examination in the same year, there is nothing to show that the marks secured is a valid criteria when such a criteria had actually been provided for a higher position and not for the position to which the appellant was selected. There was valid basis for the selection committee to have chosen the appellant for the post. He was sponsored by the employment exchange and he belonged to the backward class and, therefore, his selection should not have been set aside.
5.  We, therefore, allow this appeal and set aside the decision of the High Court as well as of the Administrative Tribunal. The appellant will be reinstated with retrospective effect within four weeks, but he would be not entitled to back wages. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
