Puran Buchaiah v Kantham N. Reddy and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 January 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.4007-4008/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The present appeals are directed against the order dated 6th November, 1998 passed by the High Court in revision. The appellant before this Court filed a suit as against the respondents for a declaration that he is the owner of the agricultural land.
2. The case of the appellant is that during the time of evidence it was realised that two places in the plaint were kept blank due to oversight. The appellant filed an application under Order 6 Rule 17 of the Civil Procedure Code seeking amendment of plaint. The amendment sought was to the following effect : The portion which is blank in the original plaint, it was sought to bring in "much prior to the year 1968". Similarly, in respect to the blank portion "after 28.8.89 in the month of March, by deleting the word "on".
3.  The submission is, these amendments were consistent with the plaint. The trial court allowed these amendments. Aggrieved by that, the respondent filed revision petition. Two revision petitions were filed, one by the respondents as against allowing these amendments and the other against the order of the trial court, rejecting a document which appellant sought to be produced as the same was inadmissible. In our considered opinion the High Court fell into error firstly in not allowing the amendment. We do not find, the reasons given by the High Court are sustainable in the eyes of law. Only two reasons have been given, one, that amendment sought was at the argument stage and the other that it is inconsistent with earlier plea.We do not find these reasons to be sustainable.
4.  An amendment can be made at any stage depending on facts and circumstances of each case, subject to judicial scrutiny. It cannot be rejected merely it is sought at the argument stage. So far inconsistent plea, the submission by one side is, it is not inconsistent but only filling up the blank in the original petition, while other side submits, it to be inconsistent. This question can be raised at the hearing stage but not a ground for rejecting the amendment of the plaint at this stage. Hence, the order of revision rejecting amendment cannot be sustained.
5.  Similarly, the other revision filed by the appellant which is against the order rejecting the documents based on the findings that it is inadmissible also cannot be sustained. This again cannot be a ground to reject at this stage. A document is admissible or not, is a matter which could be contested at trial and not to reject at this stage. Hence, for the said reasons, even this order in revision passed by the High Court confirming the order passed by the appellate court and the trial court cannot be sustained. Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed. Both the revisions dismissed by the High Court are hereby set aside. With the said observations the appeals are allowed. Cost on the parties.
Appeals allowed.
