Commissioner of Income Tax v Ajay Vijay Traders
Supreme Court of India

25 January 2001
C.As. Nos. 872 of 877 of 2001
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.  Heard the learned counsel In our view substantial question of law arises for consideration less a question of law. In the impugned order the Tribunal has said thus:
"The undisputed facts of these appeals are that this trust was created by Shri Ghanshyamdas vide trust deed dated April 12 for the benefit of the children of his sister Smt. Bhagwanti Bai. The Assessing Officer in his order admitted that the shares of the beneficiaries are specific determined. He also admitted that the trustees are representatives of the assessees of the beneficiaries. Even then he invokes the provisions of section 161and according to him these amended provisions are applicable to the facts of this case. He therefore by applying the marginal rate of tax assessed the total income of the trust in the hands firm. In this connection a decision of the apex court in the case of CWT v. Trustees of H.E.H. Nizam's FamilyTrust 1977 Indlaw SC 229 is worth mentioning. The Special Bench of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal in the case of Mohammed Omer Family Trust v. ITO 1992 40 ITD 1 under the similar facts circumstances of the case has held that in a case where the beneficiaries are kwn their shares were determinate the total income of the trust included income from profits gains of business tax at the maximum marginal rate had to be charged in the hands of trustee only in respect of the whole of the income of each beneficiary t on the aggregate income of all beneficiaries. In this very case the Special Bench was of the opinion that the association of persons cant be created by imposing tax at the maximum marginal rate on the total income of the trust.' On the admitted facts the Tribunal didt find merit in the appeals filed by the Revenue and hence they were dismissed. The Tribunal in the impugned order though hast referred to a proviso to section 161 but it applied the law correctly to the admitted facts of the case.
That being the position the appeal doest merit admission. Hence it is dismissed at this stage."
Special leave granted.
2.  After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the High Court should have admitted the appeals under section 260A of the Income-tax Act, 1961, and decided the cases on merit.
3. We, accordingly, allow the appeals, set aside the judgments of the High Court and restore the appeals filed by the appellant on the board of the High Court. We make it clear that we are not expressing any opinion on the merits of these cases.
Appeals allowed.
