Channabasavaraj Shankarrao Nadagouda and Others v Vishwanath Kashinath and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 October 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.14123/2000
The order of the court was as follows:
Delay condoned. Leave granted.
1.  Mr. MC Bhandare, learned senior counsel submitted that appellants have no objection at present regarding withdrawal of the one-third share from the compensation amount deposited by the State in various land acquisition proceedings as that was the main prayer made by the respondents in I.A.No. IV filed before the High Court in R.S.A No. 990 of 1992.
2.  Learned senior counsel submitted that appellants only grievance is that while disposing of the said application learned single judge of the High Court has transgressed into certain interlocutory applications pending before the execution court. He pointed out those observations made by the learned single judge in the impugned order as below:
"I find that I.A. Nos. 13 and 23 are vexatious having been filed before an exercise was embarked upon by the appellants by way of fresh suit in O.S. No. 118/1982 and which suit ended against them in all the three courts and which decrees have become final."
3.  So far as reference to I.A. No. 23 is concerned, both sides agreed before us that the said interlocutory application stood disposed of and there is no grievance for the appellants. But I.A. No. 13 cannot be disposed of by the impugned order as the same has to be considered by the execution court, according to the learned senior counsel. We agree that I.A. No. 13 which is made mention of in the impugned order will be considered by the execution court before which it is filed.
4. Learned counsel for the respondents expressed an apprehension that this observation of ours is likely to be misconstrued as amounting to granting stay of execution proceedings till the disposal of I.A. No.13.
5.  We make it clear that we never intended stalling of the execution proceedings on the ground of pendency of I.A. No.13 before the execution court. We leave it to the execution court to proceed with the execution proceedings and to dispose of I.A.No. 13 together therewith or separately as the execution court deems fit.
6.  Subject to the above observations we vacate that part of the order by which I.A. No.13 has been ordered to be dismissed by the High Court. This appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
