Sukhdev Singh Kahlon v State, C.B.I., New Delhi
Supreme Court of India

22 November 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  We heard Mr. Harjinder Singh, advocate in extenso. A public servant convicted for having been in possession of assets disproportionate to his known sources of income and sentenced to imprisonment for a period of one year, made an attempt before us to show that he has satisfactorily accounted for the seeming excess of the assets. A sum of Rs.3, 59, 400/- seized from his house on 15.11.86 was sought to be explained with the help of evidence of DW-13. That witness said that he carried the money to the house of the accused during a friendly visit to that house by keeping the entire currency of the bulk amount in the pocket of his jacket.
2.  We tried to imagine ourselves the magnitude of bulging of his pockets when it is admitted that the entire money consisted of 100 rupee notes. The trial court and the High Court disbelieved the testimony of DW-13, according to us, very rightly. This shows that the endeavour made by the convicted public servant to explain a major portion of the excess asset ended in dismal failure.
3.  Learned counsel then made an attempt to show some other explanation for the excess amount. Adopting an incongruous defence for explaining the excess amount, which is contradictory between each other would be antithesis to the scheme of Section (1)(e) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 with which he was charged by the Court. We are therefore not impressed by the said alternative attempt made by the learned counsel.
4.  Lastly learned counsel pleaded that the sentence may be reduced further down on health reasons. Section 5(2) reads thus:
"Any public servant who commits criminal misconduct shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. Provided that the court may, for any special reasons recorded in writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment of less than one year"
5. We are not inclined to hold that medical reasons would be a special reason for reducing the sentence from the minimum fixed by the Parliament for a legislation like Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947. It must be borne in mind in the succeeding act the Parliament has taken away the power for reducing the minimum sentence even on the ground of special reasons. If the convicted public servant is suffering from any disease it will require the jail authorities to afford all necessary treatments to him.
6.  We have noted that the High Court has taken into account the said fact as can be seen from the following culminating sentence:
"The appellant shall surrender forthwith to undergo the remaining sentence. As the appellant has been suffering from chronic renal failure and is on maintenance haemodiallysis as per medical reports filed along with Criminal Misc. No.40039 of 1999 his latest medical condition shall be taken into consideration while committing him to custody."
7.  We direct the jail authorities to see that the petitioner shall be given all necessary treatment (if found necessary) as best as possible in the circumstances.
8. Learned counsel made a plea that jail authorities may allow him t be treated in a private hospital and all the expenses needed for that would be borne by the prisoner himself.
It is open for him to make such a request to the jail authorities and that will be duly considered by the jail authorities in accordance with the Rules He shall surrender within three weeks from today failing which the special judge will take prompt steps to see that he is put back in custody.
With these observations we dismiss this SLP.
Petition dismissed.
