Prem Chand v Rup Chand and Others
Supreme Court of India

26 February 2001
C.A. Nos. 1507-1509 of 2001 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 14594-14596/2000)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Appellant filed an appeal before the High Court with a delay of 7 days and also with deficiency in the matter of court fee. That appeal was returned for re-presentation after curing the defects. It was done so by the appellant but it took a long period of one year for making such re-presentation. The High Court refused to condone the delay of 7 days in filing the appeal and also refused to condone the delay of making the re-presentation of the appeal. Hence, the impugned order was passed rejecting the application filed under Section 5 of the Limitation Act and the consequent order of rejection of the appeal and petition also.
2.  The period of limitation for filing the appeal was 30 days. The appeal was presented, though defective, with a delay of 7 days. He tried to explain the said delay of 7 days stating that he was sick and old and was bedridden for a long time and was not in a position to move the Advocate concerned. We do not think it necessary to go deep into the said explanation as the delay is only marginal. We are inclined to condone the same. We do so.
3.  Regarding representation, the delay occurred, according to the appellant, due to reasons beyond his control. Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that even after representation, the deficiency of the court fee subsisted. This is disputed by the learned Counsel for the appellant. We do not propose to go into that dispute, for, if the deficiency persisted the Registry would not have sent up the appeal for consideration of the application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. It is still open to the respondents to raise the contention that the court fee had not been remitted in full.
4.  Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that the court fee ordered to be refunded has not been collected by the appellant.
5.  In the result, we allow the appeals and set aside the impugned order. The delay involved in filing the appeal before the High Court as well as the delay involved in representing the same would stand condoned. But, this is subject to the right that the question of deficiency of the court fee, if raised, either by the respondents or by the State can be determined afresh if it is so warranted.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
Appeal Disposed of.
