Vinod Kundalia v tate of West Bengal and Anr
Supreme Court of India

27 April 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 667/2001
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  This Special Leave Petition is directed against the impugned order of a learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court. In a criminal proceeding at the stage of framing of charge, the accused filed an application before the Additional Sessions Judge invoking power under section 91 of the Code of Criminal Procedure praying that the summons should be issued to produce certain documents, which has a vital bearing in adjudicating the matter whether charges  could be framed or not.
2.  The Additional Sessions Judge on being satisfied about the relevance and desirability of the documents in question to be produced by his order dated 21.7.2000 directed the prosecution through Investigating Officer to produce the service book of Gopa Chatterjee, wife of Dilip Chatterjee as well as the Hotel Register of Hotel Swagatam at Jaipur for consideration of charge. This order was assailed in the High Courtt, and the High Court by the impugned judgment being of the opinion that the accused could not have invoked the power of the Sessions Judge at that stage, and being further of the opinion that the prosecution cannot be compelled to produce the documents, set aside the said order and hence the present petition.
3. The power of the Magistrate/Court under section 91 of the Criminal Procedure Code has been considered by this Court in a recent judgment in the case of Om Parkash Sharma Vs.CBI, Delhi 2000 Indlaw SC 285, and this Court has indicated that in a given case Court would be fully justified in issuing summons to the person concerned in whose possession the doucment is alleged to have been there for producing the same, and the only limitation is that the discretion in question must be exercised judicially.
4.  That being the position, the High Court was not justified in interferring with the exercise of judicial discretion by the learned Additional Sessions Judge in the case in hand.Learned Additional Solicitor General, however, submitted that the provisions contained in section 91 does not authorise the Court to call upon the investigating officer to go and seize certain documents and produce the same, and to that extent the order of the Additional Sessions Judge is not in accordance with law, though it would be well within the powers of the learned Additional Sessions Judge to direct that person concerned by issuing summons for production of the relevant documents in question.
5.  We find sufficient force in this contention. On examining the provision of section 91, we therefore mofify the order of the Additional Sessions Judge and hold that I.O. cannot be compelled to seize and produce the document and make it clear that it will be open for the Additional Sessions Judge to issue summons to the concerned person in whose possession the documents is alleged to be there for production of the same.
The Special Leave Petition is disposed of.
Petition Disposed of.
