Conwest Jain Clinic Group of Hospitals v Conwest Jain Clinic Group of Hosp.Emp.Un
Supreme Court of India

11  May  2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.8082/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard the leaned counsel for the parties.
1.  The petitioner, a charitable hospital, challenged the interim award dated 14.8.2000 passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Mumbai before the High Court of Bombay by filing a writ petition which was dismissed by the learned single Judge. Against that order, petitioner preferred appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court which was also dismissed by the impugned order. Hence this SLP.
2.  It has been pointed out that by the impugned interim award dated 14.8.2000 the workers are given the benefit of an interim relief of RS.600/- per month from 28.6.1998 i.e. from the date of the filing of the application. It is also pointed out that virtually most of the evidence is recorded by the Tribunal but for one or other reason the matter is prolonged.
3. It is the case of the petitioner that even at the final stage workers may not get this relief and subsequently it would be difficult for the Institution to recover back the said amount from the workers. It is the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that even considering the paying capacity of the Institution also it would be difficult for the management of the hospital to pay the said amount.
4.  Considering the fact that the dispute is pending before the Industrial Tribunal since 1998 and the fact that most of the evidence is already recorded by the Tribunal, we direct that the amount as ordered aforesaid be paid from 14.8.2000 and not from the date af filing of the application i.e. 28.6.1998. With the aforesaid modification, this special leave petition is disposed of accordingly.
5.  The Tribunal is directed to dispose of the petition as early as possible preferably within a period of six months from today. Learned counsel for the parties state that at the time of hearing before the Tribunal their counter parts would not ask for any adjournment.
Petition disposed of.
