Punjab National Bank v Tashkent Enterprises and Others
Supreme Court of India

8 August 2001
C.A. Nos. 8653-8654 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The only point which arises for consideration in these appeals pertains to the interpretation of Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C.
2.  The High Court in the impugned judgment has come to the conclusion that by virtue of the amendment of Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C., in 1976, the principle with regard to the adjustment of the amount paid as laid down in Megharaj and Ors. vs. Mst. Bayabai and Ors., no longer remains the correct law and the provisions of Section 60 of the Contract Act also would not be applicable.
3. According to the High Court, by virtue of Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C., whenever payment is made, it has to be adjusted against the principal amount due even if the judgment-debtor does not indicate to which account the adjustment is to be made, namely, principal or interest.
4.  This Court has had occasions to consider whether the law laid down in Meghraj's case (supra) still holds good in view of the change brought about in 1976 with the amendment in Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C.. A reading of this Court's decisions in Mathunni Mathai vs. Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. and Others, Prem Nath Kapur and Another vs. National Fertilizers Corpn. of India Ltd. and Others, and Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation vs. Poonam Pahwa and Others, clearly indicate and lay down that the ratio of Meghraj's case is fully applicable in a case between a debtor and a creditor in a civil suit governed by the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure even after the amendment of Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C. The object of amending Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C., is set out in the following passage of Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation's case (supra):
"Order 21, Rule 1 Civil Procedure Code as amended in 1976 expressly provides that the judgment-debtor shall give notice of the deposit of the decretal amount to the decree-holder either through the court or directly to the decree-holder. The obligation of giving the notice to the decree-holder is not absolved by simply depositing the amount without taking steps to ensure service of the notice of such deposit to the decree-holder through court or otherwise."
5.  Therefore, the appellant cannot escape its liability to pay interest to the decree-holder for the period between the date of deposit of the decretal amount and the date of notice of such deposit to the decree-holder.
6. In this case also, it must be held that even after the amendment made in Order 21 Rule 1, C.P.C., the decision in Meghraj's case (supra) is still applicable.
7. In view thereof, the decision of the High Court under appeal is set aside. In order that there is an early disposal of the dispute between the parties, a suggestion is made that there should be a settlement of the claim of the appellant. The learned counsel for the parties have agreed, and in our opinion, very fairly, that on respondents paying to the appellant a further sum of Rs.70,000/- within eight weeks from today the decree would be regarded as fully satisfied.
Ordered accordingly.
The appeals stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Appeal disposed of.
