Dr. Sudhir Kumar Gupta v University of Delhi and others
Supreme Court of India

26 July 2001
Writ Petition (C) No. 27 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The petitioner is a resident of Delhi. He took the entrance examination for admission to MBBS conducted by the University of Delhi in the year 1994 to fill up 75% seats in different institutions in Delhi. He was admitted in the University College of Medical Sciences, Shahdara, Delhi for pursuing his degree in MBBS.
2. It appears that though he was selected in All India Institute for Medical Sciences under the 15% quota of seats to be filled up on All India basis, he did not join the same as he had already been admitted in the University of Delhi. In the year 1999 he graduated in MBBS from the University of Delhi and he applied for entrance test to be conducted by the University of Delhi for Post Graduate Medical Examination. He was found to be not eligible for the said examination on the ground that he had not completed one year of compulsory rotating internship after passing the final MBBS examination from the University of Delhi on or before 31.3.2000. He appeared for the Post Graduate Medical Course held on 13.2.2000 and his name appeared in the merit list based on the marks obtained in the screening test. However, his name was little low in the merit list and he was not able to take admission in his chosen/opted medical course, so he opted to withdraw. Then again in December, 2000 a bulletin of information for Post-Graduate Degree etc. in medical science for the Session 2001 was issued and the petitioner found that a rule had been framed to the following effect:
"III. Requirements for admission to Post-Graduate Courses:
(A) 1. Candidate must have completed satisfactorily one year of compulsory rotating internship after passing the M.B.B.S. examination from the University of Delhi on or before 31.3.2001 and must have full registration with the State Medical Council/Medical Council of India.
2. The candidate who has passed the MBBS examination from a University other than Delhi University, having been allotted to the same under the 15% All India Quota by the Director General fo Health Services would also be eligible if he/she is permanent resident of the National Capital Territory of Delhi,(The proviso has been incorporated as per the direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Dr. Parag Gupta's case and is subject to further order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and if he/she fulfils at the following three conditions:
(i) He/she passed 10+2 examination from National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(ii) He/She is permanent resident of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(iii) He/she has passed the MBBS examination from a University other than Delhi University., having been allotted to the same under the 15% All India Quota by the Director General of Health Services if he/she is permanent resident of the National Capital Territory of Delhi."
3. The petitioner is challenging the said rule on the ground that the eligibility criteria set forth therein gives unfair advantage to those candidates who have done their MBBS in 15% quota of seats on All India basis from other States and are residents of Delhi as they will be eligible for 75% seats in the respective States and also for 75% seats in Delhi plus 25% seats of the All India quota and would give them the benefit of eligibility for 75% seats while a candidate like the petitioner who is a resident of Delhi and has done his MBBS from Delhi would be eligible for 75% seats of Delhi only as he cannot give the Post-Gradudate examinations of other States except for 25% seats of All India quota and his chances of getting admitted into the Post Graduate course in the University of Delhi have become bleak.
4. Identical arguments were addressed and stood repelled in at least three decisions of this Court in Dr. Parag Gupta Vs. University of Delhi and Ors. (2000) 5SCC 684 2000 Indlaw SC 301, State of U.P. and Ors. Vs. Vineet Singh and Ors. (2000) 7SCC 262 2000 Indlaw SC 579 and Abhinav Aggarwal and Anr. Vs. Union of India and Ors. (2001) 3SCC 425 2001 Indlaw SC 21391. In the cirucmstances we find no merit in this petition and hence the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed
