Shivaji Arvind Pawar v Arvind Maruti Jadhav and Others
Supreme Court of India

27 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 2430-2431/2001
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  Complainant is the petitioner against an order of the High Court. By the impugned order, the High Court has entertained an application filed by the accused under section 482 Cr.P.C, and while the matter is pending before it, has passed an interim order staying further proceedings in the complaint case.
2.  This being an interim order, normally the Court does not interfere with the same. But because of tenacity of the counsel appearing for the petitioner we are forced to indicate some reasons as to why we do not entertain this petition at this stage. Be it be stated that a counsel appearing for the petitioner even wanted an answer in course of his arguments, even without waiting what order is going to be passed. With respect, a counsel is not entitled to the same.
3.  Mr. Keshwani, the learned counsel raised as amny as four contentions for invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136. According to him, the judgment of this Court in the case of Usha Ahuja Vs. State of Haryana and Ors. squarely covers this case, and therefore this Court should entertain this petition against the order granting interim stay of further proceedings in the criminal case.
4. It may be stated that in the aforesaid case on which the counsel relies, the High Court had passed an order prohibting the police for filing of final report under Section 173 Cr.P.C until the pending civil suit is disposed of. We fail to understand how this decision will be of any application where the Court has found a prima facie case as to whether the allegations made in the complaint constitute an offence under section 482 Cr.P.C, and then passed an interim order staying the further proceedings in the complaint case until the disposal of the matter by the Court itself. This decision ought not to have been cited as a precedent in the present case.
5.  Mr. Keshwani further urged that the application for discharge having been passed on 6.1.1999, the accused could have filed an application for revision against the same, and that not having been availed of, the accused is not entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 482 praying for quashing of the criminal proceedings.
6. He further urged that the finding of learned Trial Judge and order framing charge under section 420/34 constitute a prima facie finding, and as such the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain an application under section 482 to examine whether at all it can be said that the continuance of the complaint proceedings would tantamount to an abuse of process of Court for which until the Court can exercise jurisdiction under section 482.Having considered all these submissions, we do not find any force in any of the same requring our interference by invoking jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution.
7.  It may be stated that we are not examining the merits of the matter at this stage since the matter is still pending before the High Court, and High Court would obviously go into all these questions including the question as to whether a case for interference under section 482 has, at all, been made out. Any expression of opinion at this stage would not be in the interest of accused nor in the interest of the complainant. Needless to mention when the High Court entertains an application against a complaint case for deciding the question as to whether the allegation made in the complaint proceedings constitute an offence for which the accused is being tried and process has been issued, normally, the complaint proceedings should be stayed until the High Court decides the matter finally.
8. In the aforesaid circumstances, we do not see any justification for invoking our jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution. The Special Leave Petitions are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.
