Action For Women and Anr v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

23 August 2001
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  This writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India is in the nature of a public interest litigation. The petitioner has averred facts indicating how hazardous the habit of smoking is and how much smoking has resulted in causing cancer. A special emphasis has been laid on ways to prevent smuggling of cigarettes from outside into the country. Large number of prayers have been made including the prayer that a Fund should be organised to help the victims of smoking and that Government should be directed to take appropriate action so as to prevent smuggling of cigarettes into the country.
2.  In this Court affidavits have been filed by the several foreign tobacco companies and also the Union of India.
3.  In the affidavits filed by private companies, a stand has been taken that they have no role to play in the smuggling of cigarettes and they would appreciate all possible actions being taken against those who are instrumental in smuggling of cigarettes into the country. On behalf of the Union of India an affidavit has been filed by Dr. N.K. Soren, Under Secretary, Anti Smuggling Unit, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, North Block, Raisina Hill, New Delhi. It has been indicated therein as to what steps have been taken and what steps are being taken to prevent smuggling of cigarettes into the country. It has been stated therein that the Customs Department including Directorate of Revenue Intelligence are alert and vigilant to prevent smuggling of contraband goods including cigarettes and the Department of Revenue has recently issued instructions to all the field formations including Directorate of Revenue Intelligence to intensify preventive measures to detect and prevent smuggling of cigarettes through the Indo-Nepal Border.In the course of hearing of this matter it has been brought to our notice that a Bill has already been introduced in the Rajya Sabha called
"The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Bill, 2001 "
4. Learned Attorney General produces before us a communication from the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, indicating that the matter is being considered by the aforesaid Committee. In the several sittings held so far, NGOs, and members of the public have made presentations before the Committee pursuant to an advertisement issued from the Rajya Sabha Secretariat seeking suggestions, comments, views and written submissions from individuals, organisations, institutions of tobacco growers and others who may be interested in the matter. Since the matter is still pending consideration before the Committee, it would be open for the petitioners who are NGOs., to approach the said Committee and make all submissions which they are making before this Court in the matter including the question of creation of a Fund for the victims of smoking of cigarettes. Mrs. Jethmalani, in course of her submissions, stated that this writ petition should be kept pending and be monitored by this Court. We are unable to accept this submission, particularly in view of the fact that a Bill has already been presented before the Rajya Sabha and is receiving attention of the Parliament which is seeking to make effective provisions to safeguard the health of the citizens of this country. In the aforesaid premises, we do not wish to entertain this petition any further. The same is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.
