State of Haryana and Anr v Dr.A.N. Chopra
Supreme Court of India

16 January 2001
CIVIL APPEAL NO.6950/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by the State of Haryana is directed against the order of the Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court. By the impugned judgment, an order of compulsory retirement of an employee in the State of Haryana has been quashed. The provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules apply also to the employees of the State of Haryana. The Screening Committee which considered the case of the respondent to suggest whether it will be in the public interest to compulsorily retire the respondent did not have the advantage of looking to the Character Roll entires of the respondent for the years 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 and this fact was conceded by the learned Deputy Advocate General, who appeared for the State of Haryana before the High Court.
2.  Non-consideration of the aforesaid relevant and germane materials have been considered by the High Court to have vitiated the conclusion of the Screening Committee. It is also undisputed that the entries in the CR of the respondent for the last 3 years were good or very good.
3.  Mr. Mahabir Singh appearing for the State of Haryana, however, contended that since the entire service record could be considered by the Screening Committee in forming the opinion with regard to the question whether public interest would be served by requiring the Government servant to compulsorily retire and since the compulsory retirement is not a punishment, the decision could not have been interferred with by the High Court unless the High Court come to a conclusion that the decision was taken malafide.
4.  It is no doubt true that an order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment and the employer has the right to pass order of compulsory retirement in public interest but the formation of opinion by the appropriate authority with regard to the existence of public interest is justiciable to some extent and once it is conceded that the Character Roll entries for the last 3 years prior to the order of compulsory retirement which happened to be very good had not been placed before the Screening Committee, the conclusion that the opinion was vitiated cannot be faulted with.
5. In that view of the matter, we see no infirmity with the impugned judgment of the High Court to be interferred with by this Court. The appeal accordingly fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
