Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust v M.P. Ramachandra Reddy and Anr
Supreme Court of India

3 December 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.20740/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Notice of this petition has been accepted on behalf of respondent No. 1. Notice on respondent No. 2 is waived. Counsel for the parties are agreed that this matter be disposed of finally at this stage.
Leave granted.
Heard counsel for the parties.
2.  The appellant herein took disciplinary proceeding against respondent No. 1, and as a result of the said proceeding respondent No. 1 was dismissed from service.
3.  Respondent No. 1 challenged the order of dismissal by means of a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
4. While the matter was pending before the learned Single Judge, the respondent-delinquent officer attained the age of superannuation on 31st March, 2001.
5.  Subsequently, the writ petition came up for hearing before the learned Single Judge of the High Court. The learned Single Judge was of the view that since respondent No. 1 has not been furnished with the documents asked for, the entire enquiry proceeding stood vitiated. In that view of the matter the learned Single Judge quashed the order of the dismissal and the writ petition was allowed. The writ appeal preferred by the appellant herein was dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
6.  The High Court, while dismissing the writ appeal, touched upon the merits of the matter, especially on charge No. 3. It is against the said judgment of the High Court the present appeal has been preferred.At the outset, Shri Kailash Vasdev, learned senior counsel, appearing for the appellant, urged that the High Court after having found that the enquiry was vitiated on account of non-observance of the principles of natural justice, the appellant ought to have been given an opportunity to proceed with the enquiry from the stage the enquiry was held to be vitiated. We find substance in the argument. We are of the view that once the entire disciplinary proceeding was found to be vitiated on account of non-observance of principles of natural justice, the appellate court ought not to have expressed opinion on merits of the charges.
7. We, therefore, maintain the order and judgment of the High Court on the ground that principles of natural justice were not complied with by the enquiry officer and permit the enquiry officer to proceed with the enquiry from the stage it was held to be vitiated by the High Court.
8.  During the pendency of the proceedings, the respondent superannuated. The retirement of the respondent herein shall be subject to the result of such enquiry which may be undertaken by the appellant.
9. With the aforesaid modification of the order under challenge, the appeal stands disposed of. Any observation made by the appellate court on the merits of the charges shall not come in the way of the appellant in holding enquiry or passing order. The enquiry may be completed by 31st July, 2002 from the date of receipt of this order. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
