K.K. Mutreja v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

10 October 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.19498/1999
The order of the court was as follows:
1. Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2. It appears that for one or the other reason the concerned officers of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi are not taking any action for removing the encroachment on the public roads or at public places for various reasons.
The High Court directed the removal of encroachment in 1995. That order was unfortunately reviewed after lapse of four years and respondent No.7 who was encroacher on the public land near Lajpat Nagar No.IV and got benefit of technicalities. However, when the matter came up for admission before this Court on 14th March, 2001 the Court passed the following order:
"After hearing the matter for sometime, we are told by Ms. Binu Tamta, learned counsel for the MCD that a decision has been taken way back in 1994 for demolishing the disputed structure allegedly constructed by the 7th respondent. We are not considering at present any argument of the 7th respondent as against the said decision because we are passing order without prejudice to the right of the 7th respondent to challenge the said decision, if any, made. But if such a decision was made by the MCD either in 1994 or thereafter we are at loss to understand why the MCD was disabled from implementing the said decision. Prima facie it speaks much about the weakness of the MCD unless they explain otherwise to us. We, therefore, direct the Commissioner of MCD to show cause why the said decision has not been implemented and also to showcause why adverse remarks should not be passed against him for his inability to implement the decision taken by the MCD as early as on 1994.The explanation should reach this Court either in the form of an affidavit or otherwise within one week from today."
3. In compliance with the aforesaid order, the Commissioner ofthe MCD filed an affidavit informing that the needful was done and theencroachment was removed and the Court recorded the same in its orderdated 22nd March, 2001.Today when the matter comes up for further hearing learnedcounsel for the petitioner states that at present also respondent No.7has reconstructed on the said area and has started his business on thesame spot. As against this, learned counsel for respondent No.7 statesthat he is carrying out his business activities at the same spotwithout reconstruction of the premises.
4. Considering the stand taken by respondent No.7 and inaction ofthe concerned officers of the MCD, we direct the MunicipalCommissioner of Delhi to take appropriate action for removal ofencroachment within the area of Block-C, Amar Colony, Lajpat NagarNo.IV.
5. In the Judgment and order dated 18th November, 1998 passed bythe High Court it has been mentioned that it was the contention ofrespondent No.7 that there are several other persons who are inoccupation of public properties and the list of such occupantsincludes the following persons:
"1. Mr. Manmohan Singh Kohli
2. Mr. S.K. Bhatia
3. Ms. Surinder Kaur
4. Ms. Raj Kumari Malhotra
5. Mr. J.R. Sethi
6. Mr. Shyam Lal
7. Mr. KK Mutreja and
8. Mr. Dinesh Kr. Bharadwaj."
In view of aforesaid submissions and the counter statementsmade by the parties, the Commissioner of Municipal Corporation ofDelhi (MCD) is directed to issue fresh notices within seven days fromtoday for removal of encroachments, if any, made by the aforesaidpersons and give them 14 days time to file reply, if any. Then, he will pass appropriate orders after hearing them. The orders passed bythe Commissioner should be reported to this Court in this matter.
6. Concerned affected persons would have the liberty to file properapplication before this Court alone. It would be open to theCommissioner to take appropriate action of demolition if no order ispassed by this Court.Learned counsel for respondent No.7 states that apart from thepersons above named there are several others (according to the plan submitted at page 86 onwards of this paper book) who have encroachedupon the public land and no action is being taken against them. The Commissioner will look into this allegations and pass appropriateorders List this matter after six weeks.
Order accordingly.
