Santosh Kumari and Anr v Haryana Urban Development Authority and Others
Supreme Court of India

5 October 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.10769/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellants were allotted a milk dairy booth by the respondent authority. The allotment was sought to be cancelled and taken possession of for non-payment of dues which were sought to be recovered by charging compound interest at the rate of 18% per annum. A writ petition filed by the appellants laying challenge to the impugned demand was admitted for hearing but no interim relief was granted to the appellants. The respondent authority was allowed liberty to auction the site in dispute. This appeal is directed against that part of the order by which interim relief has been refused to the appellants.
2.  Pursuant to the order dated 2.7.2001 passed by this Court an amount of Rs.3, 10, 985/- has been deposited by the appellants with the respondent authority towards the impugned demand. The amount so deposited covers principal amount of demand with simple interest calculated at the rate of 10% per annum. It appears that the booth was sealed by the respondent authority and then subjected to auction. However, the prospective purchaser has withdrawn his bid and the amount of bid has been refunded to him during the pendency of this appeal before this Court.
3.  After hearing the learned counsel for the parties this appeal is disposed of in terms of following directions which in our opinion would meet the ends of justice.
1) The milk dairy booth shall continue to remain in possession and occupation of the appellants who may use the same in accordance with allotment letter dated 12.1.1987.
2) The appellants shall continue to pay to the respondents the periodical amount due and payable by them in terms of the allotment letter dated 12.1.1987.
3) The seal put by the respondent authority on the booth shall be removed, by the respondent authority within a period of two weeks from today, as nobody stands to gain by keeping the booth closed and sealed.
4) This order shall be construed as an interim relief allowed by the High Court so as to remain in operation during the pendency of writ petition before the High Court subject to such further directions as the High Court may deem fit to make.
5) In the event of writ petition being dismissed by the High Court the appellants shall remain obliged to satisfy the demand raised by the respondent authority, to the extent upheld by the High Court, within a period of six weeks from the date of the decision of the High Court.
The appeal is disposed of. No order as to costs.
4.  We make it clear that this order shall not be construed as expression of any opinion on the merits of the matter at large before the High Court.
Appeal disposed of.
