P. Subramanyam and Others v Bangalore Development Authority and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 December 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
1.  We heard learned counsel for the petitioners Mr A.S Bhasme in extenso at the time of consideration whether the SLPs should be admitted or not.
2.  The admitted facts are these: The land belonging to the petitioners was acquired by the Bangalore Development Authority under the provisions of Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976. The land value together with other benefits have been paid to the petitioners and they accepted them and that amount is in the enjoyment of the petitioner for a very long period. Though the petitioner challenged the right of the Bangalore Development Authority to continue with the said land on various grounds, the challenge did not succeed in a previous round of litigation.  However the petitioners thought that the observation made by the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in the previous litigation that petitioner can seek relief on completion of a period of five years from the date of taking possession of the land by the BDA can be used by them so the petitioners have filed this present writ petition in the High Court claiming that the land should be returned to the petitioner because under Section 27 of the Act the scheme for which the acquisition was made has lapsed.
3.  The High Court did not accept the said contentions and dismissed the writ petition relying on the decision of this Court in G. Narayanaswamy Reddy vs. State of Karnataka (dated 29.4.87 in SLP(C)294 of 1985-it is not reported). Learned counsel now submits that the decision can be distinguished on the facts and it can be established that petitioners are entitled to get the land returned to them.
Section 27 of the BDA Act reads thus:
"Authority to execute the scheme within five year - Where within a period of five years from the date of the publication in the Official Gazette of the declaration under sub-section(1) of Section 19, the Authority fails to execute the scheme substantially, the scheme shall lapse and the provisions of Section 36 shall become inoperative."
4.  In the aforecited decision this court has stated in almost similar facts that in the absence of any provision in the act that the land which have been acquired should be handed over to the original owners if the scheme is not executed substantially within five years, the erstwhile owner is not entitled to get the land released to him. The scope of Section 27 of the BDA Act was considered in that decision.Learned counsel contended that a re-consideration of the scope of Section 27 is called for in this case because this Court in the aforecited decision did not advert to the last limb of Section 27 namely,
"the scheme shall lapse and the provisions of Section 36 shall become inoperative."
5.  Section 36 of the BDA Act only says that the acquisition of land under this Act shall be regulated by the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 in so far as they are applicable. It is admitted before us that even in the Land Acquisition Act the erstwhile claimant cannot put forward the claim, on the non existence of the purpose for which the land was acquired, that the said land should be returned to him. When the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be linked with the provisions of the BDA Act the petitioner cannot make a claim unless there is other provision in the Act entitling them to get the land returned.
6.  Learned counsel has fairly submitted before us that he has not come across any provision in the Bangalore Development Authority Act by which the land has to be returned to the former owner on the scheme getting lapsed. We do not find any reason for re considering the ratio laid down by this Court in G. Narayanaswamy Reddy vs. State of Karnataka cited above.
We therefore dismiss this SLP.
Petition dismissed.
