Messrs Beardsell Insulations Limited v State of Tamil Nadu and Anr
Supreme Court of India

30 August 2001
C.A. No.3956/1999
The order of the Court was as follows:
Learned counsel for the assessee has argued only one contention.
1.  During the period 16th August, 1985 to 12th August, 1991 (Assessment Years 1984-85 to 1989-90), a judgment delivered by a bench of three Members of the Sales Tax Tribunal, Madras was holding the field. It held that expanded polyesterene (Thermocole) was liable to tax at the general rate under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act and not under Entry 40(v) of the First Schedule thereof. During this period, therefore, the assessee collected and remitted general sales tax on the aforesaid material at the applicable rate of five per cent. On 12th August, 1991, the High Court at Madras differed from the view taken by the Tribunal. The High Court held that the aforesaid material fell within Entry 40(v) of the First Schedule and was taxable at the rate of eight per cent. Upon the order of the High Court being pronounced, representations were made by manufacturers of the aforesaid material not to reopen assessments made on the basis of the said Tribunal order.
2. Accordingly, a circular was issued by the commercial tax authorities which instructed assessing officers not to revise past cases that had been finalised according to the decision of the Tribunal.
3.  The assessments of the assessee had not been completed by reason of certain proceedings pending in the courts relating to connected issues. When these were finalised, a notice was issued to the appellant demanding the higher rate of tax for the period 16th August, 1985 to 12th August, 1991. The assessee pleaded that it was in the same situation as other manufacturers of the aforesaid material and was entitled to be treated similarly and reliance was placed upon the circular aforementioned. The authorities declined to give the assessee the benefit of the circular by reason of the fact that it applied only to completed assessments, and the Tribunal in the order under challenge agreed.
4.  Our attention has been drawn by learned counsel for the appellant to the judgment of this Court in Texmaco Ltd. and Anr.vs. State of A.P.and Anr.
5. The circular says that past cases should not be revised
"if the dealers had not collected higher rate and make provision in their balance sheets."
6. This was the raison d'etre of the circular. We are of the view, having regard to the circumstances set out above, that no differential treatment can be accorded to the assessee merely for the reason that in its case the assessments had not been completed. The principle of the circular must apply as much to the assessee as to other manufacturers of the aforesaid material, their position being similar. This is what the justice of the case clearly requires.
7.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed to the extent aforesaid and the authorities are directed to act accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
