Gouri Shankar Ghosh Hazra v Hindustan Copper Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

8  May  2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 17935/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The respondents had floated a scheme in 1993 forvoluntary retirment of its officers. The appellant had made an application for voluntary retirement which was accepted on 6th September, 1995. It seems that the appellant had applied for employment with another public sector undertaking namely, Uranium Corporation of india. After being relieved, the appellant took up the new assignment.
2.  It was thereafter that on 19th September, 1995 therespondents passed an order cancelling the voluntary retirementon the ground that the appellant had not disclosed at the timewhen he had applied for voluntary retirment that he was seeking employment with an other public sector undetaking.
3.  The appellant sought to challenge the said order dated19.9.1995. The High Court dismissed the writ petition byobserving that there was a scheme of the Union of India which hadstated that those who wanted to take voluntary retirement shouldnot join service of an other public sector undetaking aftergetting the benefits of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. Hencethis appeal.It has been brought to our notice that in 1992 aclarification was departmentally given in respect of an earlier Voluntary Retirement Scheme whereby the Government had clarified that:
"The management of PSE which is operating the V.R. Scheme should exercise its own managerial discretion and prudence~ while deciding cases of the V.R in respect of the employees who are younger in age and are still fit for rendering useful service. If they know that an employee has applied for a job in other PSE's OM dated 14.12.82, 25.1.88 and 23.6.88 should be invoked by the lending organisation and cash equivalent of gratuity, Earned Leave, Half Pay Leave standing to his credit, balance in the contributory Provident Fund should be transferred to the borrowing organisation and the benefit of VR Scheme should not be conceded. Each PSE, therefore, has to distinguish such cases themselves."
4.  It is clear that there was as such no embargo on an employee of a public sector undertaking being reemployed by another public sector undertaking. Besides that was only aninternal communication between the Government and the Publicsector undertakings. As far as the appellant is concerned, the Voluntary Retirement Scheme of 1993 which has been placed onrecord does not contain any such condition. In other words, the apellant was never told that he could not seek voluntary retirment and join another public sector undertaking. There was no bar under the scheme to the course of action adopted by the appellant.
5. In our opinion, the decision of the High Court was not correct. The voluntary retirement having accepted on 6th September, 1995 the said decision could not thereafter have been rescinded by the respondents.
6.  For the aforesaid reasons, this appeal is allowed, the decision of the High Court is set aside and the order dated 19thSeptember, 1995 passed by the respondents is quashed. Therespondents shall release the benefits due to the appellant underthe Voluntary Retirment Scheme, 1993 within a period of three months from today.
Appeal allowed.
