Shivendra Kumar Singh v Sanjay Kumar Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 September 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.15210-15211/2001

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioner is aggrieved by the order passed by the High Court disposing of civil revision against an interlocutory order of trial court. The contesting parties are respondent Nos. 1 and 4 who are represented before us. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. This case has chequered history of litigation.
2.  In spite of several orders passed by the High Court, the parties have not permitted the trial court to proceed with the suit and to terminate the hearing so as to pronounce the judgment. The parties are prolonging the hearing and in the meantime filing applications for interlocutory reliefs. Final arguments in the trial court have been going on for days and months. It is stated at Bar that final arguments before the trial court are now going on day-to-day.
3. We cannot allow the final hearing in the suit to go on for an unreasonable length of time. It is directed that the petitioner before us shall conclude his submissions before the trial court latest by tomorrow.
4.  Thereafter, the trial court shall allow not more than two days to the opposite party for concluding their submissions. This calender shall be followed strictly by all the parties as also by the trial court. Written submissions, if any, not exceeding 5-6 pages may be filed at the close of the hearing of that party but not thereafter. No interlocutory applications shall be entertained in between and, if filed, shall be just kept on record. After concluding the hearing in four days as directed hereby the trial court shall expeditiously pronounce the judgment which shall be given effect to forthwith in the matter of running of the Cinema Talkies.
5. During the course of hearing we asked the learned counsel for the parties who is running the Cinema Talkies at present? Learned counsel for respondents 1 and 4 stated, under instructions, that the Cinema Talkies is presently being run by respondent Nos. 1 and 4 though they do not have any licence - temporary or permanent - to run the same. It is also stated that all the Cinema Talkies in Muzaffarpur are being operated without licence. That is the state of affairs which is for the authorities of State to take note of and for the present we express no opinion, much less give any direction, in that regard, as on the day.The Special Leave Petitions be  treated as disposed of.
Petitions disposed of.
