Mohd. Mazhar Hussain v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

6 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 1738/2001

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  SLP(C)No.1738/2001 Heard Mr.P.S. Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner and Kumar Rejesh Singh,learned counsel appearing for the respondent. The petitioner who is the Principal of A.M. College, Gaya a constituent unit of Magadh University has assailed the order passed by the Patna High Court on 8th March, 2001 refusing his prayer for anticipatory bail in Magadh University P.S. Case No.44/2000 corresponding to the special case No.30/2000.
2.  On perusal of the order, the relevant documents on record and on consideration of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties it is ordered that in the event of the arrest of the petitioner in connection with the aforementioned case he shall be released on bail on executing a bond of Rs.20,000/- to the satisfaction of the Police Officer causing the arrest subject to the conditions that he will cooperate with the investigating officer whenever required for investigation of the case and he will not make any attempt to influence or win over witnesses or tamper with evidence. This order will remain operative till the investigation is completed and chargesheet is filed.
The Special leave petition is disposed of.
3.  SLP(C)No.1794/2001; Heard Mr.P.S. Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner and Kumar Rejesh Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondent. The petitioner who is the Principal of Gaya College, Gaya has assailed the order passed by the Patna High Court on 8th March, 2001 refusing the prayer for anticipatory bail in Magadh University P.S. Case No.44/2000 corresponding to the special case No.30/2000.
4.  On perusal of the order, the relevant documents on record and on consideration of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties it is ordered that in the event of the arrest of the petitioner in connection with the aforementioned case he shall be released on bail on executing a bond of Rs.20, 000/- to the satisfaction of the Police Officer causing the arrest subject to the conditions that he will cooperate with the investigating officer whenever required for investigation of the case and he will not make any attempt to influence or win over witnesses or tamper with evidence. This order will remain operative till the investigation is completed and chargesheet is filed.The Special leave petition is disposed of.
Petition disposed of.
