T.Karketta, Ex-Md, Cent.Coperative Bank v State of Bihar and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 August 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.4834/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Heard Mr. P.S. Mishra for the appellant and Mr. Ashok Mathur for the respondent.
2.  The appellant had approached the High Court against an order of the Deputy Commissioner, who directed forcible removal of the appellant on the assumption that the appellant is in occupation of the land belonging to the Civil Court.
3.  There is lot of dispute on the question whether the land belongs to the Civil Court or not, inasmuch as the Executive Building Engineer made a statement that the land does not belong to the Civil Court. The High Court refused to entertain the writ petition on the ground that the case involves disputed question of facts. Against the order of the Single Judge dismissing the writ petition, the appellant approached the Division Bench which also dismissed the same.
4.  Mr. P.S. Mishra, learned senior counsel, contends that without entering into any question of fact, it is well settled that an unauthorised occupant, even if, it is established that he is in unauthorised occupation, could be evicted only by following due process of law and could not have been directed to be evicted in the manner the Deputy Commissioner has ordered. He however submits that the appellant was not in unauthorised occupation. We find sufficient force in the aforesaid contention that eviction can be ordered following due process of law. The learned counsel for the respondents urged before us that the lease period of the appellant stood expired and as such, has no right to continue. But notwithstanding the same, the appellant cannot be evicted without following the due process of law.
5. In that view of the matter we set aside the impugned judgment as well as the order of the Deputy Commissioner and direct that the appellant could be evicted in accordance of law. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
