Ace Door To Door Express Cargo and Another v Pfizer Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

14 March 2001
C.A. No. 1806 of 2001 arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 10782 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal is directed against the orders passed by the Consumer Forums. The two contentions raised by the appellants did not find favour with by the Consumer Forums, one on the question of maintainability and other whether the document in question amounts to an assignment or subrogation. Both these questions have already been considered and answered by a 3-Judge Bench decision of this Court in the case of Oberai Forwarding Agency v. New India Assurance Company Ltd. and Anr., since reported in 2000 Indlaw SC 542,1999 Indlaw MRTPC 45.
2. It is true that in C.A. No. 5611/1999 a Bench of 2-learned Judges in the case of M/s. Economic Transport Organisation v. M/s. Charan Spinning Mills (P) Ltd. and Anr., expressed that the earlier decision in the Oberai Forwarding Agency may be reconsidered. But having considered the judgment of the Oberai Forwarding Agency and the law laid down therein, we see no justification for reconsideration of the same.
3.  While interpreting the provisions of the law when the documents indicated the intention of the parties, and when such document is interpreted to be a case of assignment, we do not see why recourse to be taken to the so-called 'purposeful interpretation' and the judgment should be reconsidered. The document under consideration in Oberai Forwarding Agency was in identical terms with the document which is under consideration in present appeal. We see hardly any justification for reconsideration of the judgment of this Court in Oberai Forwarding Agency, as in our view the 3-Judge Bench has considered all the relevant aspects in the light of the earlier decisions of this Court. We respectfully agree with the conclusion arrived at by this Court in Oberai Forwarding Agency, necessarily therefore the present appeal would stand allowed.
Appeal allowed.
