Tanuja Pramanick v Deputy Field Director and Others
Supreme Court of India

3 December 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 2976/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The owner of a vehicle alleged to be involved in commission of a forest offence, is the petitioner against the impugned direction of the Calcutta High Court. As it transpires, in respect of the vehicle in question, the appropriate forest authorities have initiated a confiscation proceeding under Section 59-A of the Indian Forest Act and a notice under Section 59-B has been issued. Notwithstanding the fact the confiscation proceedings have already been initiated, the Magistrate having released the custody of the vehicle in favour of the owner, the State assailed the same by approaching the High Court in revision. The High Court, by the impugned order, having directed the Magistrate to re-hear the matter, the owner has come up to this Court.
2.   Under the provisions of the Indian Forest Act, the criminal court has no jurisdiction to deal with the question of giving interim custody of the vehicle, as the entire matter is pending before the confiscating authority. The original order of the Magistrate dated 13.12.2000, therefore, was without jurisdiction.
3. The High Court also committed an error in directing the Magistrate to re-hear the matter, not being aware of the provisions of Section 59-G of the Indian Forest Act.
4.  Under the aforesaid premises, we set aside the impugned order of the Magistrate dated 13.12.2000 as well as that of the High Court and direct that the vehicle in question should remain with the forest authorities and the petitioner may appear before the forest authority for making any prayer with regard to the interim custody or otherwise and if such a prayer is made, the appropriate authorities shall deal with the matter. The vehicle should be returned to the forest authorities by the owner within a week from today and if an application by the owner is made for an interim custody before the custody authority, that should be disposed of within four weeks from the date of the application.
5.  The confiscating authority would also do well in disposing of the confiscation proceeding at an early date. The special leave petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Petition disposed of.
