T. Vijayalakshmy Ammal v State of Kerala and Others
Supreme Court of India

6 November 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 2570/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant challenged the detention order dated 16th December, 1998 passed by the Principal Secretary to the Government (Home), under Section 3(1) (ii) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'COFEPOSA') before the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in O.P. No.9559 of 2001. That petition was dismissed by the High Court vide impugned judgment. Hence this appeal.
2.  Apart from the other submissions learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the detention order is not required to be continued on the ground that there is delay in considering the representation submitted to the State Detaining Authorities. He submitted that, admittedly, the representations were submitted on 2nd January, 2001 and were rejected on 16th January, 2001 and the appellant was communicated only on 20th January, 2001. It is his submission that there is no explanation why there was delay of 14 days in considering the representation of the detenu and also there is no explanation why the concerned detaining authority took four days in communicating the same to the detenu who was residing in the same city.
3. In our view, the aforesaid submission requires to be accepted in view of the well settled legal position. Re: Soloman Castro vs.State of Kerala and Ors. and Rajammal vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Another.
4. Further learned counsel for the appellant has rightly pointed out that the detention order cannot be continued because of delay in its execution. It is stated that the detention order was passed on 16th December, 1998 and was not executed till 23rd December, 2000. It is his say that the detenu was throughout in the city of Thiruvananthapuram and was available if any action was taken by the detaining authority for its execution. It is submitted that the detenu has filed civil suit for injunction and declaration that the detention order was illegal and void on various grounds.
5.  Even at the time of hearing of the interim application respondents have not executed the detention order. In the present case, undisputedly, the detention order was passed in December, 1998 and was executed on 23rd December, 2000.
6.  Respondents in their counter-affidavit have only stated that the detenu was absconding and no further averments are made as to when and on what basis it was stated that the detenu was absconding. It is nowhere mentioned that the concerned officer of the detaining authority visited the house of the detenu for execution of the detention order. Nothing further is stated that steps were taken by the concerned authority for executing the same.
7. In our view, the delay in execution of the detention order remains unexplained and, therefore, it creates a serious doubt regarding the concern of the detaining authority as regards the immediate necessity of passing of the detention order to prevent the detenu from carrying prejudicial activity referred to in the grounds of detention.
8.  In this view of the matter, the deteniton order passed does not require to be continued any more. Re: SMF CCC Sultan Abdul Kader vs. Joint Secretary to Govt. of India and others.
9. In the result, appeal is allowed and the detention order is quashed and set aside. The husband of the appellant - detenu shall be set at liberty forthwith unless his presence is required in connection with any other case.
Appeal allowed.
