Suresh Shivarao Hattiangadi v N. D. Upadhyaya (Dead) Through Secretary
Supreme Court of India

18 July 2001
C.A. No. 5217 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is directed against an order passed by the Disciplinary Committee, Bar Council of India on 27-6-1998 holding the appellant guilty of professional misconduct and in exercise of powers under Section 35(3) of the Advocates Act, 1961 suspended his licence to practise for a period of two years. At the time when appeal was admitted for hearing, stay of the impugned order was granted.
2.  The facts are not in dispute. The appellant, while on the rolls of the Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa, got employment with M/s. Vulcan Leval Ltd. (renamed as "Alfa-Laval Ltd.") and also changed his address. He did not give any intimation to the Bar Council of Maharashtra either about the change of address or his joining M/s. Vulcan Leval Ltd., as a fulltime employee.
3.  On a complaint made to the Bar Council of Maharashtra by the complainant Shri N. D. Upadhyaya, the State Bar Council took up the complaint but since the proceedings were not completed within a period of one year, the matter was transferred to the Disciplinary Committee, Bar Council of India in terms of Section 36-B of the Advocates Act, 1961 when the order, challenged before us, came to be made.
4.  A perusal of the complaint shows that there is no averment whatsoever, to the effect that during the period when the appellant joined the services of M/s. Vulcan Leval Ltd. he also continued to practise law. Indeed, it was an obligation on the part of the appellant to have informed the Bar Council both about the change of his address and his having taken up full-time employment, but since there is nothing on the record to show that during that period the appellant practised law, the breach of Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules would only be technical.
5. In the established facts and circumstances of the case, the punishment of suspension of the licence was too harsh and uncalled for.
6.  We, therefore, partly allow this appeal and set aside the order suspending the licence of the appellant to practise for a period of two years and instead reprimand him under Section 35(3)(b) of the Advocates Act, 1961.
The appeal is disposed of in the above terms. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
