Rukma Singh and Another v Suhaib Ilyasi
Supreme Court of India

5 September 2001
C.A. No. 6237 of 2001 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) No. 6120 of 2001)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  In compliance with our order dated 31-8-2001 the respondent is present with the child. Appellant 1 is also present in court.
2.  The controversy raised in this appeal relates to custody of the minor girl named Aaliaya aged about four years. The appellants are maternal grandmother and aunt (mother's sister) of the child and the respondent is her father. The appellants have assailed the order passed by the Single Judge of the Delhi High Court on 11-7-2000 in which he restrained the appellants from forcibly taking custody of the child from the respondent which was confirmed by the Division Bench by the order dated 2-2-2001. The operative portion of the order passed by the learned Single Judge reads as under :
"I accordingly restrain the defendants from forcibly taking custody of the child from the plaintiff. However, this order will not in any way come in their way to take custody of the child in accordance with law. No further orders are required to be passed on this application and the same stands disposed of."
3. During the hearing of the appeal, it was submitted before us that after the order of the Division Bench of the High Court was passed the appellants have filed a case for custody of the child under the Guardians and Wards Act, which is registered as Case No. 86 of 2001 on the file of Mrs. Meena Bansal Krishna, Guardianship Court, Delhi. In the said case the appellants have also filed a petition seeking interim custody of the child. The case is stated to be posted on 3-10-2001.
4.  Since the arrangement for custody of the child made by the learned Single Judge as confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court is in the nature of interim arrangement subject to the order in properly constituted proceedings before the competent court for taking custody of the child and such proceedings have already been instituted before the Guardianship Court in which a petition for interim custody has also been filed, we are not persuaded to interfere with the order under challenge at this juncture.
We are of the view that the interest of justice will be adequately served if the petition for interim custody of the child is considered by the Guardianship Court expeditiously and appropriate order passed. Since the matter is urgent as submitted by learned counsel appearing for the appellants, it is appropriate that the case is advanced and the application for interim custody is taken up without further delay. The learned counsel for the parties are agreed on the above arrangement.
5. Accordingly, it is ordered that the Judge, Guardianship Court will take up the petition filed by the appellants for interim custody of the child Aaliaya in Case No. 86 of 2001 on 19-9-2001. The learned counsel for the parties have agreed that counter-affidavit, if any, to the said petition will be filed in the court by 15-9-2001 and rejoinder, if any, will be filed by 17-9-2001.
Learned counsel for the parties have further agreed that the parties will appear before the Judge, Guardianship Court, Delhi on 19-9-2001 without any further notice from the court. The Guardianship Court will take up the petition for interim custody of the child on 19-9-2001 and dispose of it expeditiously, if possible by 27-9-2001.
The appeal is disposed of on the terms aforestated. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
