Manonmaniam Sundranar v Sri Kumaragurubara S Arts
Supreme Court of India

30 August 2001
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2494/1998
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.  A Writ Petition was filed before the High Court challenging the proceedings of appellant No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the 'appellant-University') when it informed respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as the 'respondent- College') that the admission of the students to 1st year M.Sc (Physics) and 1st year M.Sc (Chemistry) for the academic year 1993-94 is not approved by the syndicate since it has been done on the basis of attaining 25 marks for their performance in an interview to test their knowledge of Saiva Siddantha and such a prescription is against the Rules laid down by the Government and the University. Certain further directions had been given by the University incidental to the same.
2.  The respondent-college contended that the college had been established in the year 1961 and is being administered by Shri Kasi Muthukumaraswami Tambiran Swamigal who is the Head of the Mutt and it is claimed that it is a Saivaite Religious Denominational Minority Institution under Article 26 of the Constitution of India and that the Mutt had established and administered several educational institutions, apart from the college in question.
3. A suit bearing O.S. No. 18/1985 had been filed before the Sub-Court Kumbakonam for declaration as a denominational minority educational institution and that the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Private colleges (Regulations) Act are not applicable to them, including the college in question. It is stated that a decree had been passed in their favour and appeal against the same was unsuccessful. Thus the said decree had become final. On that basis it was claimed that it is a denominational minority institution declared by a competent Civil Court.
4.  The High Court, however, did not go into the question whether the respondent-college is a minority institution or not. With reference to this aspect, the learned Single Judge stated as follows:
"Whether 'Saiva Siddantha' can be said to be a 'religion' or not, is a question, which in my view, need not be decided in this case."
"I do not think it is necessary for me to decide this issue at this stage, in this case."
5. In these circumstances, the Court noticed this fact that when the writ petition was pending they had almost completed their course and set aside the impugned communication sent by the appellant-university to the respondent-college and directed the appellant-university to approve the admission made by the respondent-college.
6.  The matter was carried in appeal to the Division Bench. The Division Bench affirmed what the learned Single Judge said on all aspects of the matter including on the question of non-examination of the question whether the respondent-college is a denominational educational institution or not.
7. In the circumstances, that question assumes no significance insofar as this appeal is concerned. Particularly when the High Court has decided all other aspects on the facts arising in this case and has adjusted equities, we do not think that we are called upon to interfere under Article 136 of the Constitution.
8.  Hence we decline to interfere with the order made by the High Court. The appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
