B. H. E. L v Kamal Kar Matar and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 February 2001
C.A. No. 1229/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal by the B.H.E.L. is against interlocutory order of the Bombay High Court in the pending writ petition directing the payment of Rs. 1500/- per month more to the respondents, who are the employees of the contractor. The said respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court praying for issuance of a mandamus to the present appellant to absorb them in service and regularise their services with effect from the date of joining. On a notice of motion being taken, the impugned direction has been given.
2. Though ordinarily this Court does not interfere with an interim order of the High Court passed during the pendency of a writ petition, but in the case in hand the impugned order on the face of it is unsustainable and without examining the question as to whether the provisions of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 at all apply or not, and that there exists any relationship of master and servant between the B.H.E.L. and respondent-workers, who are admittedly the workers of the contractor, it was wholly unjustified on the part of the High Court to issue the impugned direction directing B.H.E.L. to pay additional sum of Rs. 1500/- per month to each of the respondents.
3.  The learned counsel appearing for the respondents brought to our notice an order of this Court and submitted that under identical circumstances this Court has not interfered with in special leave petition against a similar interlocutory order. But dismissal of SLP at the admission stage has no binding precedence. As we have stated earlier, the facts and circumstances of the present case compel us to interfere with the impugned order.
4. We therefore set aside the impugned direction of the Bombay High Court and allow this appeal. The High Court, however, is requested to dispose of the pending writ petition at an early date.
Appeal allowed.
