Ehsanuddin Mohd. Sharif and Another v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

27 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.1897/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In this batch of special leave petitions filed by the petitioners, who are running Fair Price Shops, the order of the Division Bench of the High Court of Allahabad dated 21.12.1998 has been put in issue.
2.  Pursuant to the report of Screening Committee set up by the Government, dealership agreements of various Fair Price Shops was cancelled by the District Magistrate.
3.  The impugned order records that the Government Order which dealt with the issue of cancellation of dealership of Fair Price Shops, itself provided that aggrieved parties could file an appeal before the Divisional Commissioner against the cancellation of their dealership agreements.
4. The High Court, dismissed all the writ petitions and directed the Commissioner to entertain appeals, if preferred by the writ petitioners and decide the same expeditiously in accordance with law. Instead of following that course, the petitioners rushed to this Court invoking jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution.
5.  After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that these are not fit cases in which we may exercise our jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution, particularly in view of the appellate remedy available to the writ petitioners.
6.  Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the petitioners may take recourse to filing of appeals before the appropriate authority but for a period of three months status quo as regards dealership be maintained to enable them to approach the appellate forum. This appears fair to us.
7.  We, accordingly, while dismissing the special leave petitions, direct that for a period of three months from today, status quo as regards dealership of the petitioners as existing today shall be maintained. The appellate authority shall entertain the appeals, if preferred, without putting the issue of limitation against the petitioners. It shall be open to the appellate authority to vacate or continue the order of status quo during the pendency of the appeals. We expect that the appellate authority shall decide the appeals expeditiously.We clarify that nothing said hereinabove shall be construed as any expression of opinion on the merits of the controversy and the appellate authority shall decide the appeals uninfluenced by the dismissal of these special leave petitions. The special leave petitions are dismissed with above observations. No costs.
Petitions dismissed.
