Babulal v State of Rajasthan
Supreme Court of India

4 December 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No.2648/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Leave granted.
2. The three appellants are accused before the Sessions Court facing trial for offences punishable under Sections 366, 368 and 376 read with Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 They repeatedly moved for being enlarged on bail and in consideration of the gravity of the offences alleged against them, the trial court as well as the High Court repeatedly rejected their bail applications. The present is the latest order by which the High Court declined to grant bail.
When the Special Leave Petitions were pending, we wanted to know about the progress of the trial, particularly whether the prosecutrix would have given evidence in the trial court. On a previous occasion we were told that the prosecutrix was examined in chief and the case was again posted for cross-examination. Today we are told that the cross examination was over and hence the case stands posted for taking remaining evidence.
3. All these appellants are in custody from December 2000 onwards (Banshilal, appellant is in custody from November, 2000 onwards). In view of the fact that the main witness, the prosecutrix, has been examined in the trial court, we feel that the appellants need not be further detained as undertrial prisoners and can be enlarged on bail by imposing some stringent conditions.
We, therefore order that the appellants be released on bail on each of them executing a bond for such sum as the trial judge may fix and with two solvent sureties to his satisfaction. The appellants shall abide by the following conditions also:
1. They shall report to Shergarh Police Station (Jodhpur District) on all Sundays between 10.00 a.m. and 12.00 noon unless the trial court otherwise decides.
2. They shall not influence any of the prosecution witnesses or tamper with the evidence in any manner.
3. They shall not cause any delay in the further progress of the trial.
4.They or any one engaged by them shall not cause any threat or intimidation or cause any physical harm to the prosecutrix or members of her family.
5. With the aforesaid observations, the appeals are disposed of.
Appeals disposed of.
