Mirza Ghalib College and Others v Md. Quasim and Others
Supreme Court of India

22 November 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.7546/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Leave granted. Status quo as of date to continue until the event mentioned herein.
2.  Upon hearing the submissions made on behalf of the parties, this appeal stands disposed of in the manner following.
3.  That the Director of Higher Education, State of Bihar shall conduct the election of the Managing Committee and Chamber of the Council either by himself or shall nominate any of his nominees not below the rank of District Education Officer or Inspector of Colleges or equivalent post in the State as a special officer appointed by this Court for the purpose of proper conduct of election. Such election process shall be completed by 28th February, 2002.
4. Simultaneously with the election of the Managing Committee in terms of this Order, the election of the Chairman of the Council shall also be conducted in terms of the by-laws of the College.
5.  We have been informed during the course of hearing that the college session lasts till the end of April and the new session begins either by the end of April or beginning of May. Be it clarified that no disturbance would be created as regards the students or the placement of teachers or the rules as are being followed presently until the commencement of next session even if the new Managing Committee takes charge after the election.
6.  This order is passed having due regard to the interest of the students of the college.The present Management is directed to furnish a detailed statement of accounts to the Director of Higher Education or his nominee in terms of this Order after the same being audited by a recognised chartered accountant.
7.  The Director of Higher Education is directed to have the same considered and would be at liberty to take appropriate steps in accordance with law, if otherwise he finds the same not in order.
8.  The Director would be at liberty to take assistance from the party or parties as he may deem fit and proper.
9.  The Special Officer shall conduct the election within the time specified above and while conducting the election would be at liberty to prepare the electoral roll. Due notices of such election including addition/deletion in the electoral roll, be effected by him in accordance with the formalities laid down by the Rules of the institution.
Appeal disposed of.
