Damodar Pd. Ladha v State of Rajasthan and Anr
Supreme Court of India

30 August 2001
C.A. No. 5066/1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Mr. B.D.Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the State says that in Civil Appeal No. 5073/1997 the appellant is dead. No steps for substitution having been taken, that appeal must be said to have abated.
Leave granted in SLP.
2.  These appeals are directed against the judgment of the Taxation Tribunal in the State of Rajasthan. The moot question for consideration is the true meaning of the expression
"If any amount of tax remains to be paid in respect of earlier period, it will have to be paid by the assessee."
3. This Court in the case of Federation of Mining Association of Rajasthan Vs.State of Rajasthan the validity of the provisions of Rajasthan Land Tax Act 1985 was the subject matter of challenge. Following the judgments of this Court in India Cement and Orissa Cement, this Court came to the conclusion that the State Legislature did not have the competence to make the law in question, as essentially the law is one imposing tax on minerals, which power is possessed by the  Central Legislature in view of the provisions of the Mining and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act.
4.  The judgment of this Court was delivered on 30th August, 1991. In the concluding portion of the judgment, the Court held:
"we direct that our declaration will take effect only from the date of this judgment. In other words, any tax collected under the statute so far need not be refunded by the State Government, and if any amount of tax remains to be paid in respect of earlier period, it will have to be paid by the assessee."
5. Subsequent to the aforesaid judgment, notice having been issued by the Revenue on 28.11.1994 and 1.7.1996, the assessee approached the High Court in a Writ Petition.The High Court having not entertained the matter, the assessee approached the Tribunal. The Tribunal in the impugned judgment construed the aforesaid observation of this Court in the earlier case to mean that it conferred unfettered right on the State to make a fresh demand and fresh collection of levy notwithstanding the striking down of the Act.
6. In coming to the aforesaid conclusion, the Tribunal heavily relied upon the judgment of this Court in Kannadasan Vs. State of Tamil Nadu. In Kannadasan's case the Parliament had enacted the Validation Act for a specified period, and it is in that context the question had arisen before this Court as to whether by virtue of the Validation Act the Revenue will be entitled to make a fresh demand and fresh collection of the tax in question. No doubt, the Bench of this Court came to the conclusion that in view of the Validation Act, the State would be entitled to make a fresh assessment and collect the demand in respect of liability that had accrued until the Act was struck down.
7.  But the aforesaid decision of this Court of a 2-Judge Bench has been considered later in the case of District Mining Officer Vs. Tata Iron and; Steel Co., and on an elaborate consideration of the several provisions of the law as well as relying upon the judgment of two Constitution Bench decisions of this Court, it has been held that Kannadasan's case has not been correctly decided. This conclusion in Tata Iron and; Steel case is notwithstanding the validation of the Legislature of the Parliament. But in the case in hand there has been no validation law, and the State merely relies upon the aforesaid observations of this Court in the earlier judgment in Federation of Mining Association of Rajasthan. It is difficult for us to comprehend that after the Act has been struck down on the ground of lack of legislative competence, any Court can make the Act still alive for the purpose of initiating and completing the assessment procedure and collection of the levy in question. Such a procedure would, on the face of it, contravene under Article 265 of the Constitution, as has been discussed by us in the earlier judgment in Tata Iron and Steel Co.  To us it appears that the expression
"if any amount of tax remains to be paid in respect of earlier period it will have to be paid by the assessee,"
8.  That being the position, the impugned judgment of the Tribunal cannot be sustained, and we accordingly quash the same. These appeals are accordingly allowed. There is an application for impleadment in SLP(C) 12869/1997 filed by Mr. B.B. Singh, but there is none to press the application. The application is dismissed as not pressed.
Appeals disposed of.
