Collector of Central Excise, Jaipur v Man Structurals Limited
Supreme Court of India

19 April 2001
C.A. No. 5373 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
1.  The learned Solicitor General appearing for the Department fairly states that the Department does not question the correctness of the judgments in Moti Laminates Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. v. Collector of Central Excise, 1995 Indlaw SC 1533,1995 Indlaw SC 1533, and Union of India and Anr. v. Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. and Anr., 1997 Indlaw SC 2215,1997 Indlaw SC 1400, insofar as the issue of marketability is concerned.
2. Tariff Item 73.08 of the Central Excise Tariff covers structures and parts of structures, as therein stated (which are, for convenience, referred to as "structurals").
3.  It was for the Tribunal to determine, as a fact, whether the structurals that the Department sought to make exigible to excise duty in the various appeals before it were new, identifiable goods which were produced as a result of manufacture or processes and which were marketable. Depending upon its conclusion on these aspects in each of the appeals before it, it was for the Tribunal to determine whether or not the goods in question in each of these appeals were exigible to excise duty.
4.  In the judgment and order of the Tribunal that is under challenge the Tribunal has failed to consider the facts of even a single of the appeals before it. It has proceeded simply upon the basis that structurals are not exigible to excise duty. It has failed to appreciate that there is a tariff entry which makes structurals exigible to excise duty and that they are so exigible, provided that they are new identifiable goods that are the result of manufacture or processes and they are marketable.
5. It, thus, becomes necessary to set aside the judgment and order of the Tribunal under challenge and remand the appeals to the Tribunal for being heard and disposed of afresh, bearing in mind what we have stated above. All contentions may be raised before the Tribunal by either party. Liberty is given to produce additional evidenceThe Civil appeals are allowed accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
