Kakkanatt Kunhan Menon v Ummathukutty Hajumma and Another
Supreme Court of India

19 February 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.14517-14518/2000
The order of the court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The short question raised on behalf of the appellant is that the High Court while exercising its revision jurisdiction did not intervene to the question raised by the appellant and disposed it of on short point that it is not open for the same court to reappreciate the evidence and come to different conclusion. So far as the reappreciation of the evidence is concerned there would be no two opinions ordinarily that is not permissible while exercising the revision jurisdiction.
2.  However the grievance of the appellant is not that. The grievance of the appellant is that main two points on which the appellate court has set aside the trial court findings was not adverted to or scrutinised while exercising revision jurisdiction. We feel the High Court has committed error in not examining the same.
3. Learned counsel for the respondents-landlord, on the other hand, states that subsequent fact which is brought by means of affidavit in the present appeal if decided the present appellant could not continue in the premises in question.
4.  On question being put, whether this was placed before the High Court or not the learned counsel states it could not be placed as his client was not aware of the same. We grant this opportunity to the respondents to place these subsequent facts before the High Court when the matter is taken up by it on the basis of this order which we are going to pass. For the aforesaid reason accordingly, the impugned order of the High Court in revision dated 14th March 2000 as modified by order dated 21st March 2000 is not sustainable and is hereby quashed. The case is remanded back to the High Court for deciding afresh after giving opportunity to the parties to be heard.
5.  In the light of the observation made by us the appeal is allowed. No order as to costs. We hope and trust when the matter is taken up the High Court will disposed of the matter expeditiously.
Appeal allowed.
