Aligarh Muslim University v Krishna Kumar Navman and Anr
Supreme Court of India

26 November 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 2975/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal is directed against the order of the High Court in interfering with an order of the Magistrate under section 145 CPC In relation to a plot of land, apprehension of breach of peace being found on the basis of a Police Report, the Magistrate issued the preliminary order in exercise of power under section 145 (1) CPC., and in that proceeding ultimately came to the conclusion that the University must be held in possession of the disputed land on the date of the preliminary order.
2. Against the said order of the Magistrate, the respondents approached the District Judge in revision. The revision having been dismissed, the matter was carried to the High Court. High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under section 482, CPC. set aside the said order of the Magistrate and also the criminal proceeding under section 145 on a finding that there was no satisfaction of the Magistrate about the existence of breach of peace in relation to an immovable property, which alone would confer jurisdiction upon a Magistrate under section 145(1) to  initiate a proceeding under the said provision.
3.  It is contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the revision having been dismissed, the High Court was not entitled to invoke its inherent jurisdiction under section 482, CPC. to interfere with the proceedings. Alternatively, it is urged that the inherent power being required to be exercised sparingly and only when the Court would come to the conclusion that there will be great traversity of justice, if the order of the subordinate courts are not interferred with, the case in hand does not satisfy the said requirement for invocation of the inherent jurisdiction under section 482.
4.  Learned counsel appearing for the respondents, on the other hand, contended that the apprehension of breach of peace being the condition precedent for exercise of power under section 145 (1) and that apprehension not being present when the Magistrate issued order under section 145(1), it was permissible for the High Court to interfere with the said order of the Magistrate and therefore there is no illegality with the said order so as to be interferred with under Article 136 of the Constitution.
5.  Having regard to the submissions made and on examining the order of the Magistrate as well as that of the learned Sessions Judge in revision read with the Police Report and all other relevant documents, we have no hesitation to come to the conclusion that the High Court was not justified in invoking its inherent jurisdiction under section 482 to interfere with the order passed by the Magistrate under section 145(1), which stood affirmed by the Sessions Judge in dismissing the revision. In that view of the mater, the impugned order cannot be sustained and we quash the same.The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
