Manomati Chethia and Others v Naren Pathak and Others
Supreme Court of India

22 November 2001
CIVIL APPEAL NO.1917 OF 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Though the matter has come up to this Court for the second time, yet, after hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find yet another remand to the High Court unavoidably warranted. It is not disputed that the land forming subject matter of these proceedings is governed by the provisions of the Assam Non-Agricultural Urban Areas Tenancy Act, 1955 (hereinafter `the Act', for short). The landlords - respondents initiated proceedings for ejectment which travelled upto the High Court. By order dated 31.03.1997, the High Court allowed the appeal preferred by the landlords and directed the tenant to be evicted.
2. The tenant preferred an appeal by special leave, which was disposed of by order dated 12.1.1998 by this Court. This Court held that inasmuch the tenancy is governed by special enactment, a notice under Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act was not required to be served before initiating the proceedings for ejectment. Having decided that controversy, this Court set aside the judgment of the High Court and sent it back for decision on other points. This time again, the High Court has allowed the second appeal and set aside the judgment of the first appellate court, restoring the judgment of the Trial Court.
3.  Having perused the judgment of the High Court dated 05.05.1998, we are satisfied that all the issues arising for decision between the parties have not received the attention of the High Court and dealt with and disposed of in the impugned judgement. Even the questions of law framed by the High Court of its impugned judgment do not specifically cover and set out those substantial questions of law on which the parties are litigating and this has occasioned a failure of justice.
We deem it proper to set aside the impugned order of the High Court and remand the matter for hearing afresh, after framing such substantial questions of law as do arise in the case.
4.  The appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment of the High Court, dated 05.05.1998 is set aside. Second Appeal No.56 of 1989 shall stand restored on the file of the High Court. The High Court shall afford the parties an opportunity of suggesting for framing such questions of law as arise in the case in their respective submissions. The High Court shall frame the questions, consistently with Section 100 of the C.P.C. and thereafter dispose of the appeal afresh, recording specific findings on the substantial questions of law framed by it.
5.  The appeal is allowed in the above terms. No order as to costs. We, however, make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of any of the questions arising for decision in the appeal and the High Court shall be at liberty to form its own opinion thereon while deciding the appeal.
Appeal allowed.
