Sarbendra Ojha v Pannag Bhushan and Another
Supreme Court of India

16 February 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.2876/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
This is a case of much ado about nothing.
1.  In respect of certain lands a title suit in C.A. 17/97 on the file of Munsiff Buxar was instituted by the Petitioner seeking for a declaration that the disputed land had been the outcome of a Kebala of the plaintiff and survey entry had been wrongly made and the defendant be restrained from going over the suit land and alienating the land to anybody else.
2.  Padam Bhushan Ojha Pannag Bhushan Ojha is claimed to have purchased the property from one Bhikheri Ahir Mahesh Ahir S/o Dhuri Ahir who belongs to another branch of the family of Kamal Ahir. When the suit was pending, an application for impleadment had been made by the said Padam Bhushan Oja Pannag Bhushan Ojha. At the time of recording the compromise the application for impleadment was allowed and he was also made a party. That order was however challenged in a Revision Petition before the High Court. The Revision Petition was allowed deleting the name of said Padam Bhushan Ojha Pannag Bhushan Ojha. Subsequently however that order was reviewed by the High court and it is made clear that suit can proceed in respect of parties with whom there is no compromise. It is brought to our notice that said Padam Bhsuhan Ojha has filed a separate suit in C.A. No. 79/98 for declaration of his rights and incidental reliefs against petitioner. If that is so, either in the title suit No.
17/1997 out of which the present proceedings arise or title suit No. 79/1998 the rights of the parties will have to be thrashed out. So, whether the said Padam Bhushan Ojha Pannag Bhushan Ojha is impleaded or not is not a matter that needs to be gone into in these proceedings. Hence we do not see any reason to interfere with the order of the High Court.
3. It would be appropriate for the trial Court to take up the suits together for trial. If the parties so desire they may file additional pleadings in the suits as is permissible under law. The special leave petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.
