Messrs Rajvaidya Shital Prasad and Sons v Lt. Governor, U.T. of Delhi and Others
Supreme Court of India

13 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.20927/2000
The order of the court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  A batch of matters was disposed of by the High Court. Thereafter an application was filed by the appellants stating that their case had been wrongly clubbed with the other cases and there are certain distinguishing features to be considered in their matter.
2.  However, that application came to be dismissed on the ground that there was delay in making the application and it was not in fact clearly stated by the learned counsel appearing for the parties before the High Court that they had in fact made a mistake. But the tenor of submissions recorded before the Court clearly indicates the circumstances in which these matters came to be disposed of and the manner in which the High Court dealt with the contentions is set out hereunder :
"Coming to the merits of the application, the main thrust of the argument on behalf of the petitioner is that the present case wrongly clubbed with the cases before the Full Bench involving the question of effect of inordinate delay in completing the acquisition proceedings on the acquisition proceedings. The learned counsel for the petitioner fairly admitted that he had several cases before the Full Bench and he was actively associated in the proceedings before the Full Bench throughout the hearing of the batch of cases which included the present cases. The learned counsel also concedes that he had addressed arguments before the Full Bench.
On the basis of these admitted facts, the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it is a case of wrong clubbing cannot be accepted. There could be some substance in the plea of wrong clubbed had the petitioner not raised the point of delay in acquisition in the present writ petition. Therefore, it cannot be said to be a case of wrong clubbing. If the petitioner wanted to urge the other point regarding spot zoning to which reference was made during the course of hearing, it was duty of the learned counsel for the petitioner to point this out to the Court and seek hearing on that point or to have the case segregated on this ground from the other cases. The learned counsel for the petitioner himself drew our attention to an order dated 14th December, 1995 passed by the full Bench on the date when the main judgment was pronounced, whereby some cases raising additional point were segregated for purpose of separate hearing. The learned counsel for the petitioner ought to have pointed out at least on the date of pronouncement of judgment that the present case should not be disposed of since it involved additional points and should be heard separately. The only presumption that can be drawn from this conduct is that the petitioner did not want to raise the point of spot-zoning. The petitioner will be deemed to have given up the said point. It often happens that counsel take several points in a petition but at the time of hearing they confine to only some points and the rest of the points are not urged. Such points are deemed to have been given up. Similar inference follows in the present case and the petitioner is deemed to have given up the other points raised in the writ petition."
3.  In the light of what is stated above, it is clear that there was obvious mistake on the part of the learned counsel in having allowed this case to be clubbed along with other cases which were disposed of. The delay, if any, was properly explained by the appellants, inasmuch as such matters cannot be discovered immediately and it is only when the same is brought to their notice by their clients that such an order has been made and after proper verification of the records, an inference could be drawn whether the clubbing was right or not. We do not think that the High Court should have been so technical in its approach. In the circumstances, we set aside the order made by the High Court and allow C.M. 661/1997. The result is that C.W.P. No. 1337/1983 gets restored for fresh consideration in accordance with law by the High Court. The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
