Union of India and Others v Ramesh Gandhi
Supreme Court of India

17 April 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 916/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard learned counsel Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, Addl. Solicitor General for the petitioner and Mr. Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel for the respondent.
2.  This SLP is filed by the Union of India, the Central Bureau of Investigation and other officers of the CBI challenging the interim order passed by the Calcutta High Court on 23rd of February, 2001 in W.P. No.352/2001 in which the High Court inter alia injuncted the CBI for carrying out any further investigation on the basis of the impugned first information report.
3. This Court by the order passed on 2nd of March, 2001 in this SLP ordered that the investigation will continue but it will be subject to the result of the SLP. This court also ordered that on the bail application, being filed by the respondent, he will be released on bail on such conditions as may be fixed by the Court concerned. This order is in operation now.
4.  Considering the fact that this SLP is filed against an interim order, and the writ petition is pending before the High Court, we consider it appropriate that writ petition should be disposed of expeditiously and till then the arrangements made by the order dated 2nd March 2001 should remain operative. This arrangement is also agreed to by learned counsel for the parties.
5.  In view of the agreed position, we dispose of this SLP by passing the following order:
"The Calcutta High Court is requested to dispose of the writ petition, No.352/2001 as expeditiously as possible. The Central Bureau of Investigation may file its counter affidavit, if any, within two weeks from today. Till the writ petition is disposed of by the High Court, the arrangement made by the order dated 2nd of March, 2001 in this case will remain operative with the modification that the charge sheet, if any, filed in the case will be subject to the result of the writ petition instead of the S.L.P."
6.  Mr. Dipankar Gupta, Sr. Adv. appearing for the intending interveners does not press the application saying that, he may file fresh application for intervention before the Calcutta High Court, if necessary.
Petition disposed of.
