N.P. Amnutesh and Others v Government of Karnataka and Others
Supreme Court of India

8  May  2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.4296/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The appellants had filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the decision of respondent No. 1 in permitting respondent No. 4 to construct a pay and use toilet on a footh-path. The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court by observing that there is need for public toilets and if the Government does not have resources it can require a private person or a social organisation to undertake the task.
2.  While there can be no dispute that the Government or Municipality can require private parties to provide public facilities, what we find in the present case, however, is that one public facility has been provided at the cost of another. The toilet which has been constructed is on a foot-path which was 26 ft. 9 inches wide and the pay and use toilet has been so constructed that its maximum width is 21 ft. 3 inches. The foot-path does not have uniform width and as a result of the construction of the said toilet at its narrowest point, the foot-path is reduced to width of 3 ft. 3 inches only.
3.  The decision of the Corporation giving the said permission does not show what was the criteria adopted in allowing respondent No. 4 to construct the pay & use toilet. Public land has been allowed to be utilised apparently neither for consideration nor has a policy decision in that regard been shown. Furthermore, the permission does not specify the area which can be utilised by respondent No. 4 for the construction of the toilet.
4. It is quite obvious that respondent No.4 has regarded this as a profitable venture to which he may otherwise be entitled to but the permission which has been granted by the Municipality is at the cost of public convenience, namely, width of the foot-path has been drastically reduced which will result in the pedestrians having to walk on the road which has heavy traffic being near the bus stand. Such an action is clearly arbitrary. We are informed that it is only an yearly licence which was granted and after 1999 no extension has been given.
5.  We, accordingly, allow this appeal, set aside the decision of the High Court and direct the respondents to take appropriate steps to clear the foot-path of the said pay and use toilet.
Appeal allowed.
