U.T. Administration v B.K. Khanna and Others
Supreme Court of India

9 April 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.13365/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Leave granted.
2. Upon hearing the submissions made on behalf of the parties, we do feel it expedient to record that the technicalities of the situation as raised in support of the petition herein may be reserved for a future occasion rather than to be disposed of at this juncture on the special facts of the matter under consideration. The concerned employee, retired in the year 1983 but unfortunately, he had to undergo a by-pass surgery for which he did spend a substantial amount of money and to the tune of Rs.1, 56,750/- at the Escorts heart hospital. Being however, a retired employee he claimed medical reimbursement. The records depict that his case was referred to the State of Punjab for necessary sanction. The Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab has certified the expenses however to be Rs.84,393 as per the rates of AIIMS, New Delhi for reimbursement.
4. By reason however of non-payment and on a writ petition being moved, the High Court passed an order directing the payment to be made as sanctioned by the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab with even a default clause pertaining to payment of interest.
5. It is this order of the High Court which stands challenged in this appeal by the U.T.Administration, Chandigarh.
6. Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, the learned Advocate in support of the appeal very strongly disputed any liability for payment having regard to the introduction of conditions of service of Union Territory of Chandigarh Employee Rules, 1992, with retrospective effect from 1st April, 1991.It has been contended that by reason of the retirement of the employee concerned in 1983, the Appellant is otherwise justified in its stand of there being no liability - undoubtedly a well-formulated defence - but does it justify the Court in a situation like the present, to go into the same and decide a question of law as above, having regard to the submissions of Mrs. Indra Sawhney that Chandigarh Administration has already paid the money. The issue thus survives for determination of the quantum of contribution.
7. In this context the counter-affidavit filed by the Registrar of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana ought to be considered: The Registrar of the High Court in paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 stated as below:
"4. That, the medical expenses are required to be met by the States of Punjab, Haryana and U.T.Chandigarh, for which the High Court exists, u/s. 29 of the Re-organisation Act, 1996 in proportion to the number of cases instituted in the High Court under Schedule 14 of Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1996 read with Art. 290 of the Constitution of India in the same manner as salaries and other allowances of the serving employees of the High Court is apportioned among the States of Punjab, Haryana, and U.T. Chandigarh."
8. That, the High Court being common for all the three States of Punjab, Haryana and U.T. Chandigarh has invariably been adopting such measures from time to time which ensure to the benefit of the High Court employees/pensioners. The competent authority exercising the administrative control of the pensioners of the High Court is Hon'ble the Chief Justice and it is his sole prerogative to enact the Rules governing the conditions of service of his employees and pensioners u/art. 229 of the Constitution of India and Rule 34(1) of the High Court Establishment (Appointment and Condition of Service) Rules, 1973.6. That, as the Administrative Department of the High Court is the U.T.
9. Administration so the medical reimbursement cases of the staff/pensioners of Punjab and Haryana High Court are referred to the U.T.
10. Administration for the settlement of the claims.
11. That, under the rules and in view of the notification dated 15.4.1991, the medical bills of the retired employees of the High Court are to be submitted for sanction to the State of Punjab and the payment is to be made by the Chandigarh Administration is the Administrative Department for the employees pensioners of the Punjab and Haryana High Court. The powers exercised by the Chief Justice of the High Court under the Constitution and under The rules is unfettered powers and cannot be interfered by the Administration.
The above statements depict the correct state of affairs, but considering the factum of receipt of payment, this Court deems it expedient to resolve the dispute between the contesting parties herein with a direction on to the Chief Secretary, Punjab Government to look into the matter of allocation of fund as per the existing notification and issue necessary orders therefor in terms of the usual procedure as has been laid down in the notification within a period of six weeks from the date of communication of this order. Let it be placed on record that this order is being passed in the special facts of the matter under consideration and without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the U.T.
12. Administration, Chandigarh. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly without any order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
