Mahendra K. Bhardwaj v Distt.Inspector of Schools and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 September 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.13851/1999

The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  These two appeals raise the question as to whether the appointment of the appellant in each of the appeals was validly made by the Managing Committee, and that whether there was any approval of the public authority to such appointment. The respondents took a stand in the counter affidavit alleging therein that the so-called appointment (Annexure-P2 dated 25.7.1992) is a forged one, and such forged order of approval will not confer any right on the claim of the appellants.
2. In view of this stand taken in the counter affidavit, we directed that the letter of approval should be sent to a hand-writing expert for his opinion at the cost of the appellants. Pursuant to the said order, the letter of approval had been sent to the hand-writing expert, who has given his opinion categorically stating that the letter of approval is a genuine one and is not a forged one.
3. In view of this report of the hand-writing expert, and in view of the stand taken in the counter affidavit there is no impediment on the part of the appellants to get the relief sought for. Mr. Singh in course of his arguments appearing for the State contended that the appointment and approval would be contrary to the relevant provisions of the U.P. Act and the rules framed therein. We are not called upon to examine the submission in view of the positive stand taken in the counter affidavit, which was found to be untrue.
4. In the aforesaid circumstances, the appellants are entitled to get their salary from the Educational Authorities. Needless to mention, if the Educational Authorities has any power under any statutory provision, they may take appropriate action.Amount of Rs.5000/- deposited by the appellants in this Court may be released to the hand-writing expert.
Appeals disposed of.
