Kerala Small Financier's Association and Others v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

2 August 2001
C.A. No. 5005 of 2001 With C.As. Nos. 5006, 5007, 5008, 5009-5019 and 5020 of 2001 (Arising as an appeal by S.L.P. From the Judgment and Order Dt. 5 July 2000, of the Kerala High Court In W.A. No. 1262 of 2000)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  The only contention raised in these cases is with regard to the legislative competence of the Parliament to enact section 45S of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. The main ground in this regard which is urged by learned counsel for the appellants is that in respect of persons who are registered under the Money Lenders Acts passed by the various States their business cannot be brought to an end by virtue of section 45S. It is contended that the State Acts have been passed in exercise of the powers conferred on the State Legislatures under entry 30 of List II and inherent in the right of carrying on the business of money lending is the option to take money on deposit. The enactment of section 45S now prevents an unincorporated body or person from accepting a deposit even though the person may be a registered money-lender.
2.  In our opinion, this question is no longer res integra. In Kanta Mehta v. Union of India, the High Court of Delhi considered such a contention which had been raised with regard to the validity of section 45S which had been incorporated at that point of time on the ground of legislative competence.
3.  The High Court came to the conclusion that under entry 45, List I of the Seventh Schedule the said provision had been validly enacted. This case came up for consideration before a Bench of three judges of this court in T. Velayudhan Achari v. Union of India. After setting out the conclusions of the High Court, this court had upheld the legislative competence of Parliament to enact the said provision.
4. This court in no uncertain terms observed that the decision of the Delhi High Court was correct.  This court stated that:
"We approve the reasoning of the Delhi High Court in Kanta Mehta's case".
Again this court stated that:
"Therefore, we are in entire agreement with the Delhi High Court".
5.  The aforesaid decision of this court in T. Velayudhan Achari's case is binding on us and following the ratio of the said decision the conclusion which we can arrive at is that even the new section 45S has been validly enacted. The provisions of the State laws relating to money lending cannot have the effect of overriding the provisions of section 45S of the Reserve Bank of India Act. Section 45S is a valid piece of legislation and it binds all persons referred to therein.
These appeals are, accordingly, dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
