Nafar Chandra Jute Mills Limited v United Bank of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

3 September 2001
C.A. No.3185/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is directed against the judgment of the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court. The property in question belong to one Kolay Iraon & Steel Co. In a proceeding before the Calcutta High Court, the property was put to sale, and the appellant, as the highest bidder, was required to deposit a sum of Rs. Sixty Five Lakh.
The said sum of Rs. Sixty Five Lakh has already been deposited on 18.9.1995. On such deposit being made, the sale was confirmed in favour of the appellant. The United Bank of India filed an application for setting aside the sale.
2.  That application stood dismissed by a learned Single Judge. The Bank preferred an appeal. The Division Bench ordered for further sale by open auction after fixing the minimum reserve price, and ultimately that order of the Division Bench setting aside the sale and directing a fresh auction is subject matter of challenge in this appeal.
3.  In course of hearing of this appeal, this Court had directed the Official Liquidator to find out as to whether any higher bidder could be available on a fresh auction being made. Perused the Report of the Official Liquidator. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we dispose of this appeal with direction that the appellant would deposit a further sum of Rs. Thirty Lakh within 3 weeks from today, and on such deposit being made, the sale in favour of the appellant would stand affirmed, and that the appellant would be handed over possession of the property ( which was the subject matter of auction both movable and immovable) immediately.
4. If within 3 weeks from today, the appellant does not deposit the aforesaid sum of Rs. Thirty Lakh, then the amount of money, which has already been deposited on 18.9.1995, will be refunded to the appellant with interest at 9% per annum within 4 weeks from that date.
5.  The Official Liquidator having collected the money would be able to pay aforesaid amount to the appellant. The Official Liquidator shall pay all the amount with interest. Needless to mention, in the event the appellant fails to deposit the additional amount, as stated above, and the Official Liquidator pays up the amount to the appellant, as directed by us, the property will have to be re-auctioned.
Order accordingly.
