Champa Santra v Chinta Santra (Porel) and Others
Supreme Court of India

2 March 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.4986/2000
The order of the court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Certain selections had been made to the posts of Class IV staff in Goghat Bhagabati Balika Vidyalaya. A writ petition was filed contending that the appellant's name had not been sponsored by the Employment Exchange when the vacancy was notified. A Learned Single Judge of the High Court directed the school authority to allow the said appellant to appear at the interview and also interviewed subsequently and thereafter she had been selected and was given appointment as Group 'D' staff by the school authorities.
2.  The first respondent questioned the appointment on the ground that the certificate produced by the appellant was a forged one and her name had not been sponsored in terms of the directions issued by the Director of School Education. The learned Single Judge examined the matter and directed that the representation made by the first respondent should be examined and appropriate findings given thereto and her empanelment would depend upon the decision on the said representation. At the time of disposal of the said representation the authorities will have to taken into consideration the decision rendered in MAT 1198/98 ( Muktipada Maity Vs. State of West Bengal and Ors) which shall be made available to the concerned authority.
3.  On appeal against that order the Division Bench took exception to the directions issued by the learned Single Judge When the authorities had been directed to look into the matter to consider the representation made on both these aspects that the appellant had produced a forged certificate and her name ought not to have been appropriately sponsored in terms of the directions of the Director of School Education.
4. While doing so, the learned Single Judge had directed to take into consideration the effect of the order made by the High court we fail to understand as to how the Division Bench could have interfered with that order. Whether there was compliance with the relevant rules or not could have been look into by the authorities and appropriate decision could have been made on the representation made by the parties. We therefore set aside the the order made by the Division Bench of the High Court and restore that of the learned Single Judge. The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
