Ram Kishan and Another v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

10 August 2001
Review Petitions (Cr.) Nos. 1055-56 of 2000 In S.L.Ps. (Cr.) Nos. 1063-64 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The only question raised in this review petition is, whether the present case falls under the category of "rarest of rare" case so that the convicted accused be hanged by the gallows. This Court has held that sentence of death should be passed in "rarest of rare" cases. Learned counsel appearing for the State referred to some of the cases in which death sentence was confirmed by this Court. The reference is made to the case of Surja Ram v. State of Rajasthan 1996 Indlaw SC 24811996 Indlaw SC 2481 And govindaswami v. State of T.N. 1998 Indlaw SC 6981998 Indlaw SC 698 we have examined these two cases. In these cases the entire family members had been killed. The striking feature which distinguishes the present case from the aforesaid two cases is that in the cited cases for several months there was no dispute, conflict or tension which could be said to be the reason for the gruesome murder committed. There was no such reason which could be said to have incited the accused or which could be said to be the reason for committing the murder in a fit of anger.
2.  In the present case, we find such fact emerging. In our case the prosecution story is, there was a dispute between the two brothers, namely, Risal Singh and Chhaju Ram having adjoining fields. Risal Singh owned about seven-and-a-half acres of land. He was living with his sons. They had constructed their "dhani" (farmhouse) in the field. They had also installed a tubewell about one-and-a-half years prior to the date of occurrence. The sons of Chhaju Ram had started installing a tubewell in their field. They had chosen a site which was close to the tubewell of the complainant. They were asked by the complainant to shift the site. Having failed to persuade, they had approached the civil court at Hissar and got a stay order on 1-3-1995. In spite of this, they continued to dig the well.
3. Thereafter, on 2-3-1995 a complaint was lodged against Pradeep and Dalbir, sons of Chhaju Ram, with the police. Criminal proceedings were initiated against them and they were arrested by the police. This infuriated the accused which led to the murder which occurred on the same day in the night i.e. on 2-3-1995 at about 10.30 p.m. In other words, blood was boiling between the families of the two brothers.
4.  Looking to these facts, it is clear that a rage between the parties accelerated during these days. The arrest of the said two persons by the police on the same day led to the murder. This distinguishes this case from the above two cited cases. Accordingly, we feel, on the facts and circumstances of the case, it is appropriate to commute the sentence of death to that of life sentence based on the conviction already confirmed by this Court earlier.
5. Accordingly, the review petition is allowed to the extent indicated above. The Registry to communicate this order to the authorities concerned within one week.
6.  In view of commuting death sentence, it becomes relevant, which was not adverted to by the High Court that the sentence under the Arms Act shall run concurrently with that under Section 302 IPC.
The review petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.
