Commissioner of Income Tax v Palghat Shadi Mahal Trust
Supreme Court of India

19 July 2001
C.A. Nos. 4294 to 4303 of 2000 (From the judgment and order Dt. 24 October 1998 of the Kerala High Court in IT Ref. Nos. 27 to 35 & 139 of 1996, reported as CIT vs. Palghat Shadi Mahal Trust 1999 153 CTR (Ker) 46 : 1999 236 ITR 722 (Ker)) & 5021 of 2000.
The Order of the Court was as follows:
C.A. Nos. 4294 to 4303/2000
1.  These appeals by the Revenue arise upon a certificate of fitness given by the High Court of Kerala. The High Court answered in the affirmative and in favour of the assessee-trust the following question :
"Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the assessee is charitable institution whose income is exempt under s. 11 of the IT Act, 1961 ?"
2.  The assessee-trust is a public charitable trust. It was constituted under a trust deed dt. 14th April, 1975. The settlers of the trust were certain Muslim residents of Kerala.
3. They constituted the trust
"for the purpose of constructing the establishing at Palghat a Shadi Mahal and other institutions for the educational, social and economic advancement of the Muslims and for religious and charitable objects recognised by Muslim law. ......"
"It was decided to further clarify the clause in the trust deed regarding the purpose of the trust as mentioned in para 5 of the trust deed as :
The income of the trust as well as the Shadi Mahal Building proposed to be erected shall be made available to all communities irrespective of religion, caste or creed."
4.  Upon this basis, the trust made a claim for exemption from tax under s. 11 of the IT Act, 1961. The matter went up to the High Court which restored the appeal to the Tribunal with certain directions. Thereafter, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the trust was entitled to the exemption by virtue of the provisions of the second Explanation to s. 13 of the Act. The High Court, in the judgment and order under challenge, has upheld this finding.
Sec. 11 deals with income from property held for charitable and religious purposes and sets out which income shall not be included in the total income of a trust. It does not apply when the provisions of s. 13 are attracted.
Sec. 13(1)(b) is relevant here, and reads thus :
"13(1) Nothing contained in s. 11 or s. 12 shall operate so as to exclude from the total income of the previous year of the person in receipt thereof :
(a) ......................
(b) in the case of a trust for charitable purposes or a charitable institution created or established after the commencement of this Act, any income thereof if the trust or institution is created or established for the benefit of any particular religious community or caste."
The second Explanation to s. 13 reads thus :
" Explanation 2. - A trust or institution created or established for the benefit of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes, Scheduled Tribes or women and children shall not be deemed to be a trust or institution created or established for the benefit of a religious community or caste within the meaning of cl. (b) of sub-s. (1)."
5.  It is an admitted position that in the State of Kerala the Muslims are notified to be a backward community and it is on that basis that the Tribunal and the High Court held that the trust was entitled to the benefit of the second Explanation to s. 13 and, therefore, the benefit of s. 11.
6.  It was contended before us on behalf of the Revenue that the Tribunal and the High Court failed to take into account the fact that the trust provided benefits to Muslims all over the world and only to the Muslims of Kerala so that it could not be said that the trust was covered by the provisions of the second Explanation to s. 13.
7.  On behalf of the trust it was submitted that the resolution of the General Body of the trust passed on 20th April, 1975, operated and that, therefore, the benefits of the trust were not restricted to any particular community or religion. Reliance in this behalf was placed upon cl. (xiv) of the trust deed which entitles the General Body of the trustees, by majority of the trustees attending the meeting, to "decide the meaning and scope of any of these clauses. ......" The trust is created for the purposes of establishing institutions for the educational, social and economic advancement of the Muslims and for religious and charitable objects recognised by Muslim law. The resolution of 20th April, 1975, purports to change the object of the trust so that the benefits thereof are made available to all communities, irrespective of religion, caste or creed. This is not deciding the meaning and scope of a clause of the trust deed but an attempt to alter the object of the trust deed, which is not contemplated by the said cl. (xiv) and is impermissible except by means of an amendment of the trust deed by the settlers.
It was also contended on behalf of the trust that the trust enures only for the benefit of the residents of the locality and is so used and, therefore, the income of the trust is saved by the second Explanation to s. 13. This contention also ignores the object of the trust which we have set out above. There is no limitation in the trust deed in regard to which Muslim can avail of the benefit of the trust. The benefit is available to Muslims from all over the world, none of whom, except in Kerala, are of backward classes.
8. It is, therefore, not possible to accept the view taken by the High Court and the Tribunal that the trust is covered by the second Explanation to s. 13.
9.  The trust attracts the provisions of s. 13(1)(b) and is not entitled to exemption under s. 11. The question, therefore, is answered in the negative and in a favour of the Revenue.
10. The appeals are allowed and the judgment and order under challenge is set aside. The assessee-trust shall pay to the Revenue the costs of the appeals.
C.A. No. 5021/2000
11.  The question raised in this appeal is the question that was raised in C.A. Nos. 4294-4303/2000, which we have just allowed. This appeal is, therefore, allowed and the judgment and order under challenge is set aside.
No order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
