Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai v M.S. Bidarkundi and Others
Supreme Court of India

26 March 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.18725/2000
The order of the court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal is directed against an interim order of the Bombay High Court in a pending writ petition. It appears that the relief sought for in the writ petition is to treat the respondents-Laboratory Superintendents as "Academic Staff" in which case the age of superannuation would be 62 years.
2.  Some of the Laboratory Superintendents had filed a writ petition in the year 1988 claiming the self-same declaration and the High court entertained the matter, but did not pass any interim direction. In the present case, by an interim order dated 27th September, 2000 the High Court has granted the interim relief by holding that the Laboratory Superintendents be treated as academic staff and, therefore, they should be continued till they reach the age of 62 years, which is the age of superannuation for academic staff.
3.  The learned Solicitor General appearing for the Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, contends that since the main (2) relief which has been sought for in the writ petition is to treat the Laboratory Superintendents as `Academic Staff' the High Court was not justified in granting the same as interim relief. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that there had been certain change in the situation and in the changed situation, the High Court was fully justified in granting the interim direction.The age of superannuation is a condition of service and unless and until the Laboratory Superintendents are treated to be academic staff, they cannot claim to be entitled to continue till 62 years, which is the age of superannuation for academic staff. The question for consideration before the High Court therefore would be, taking into account the duties discharged by these Laboratory Superintendents, can they be held to be "academic staff" ? In the event ultimately the petitioners would succeed before the High Court, then they would be entitled to get the compensation for the period for which they have been illegally denied their continuance.
4. In the event, however, the writ petition will ultimately stand dismissed, then by interim order they would be allowed to usurp the public office which ordinarily they would not be entitled to. In this situation, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court committed error in granting the interim direction. We therefore quash the interim order dated 27th of September, 2000 and request the learned Chief Justice (3) of Bombay High Court to get the writ petition heared at an early date.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
