Md. Mortuja Hussain v Afia Khanam Choudhury and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 November 2001
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2227/1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Pursuant to the advertisement issued on 29.6.1992, applications were filed by the appellant and certain other candidates for the post of a Lecturer in English in N.C. College Badarpur.
2.  The requisite qualification for the post is Master's Degree in relevant subject with at least 55% marks in aggregate and "consistently good academic record from H.S.L.C. onwards". The selection Committee after having interviewed the candidates and considered their performance and knowledge of the subject and marks obtained by them at the interview and their academic qualifications unanimously recommended a panel of candidates in order of merit to the Governing Body of the N.C. College Badarpur for appointment as Lecturer in English. The appellant was ranked first in that list.
3.  He was thereafter appointed as Lecturer from 6.1.1993 and he has continued to hold that office till today.
4.  The said selection was challenged before the High Court in a Writ Petition. Learned Single Judge of the High Court and thereafter the Division Bench of the High Court examined the question of qualifications possessed by the appellant and found that though he possessed a Master's Degree in English with more than 55% of the marks, he did not possess the qualification of the "consistently good academic record from H.S.L.C. onwards.
5.  Whatever be the opinion of the High Court, in such matters where academic qualifications are concerned, which cannot be spelt out by mere reference prescription but has to be assessed with reference to academic record and whether it is consistently good or otherwise should be left to academic bodies themselves. This view is stated in more than one decision of this Court, including University of Mysore and Anr. Vs. C.D. Govinda Rao and Anr. 1963 Indlaw SC 169.
6. The question whether the academic record is consistently good or not pertains purely to an academic matter and Courts would naturally hesitate to express a definite opinion, particularly when it appears that the Selection Committee consisting of experts was satisfied that the selected candidate fulfils the necessary qualification, the High Court ought not to have embarked upon its own assessment and interfered with the selection of the Appellant.
7.  In the result, we allow this appeal, set aside the orders made by the High Court in the Writ Petition as well as in the Writ Appeal and dismiss the Writ Petition filed by the respondents.
Appeal allowed.
