Ramesh Kumar Bhalla v Parampyari Bhalla and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 July 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.17225/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Despite service of notice no one appears for the respondents.
Heard learned counsel for the appellant.
Leave granted.
1.  Appellant filed application for amending the plaint in Civil Suit No.485/1 of 1999/95. The Sub Judge, Shimla by order dated 5.1.2000 rejected the said amendment application on the ground that it introduces entirely a new case and new cause of action. Against that order, the appellant preferred Civil Revision Application No.98 of 2000 before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
2. By judgment and order dated 7th September, 2000, the High Court partly allowed the revision application by permitting the appellant to amend paragraph No.8 of the plaint as prayed for. With regard to the rest of the amendment application the High Court observed that the amendment sought for was the substitution of paragraph nos.3 and 4 and addition to paragraphs 6 and 9 and it would introduce new subject matter and new cause of action.
3.  From the facts stated in the plaint, it is apparent that the suit of the appellant is for partition of land admeasuring 25 bighas jointly owned by the plaintiff and the defendants and the description of it is also mentioned in the plaint. The only mistake which was committed by the plaintiff was instead of mentioning the 'khasra' number he has mentioned 'khatauni' number. The rest of the amendment sought for by the plaintiff is for the prayer that so-called partition affected by the defendant is fraudulent. By this amendment, there is no question of change of the subject matter of the suit as described in the plaint, which is land allegedly jointly owned by the parties.
In this view of the matter, this appeal is allowed.
4.  The impugned orders passed by the High Court and the trial court are set aside and the amendment application filed by the appellant is allowed. Four weeks time from today is granted to carry out the amendment. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
