Gen.Manager, S.E. Railway and Others v Sarat Chandra Satapathy and Others
Supreme Court of India

9 February 2001
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.9563/1998

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  At the time of grant of recognition of an educational institution functioning in Puri Railway Colony the South Eastern Railway proposed to the Director of Public Institution, Orissa by letter dated 21.6.1988 as follows:
"In response to your Memo No. quoted above, I am to inform you that all the cost of the School in question will be entirely born by the Rail way Administration and there will be no financial implication to State Government in future.
Moreover, presently, the question of Grants-in-Aid does not arise. As the requisite assets for a M.E. School available, the question of recognition as discussed in the meeting may please be taken into consideration. Further, it is to apprise that in future, the said school would be taken over by the Railway Administration as per the formalities laid down in the Education Code of State Government(Orissa))."
2.  Even, thereafter, when no steps were taken , Writ Petition was filed before the High Court to give effect to the undertaking given by the South Eastern Railway administration. The High Court by an order made on 14.10.1996 directed the Railway authorities to consider and decide the question of taking over of the Management of the school in question within certain time. Thereafter, an order was made on 8.1.1997 by the Chief Personnel Officer of the Railways which is rather astonishing particularly in the light of the undertaking that has been given earlier.
3. It would be useful to set out the reasons given in that order in this regard:
"The opposite party No.2 has taken a decision that the school under subject in this O.J.C. cannot be taken over by this Railway in its present form and status as it will flout the Railway's recruitment guidelines and cause disenchantment amongst the staff. It has also been decided by him that the present Primary School fully managed by the railway should be upgraded to M.E. School for which proposal is being mooted to Railway Board."
4.  The matter was carried in appeal before a division Bench of the High Court which considered the matter and is of the view that though they would have ordinarily thought of remitting the matter to the Government for reconsideration but in view of the dogged view taken by them no useful purpose will be served by doing so and, therefore, directed to take over the school in question. Really speaking what is sought to be done by the High Court is to give effect to or implement the undertaking given by the Railway Administration on 21.6.1988 at the time of recognition of the school in question. When it was made clear that not only they would take care of the cost of the administration of the school but they will also in future take over the school itself subject to the formalities laid down in the Educational Code of the Government of Orissa. If that was the position, there is no justification now for the Railway Administration to have passed an order as on 8.1.1997.
5.  Further the reasons set out therein are as vague, as the vagueness could be not to take over the school. How the taking over of the school in the present case will flout the Railway's Recruitment quidelines and cause disenchantment amongst the staff is baffling. To say the least the reasons set out only reminds us of the famous Aesop's fable of Wolf chiding the lamb having pollutted the water upstream while drinking water down the stream, and if not that lamb any of his ancestors might have done so.
6. In the circumstances, we find there was justification for the High Court to have ordered take over of the school. Therefore, we decline to interfere and reject this Special leave petition.
Petition dismissed.
