Gujarat Housing Board v Thawardasladharam Khubchandani and Others
Supreme Court of India

11 December 2002
C.A. Nos. 11441-11443 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant herein is the Gujarat Housing Board (hereinafter referred to as "the Board"). In the year 1982, the Board floated a Scheme for providing cheaper houses to the public. In response to the advertisement, the respondents herein submitted their applications. It is not disputed that each of the respondents paid a sum of Rs.l,85,000/- towards the purchase price of the flat and on their such payments the possession of the flats was given to them. Subsequently, in the year 1990, the respondents filed complaints before the State Consumer Forum contending that they were freedom fighters and are entitled to purchase the houses on concessional rates. It was prayed in the complaint be Rs. 1,50,000/- with they were required to pay an additional amount of Rs. 35,000/- and, therefore, a sum of Rs. 35,000/- may be refunded to them. The State Consumer Forum found that the price of the flat was Rs. 1,50,000/- and, therefore, directed the appellant herein to refund a sum of Rs. 35,000/- to each of the freedom fighter.
2. Aggrieved the Board preferred an appeal before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. The respondents also preferred an appeal against the order to the extent that their prayer in the complaint was refused. The National Commission was of the view that the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission has no jurisdiction to fix the price of the flats, and, therefore, set aside that finding. However, it held that since the respondents were given lesser area than what was stipulated under the Scheme, they are entitled to refund of a sum of Rs. 25,000/-towards compensation. Aggrieved, the Board has filed these appeals.
3.  Learned counsel appearing for the appellant urged that the view taken by the National Commission in holding that the respondents were given lesser area and, therefore, entitled to have refund of Rs. 25,000/- as compensation is erroneous. We have perused the record and found that no evidence at all was led by the Board to show that in fact the respondents were allotted the stipulated area.
4. In absence of such a evidence, the finding recorded by the National Commission that the respondents were given possession of lesser area does not suffer from any infirmity. Consequently the appeals fails and are, accordingly, dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
