United India Insurance Company Limited and Another v B. A. Anwar Basha (D) By Lawyers and Others
Supreme Court of India

12 April 2002
C.A. No. 2897 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal filed by the Insurance Company is directed against the order of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission in Revision Petition No. 283 of 1997 setting aside the order passed by the State Commission and restoring the order of the District Forum.
2.  The matter in dispute relates to repudiation of the claim of respondents by the Insurance Company on the ground that the insurer had suppressed material informations regarding the condition of his health at the time of issue of the policy. The District Forum had accepted their claim for Rs. 99,999/- giving certain reasons.
3.  The State Commission, on appeal by the Insurance Company, set aside the order passed by the District Forum and accepted the case for repudiation of the claim by the Insurance Company. In the Revision Petition filed by the claimants, the National Commission passed the order which reads as follows:
"We set aside the order of the State Commission. The District Forum's order is restored. We set aside the order of the State Commission because the State Commission has relied upon the Surveyor's Report which is not borne out by any annexures. The allegations made by the Surveyor in his report is not corroborated by any evidence. The Revision Petition is disposed of as above."
4.  Considering the case of the parties, we are of the view that the National Commission should have passed a reasoned order disposing of the revision petition on merits. It is relevant to note here the observations of the National Commission that the State Commission has relied upon the Surveyor's Report which is not borne out by any annexures is incorrect. The Surveyor's Report was on record before the National Commission and the Surveyor, in his report had not referred to any other document in support of his findings.
5. In the circumstances, for the sake of proper adjudication of the dispute raised and in the interest of justice, the matter should be remitted to the National Commission for fresh disposal.
6.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The order under challenge is set aside and the matter is remitted to the National Commission for disposal in accordance with law. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
