Pramod Mahto v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

31 July 2002
Cr.A. No. 931 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant herein and two others, namely, Bechan Paswan and Bibhakar Mahto were charged for offence punishable under Sections 302/34 IPC for having committed the murder of Devendra Mahto on 17-5-1984 at about 7.30 p.m. in a village called Rasulpur.
2.  Since Bibhakar Mahto was a minor, his trial was separated and it is on record that he was subsequently acquitted from the charge against him. Learned VIIth Additional Sessions Judge, Munger who tried the case of the appellant and Bechan Paswan, found both of them guilty of the offence charged against them and convicted the appellant u/s. 302 and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment. He also convicted the said Bechan Paswan u/s. 302 read with S. 34 and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.
3. In appeal the High Court allowed the appeal of Bechan Paswan and acquitted him of the charge while the appellant was found guilty of the offence charged against him and the sentence was affirmed. It is against the judgment of the High Court, the appellant is before us.
4.  Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the evidence of eyewitnesses PWs 1, 2 and 5 is wholly artificial and could not be relied on. He also submitted that from the material on record it is clear that at the time of incident it was dark and there was no light at the place of incident. Therefore, the identification allegedly made by the said eyewitnesses also cannot be relied upon. He further submitted that the names of PWs 1 and 5 do not find place in the FIR and there is also inordinate delay in recording the statement of the witness. On these bases he argued that their evidence should be rejected.
5.  We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and also Mr. Saket Singh, learned counsel for the State and we have gone through the judgments of the courts below and also the records of the case. Having perused the same, we are of the considered opinion that the courts below have rightly appreciated the material on record and have found the appellant guilty therefore we find no reason whatsoever to interfere with the findings of the two courts below.
6.  Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, then relying upon the judgment of this Court in State of U.P. v. Jaggo 1971 Indlaw SC 8491971 Indlaw SC 849 submitted that since the prosecution has failed to examine the owner of the shop Mansoor Alam who if examined would have unfolded truly the facts leading to the death of Devender, an adverse inference should be drawn against the prosecution for his non-examination. But we see from the records that so far as Mansoor Alam is concerned, though his previous statement was recorded, he was not available to be examined in the court. Even though non-bailable warrant was issued at the instance of the appellant for production of the said Mansoor Alam but the said warrants could not be executed. We also notice the facts that no suggestion has been made to the investigating officer that he has deliberately not got the execution of non-bailable warrant so as to prevent the witness from appearing in the court.
7. In these circumstances we do not agree with the learned counsel on this point so as to draw any adverse inference for the non-examination of this person. Learned counsel relying on the said case of Jaggo.
8.  For these reasons we find no merit in this appeal. The appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
