Nirmal and Navin Private Limited and Others v D. Ravindran
Supreme Court of India

4 April 2002
Cr.As. Nos. 439-440 of 2002 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (Cri.) Nos. 6884-85 of 2001)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Being aggrieved and dissatisfied by the judgment and order dated 22nd June 2001 passed by the High Court of Madras in Criminal Revision O.P. Nos. 14209 of 1998 and 11832 of 2000, the appellants have preferred these appeals by special leave.
2.  It has been contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that in view of the specific common order passed by the Settlement Commission (IT and WT), Madras, dated 30th March 1995, the criminal complaint filed against the appellants requires to be quashed and set aside. For this purpose, in our view, he has rightly relied upon following paragraph of the said order : -
"9. Considering the co-operation extended by the applicant in the proceedings before us, immunity is granted from penalties and prosecution in respect of matters arising out of this settlement. The immunity from prosecution is subjected to the applicant co-operating with the Department in any proceedings for assessment, penalty or prosecution in case of M/s. ENP. The delay of 6 months in filing the Return will be condoned and no interest under S. 139(8) will be charged. Interest u/S. 215/217 will, however, be charged for a period of twelve months."
3.  This order is passed in view of the power conferred on the Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty under S. 245-H of the Income Tax Act which empowers the Settlement Commission to grant such immunity if any person has made a full and true disclosure of his income and the manner in which such income has been derived on such condition as it may think fit to impose, from prosecution for any offence under the Act or under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or under any other Central Act for the time being in force with respect to the case covered by the Settlement.  Further, Section 245-I specifically provides finality and conclusiveness to such order and it cannot be re-opened in any proceeding under the Act or under any other law for the time being in force. The said section reads thus :
"245-I. Every order of settlement passed under sub-section (4) of S. 245?D shall be conclusive as to the matters stated therein and no matter covered by such order shall, save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, be reopened in any proceeding under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force."
4.  In the present case before the Settlement Commission the appellants stated that the Company has earned additional income in its dealings in potato with M/s. Express Newspapers Ltd. (M/s. ENP) and claimed that M/s. ENP had appointed the applicant as its agent to buy and sell potatoes. Instead of purchasing potatoes in the open market as an agent of M/s. ENP, it contended that it traded in potatoes belonging to itself which resulted in substantial profits and corresponding losses to M/s. ENP. It was also stated that the applicant had introduced certain fictitious purchases and sales to ensure that losses incurred by M/s. ENP were brought to reasonable level. Thereafter when the appellant was asked to furnish necessary evidence, he withdrew the said contention and filed two statements dated 18-1-1995 stating that the said transaction were not genuine and were made only to help M/s. ENP to justify its claim for loss in potato dealings. The Settlement Commission considered the aforesaid disclosure made by the appellants. But as the re-assessment for assessment year 1985-86 was over, it had not re-opened the said re-assessment for that assessment year.  However, for subsequent assessment year 1986-87, appellant's case was considered and thereafter necessary order for re-assessment was passed. Finally, with regard to the penalties and prosecution, Settlement Commission granted immunity as stated above. Reading the aforesaid order as a whole, it is apparent that immunity was granted from paying penalties and prosecution in respect of the fictitious transactions with M/s. ENP on conditions as mentioned therein. Therefore, in our view, the immunity is not confined only for re-assessment for the assessment year 1986-87, but it is with regard to fictitious transactions with M/s. ENP.
5.  In view of the total immunity granted by the Settlement Commission, it was totally unjustified on the part of the Commissioner of Income-tax to proceed with the complaint against the appellants. It is also not open to the Criminal Court to go behind the order passed by the Settlement Commission. It was not open to the High Court to say that the impugned order passed by the Settlement Commission was in any way illegal or void.
6.  Hence, in view of the order passed by the Settlement Commission, the prosecution which is pending against the appellants would not survive. In the result, the appeals are allowed to the aforesaid extent and the impugned orders passed by the High Court are set aside. The respondent is permitted to deposit Rs. 5,000/- as ordered by this Court vide order dated 7th March, 2002 within two days. However, it is made clear that this order would not give any immunity to the appellants not to abide by the terms and conditions laid down by the Settlement Commission in its order dated 30th March, 1995.
Appeals partly allowed.
