Troikaa Pharmaceuticals Limited v Wockhardt Limited and Anr
Supreme Court of India

26 August 2002
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 60 of 2002
The Judgment was delivered by: ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Heard counsel for the parties.
1.   A suit has been filed by the petitioner against the respondents in Ahmedabad on the violation of a trade mark of the petitioner. Having obtained time for filing the written statement, the respondent then chose to file Suit No.13 of 2001 entitled M/s. Wockhardt Limited v. M/s. Devendra Medical Store & Anr. against the petitioner herein in the Court of the District Judge, Kanpur Dehat (UP).
2.  The present application has been filed for transfer of the suit filed by respondent No. 1 to Ahmedabad. It is not in dispute that as far as respondent No.1 is concerned, its registered office is at Bombay and its factory is in Gujarat. How it chose to go to Kanpur to file a civil suit defies all logic. 1993 is a speaking order containing reasons for refusal to grant ad-interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff.
3.   In fact it is noted in the said order that the "learned counsel for the plaintiff stated that, at the moment, they would be pressing only for an ad-interim order to restrain the First Defendant from creating any third party rights in the three marks which are very valuable". In this context the learned Judge goes on to observe:
" I have been taken through the averments made in the plaint on this aspect of the matter. Although it is contended by the plaintiff that, in order to ensure maintenance of quality one representative of Shaw Wallace Group was deployed in every manufacturing unit wherein products sold under the three names/marks were manufactured and bottled, this is not borne out from any material on record. In any case, it is not possible to accept that this condition can be imposed upon the First Defendant if it has ceased to be part of Shaw Wallace Group. At this stage at least, the First Defendant has been held to be the rightful owner of the concerned three marks, and, therefore, prima facie, it would be entitled to do everything that a rightful owner is entitled to do. The argument that the assignment is clear that the intention was to harrass the petitioner.
4.  We are satisfied that this is a fit case for transferring the petition. The Courts are not meant to be used for such business rivalries and trying to inconvenience another party at the expense of the Court's time. Such type of litigation has to be discouraged with a heavy hand. We, therefore, allow this petition directing the transfer of Suit No. 13 of 2001 entitled M/s. Wockhardt Limited v. M/s. Devendra Medical Store and Anr., from the Court of the District Judge, Kanpur Dehat (U.P.) to the City Civil Court, Ahmedabad and further direct the said suit to be tried alongwith Suit No. 3546/2001 entitled Troikaa Pharmaceuticals v. Wockhardt Ltd., and Ors.
This petition is allowed with Rs. 10,000/- as costs.
Petition allowed.
