Thankappan Nadar and Others v Gopala Krishnan and Another
Supreme Court of India

30 April 2002
Cr.A. No. 621 of 2002 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (Cr.) No. 6438 of 2001)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal is filed against the judgment and order dated 18-7-2001 passed by the High Court of Kerala in Crl. RP No. 62 of 1994 allowing the revision application filed by PW 1 de facto complainant.
2.  In the present case, the Principal Assistant Sessions Judge, Thiruvananthapuram by his judgment and order dated 18-1-1992, convicted Accused 1 to 11 and sentenced them for the offences under Sections 143, 147, 148 and 307 read with S. 149 IPC. The Sessions Judge, Thiruvananthapuram, after appreciating the evidence allowed Criminal Appeal No. 24 of 1992 and acquitted the accused for the offences for which they were charged. In revision application filed by PW 1 de facto complainant, the High Court set aside the order of the Sessions Judge. Hence, this appeal.
3.  Mr. U. R. Lalit, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants submitted that the order passed by the High Court is, on the face of it, illegal and erroneous as the High Court has exceeded its revisional jurisdiction conferred u/s. 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. It is his submission that it is well-settled law that the High Court can exercise/invoke its revisional jurisdiction only in exceptional cases, where there is manifest illegality or gross miscarriage of justice. For this purpose, he relied upon various judgments. It is his contention that in the present case the High Court has only reappreciated the evidence and arrived at the conclusion that it is not a fit case for acquitting the accused. For this purpose, the High Court mainly relied upon the evidence of the injured witness. No doubt, finally the High Court remitted the matter to the trial court for deciding the case afresh. But it is his submission that the appreciation of evidence was without jurisdiction as there was no manifest illegality nor was there any glaring defect in the procedure followed by the trial court.
4.  As against this, learned counsel for Respondent 1 victim submitted that for one or the other reason, if the State Government does not prefer appeal in such serious cases, the High Court has ample jurisdiction to interfere with the judgment and order passed by the appellate court. It is his submission that for exercise of revisional jurisdiction there is no limitation.
5.  In a revision application filed by the de facto complainant against the acquittal order, the Court's jurisdiction u/s. 397 read with S. 401 CrPC is limited. The law on the subject is well settled. Instead of referring to various judgments, we would only refer to a few decisions rendered by this Court. In Akalu Ahir v. Ramdeo Ram  1973 Indlaw SC 2681973 Indlaw SC 268 this Court has observed thus:
"This Court, however, by way of illustration, indicating the following categories of cases which would justify the High Court in interfering with a finding of acquittal in revision:
(i) Where the trial court has no jurisdiction to try the case, but has still acquitted the accused;
(ii) Where the trial court has wrongly shut out evidence which the prosecution wished to produce;
(iii) Where the appellate court has wrongly held the evidence which was admitted by the trial court to be inadmissible;
(iv) Where the material evidence has been overlooked only (either) by the trial court or by the appellate court; and
(v) Where the acquittal is based on the compounding of the offence which is invalid under the law.
These categories were, however, merely illustrative and it was clarified that other cases of similar nature can also be properly held to be of exceptional nature where the High Court can justifiably interfere with the order of acquittal."
The Court further observed:
" 10. No doubt, the appraisal of evidence by the trial Judge in the case in hand is not perfect or free from flaw and a court of appeal may well have felt justified in disagreeing with its conclusion, but from this it does not follow that on revision by a private complainant, the High Court is entitled to reappraise the evidence for itself as if it is acting as a court of appeal and then order a retrial. It is unfortunate that a serious offence inspired by rivalry and jealousy in the matter of election to the office of village mukhia, should go unpunished. But that can scarcely be a valid ground for ignoring or for not strictly following the law as enunciated by this Court."
6. In our view, the emphasised portion of the aforesaid judgment is applicable in the present case. It is unfortunate that such a serious offence inspired by rivalry in the matter of election should go unpunished. However, that would not be a valid ground for ignoring or for not strictly following the law as enunciated by this Court, which does not empower the Court exercising the revisional jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence.
7.  In Vimal Singh v. Khuman Singh  1998 Indlaw SC 11271998 Indlaw SC 1127 this Court after considering various decisions, observed as under:
"Coming to the ambit of power of the High Court u/s. 401 of the Code, the High Court in its revisional power does not ordinarily interfere with judgments of acquittal passed by the trial court unless there has been manifest error of law or procedure. The interference with the order of acquittal passed by the trial court is limited only to exceptional cases when it is found that the order under revision suffers from glaring illegality or has caused miscarriage of justice or when it is found that the trial court has no jurisdiction to try the case or where the trial court has illegally shut out the evidence which otherwise ought to have been considered or where the material evidence which clinches the issue has been overlooked. These are the instances where the High Court would be justified in interfering with the order of acquittal. Sub-s. (3) of S. 401 mandates that the High Court shall not convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction. Thus, the High Court would not be justified in substituting an order of acquittal into one of conviction even if it is convinced that the accused deserves conviction. No doubt, the High Court in exercise of its revisional power can set aside an order of acquittal if it comes within the ambit of exceptional cases enumerated above, but it cannot convert an order of acquittal into an order of conviction. The only course left to the High Court in such exceptional cases is to order retrial."
8.  Same is the view taken by this Court in Logendranath Jha v. Polai Lal Biswas 1951 Indlaw SC 171951 Indlaw SC 17, K. Chinnaswamy Reddy v. State of A.P. 1962 Indlaw SC 1921962 Indlaw SC 192, Mahendra Pratap Singh v. Sarju Singh 1967 Indlaw SC 3871967 Indlaw SC 387, Pakalapati Narayana Gajapathi Raju v. Bonapalli Peda Appadu  1975 Indlaw SC 5411975 Indlaw SC 5411975 Indlaw SC 541 and Ayodhya Dube v. Ram Sumer Singh 1981 Indlaw SC 631981 Indlaw SC 631981 Indlaw SC 63.
9.  In the present case also, the High Court has not found any procedural illegality or manifest error of law in the order passed by the Sessions Judge. The High Court has merely reappreciated the evidence and arrived at the conclusion that there was no reason not to rely upon the injured witnesses PW 1, PW 2 and PW 4 and that when there is an attack by a large group of people armed with lethal weapons and when they belong to an organised group like RSS, the people of the locality may be terrorised and might be unwilling to testify even if they had actually seen the occurrence. The High Court observed that the victims in the case no doubt belong to the rival party, but that does not render their evidence interested or partisan and thereafter set aside the acquittal order passed in appeal by the Sessions Judge and remitted it for fresh hearing and disposal by observing that the Court would decide the matter unhampered by any of the observations contained in the order. From the findings recorded by the High Court, it is difficult to hold that there was any manifest error of law or procedure. It is nobody's case that the appellate court has shut out or has overlooked the evidence which clinches the issue. The High Court has only reapprociated the entire evidence and has taken contrary view for setting aside the acquittal order. This, in our view, is not permissible while exercising the revisional jurisdiction at the instance of the de facto complainant against the order of acquittal.
10. In the result, the appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is set aside and the order passed by the Sessions Judge in Criminal Appeal No. 24 of 1992 is restored.
Appeal allowed.
