Muneer Khan and Others v State of Madhya Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

15 January 2002
Cr.A. No. 294 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is a case of bride-burning. Mussamad Sharifan Bi @ Savitri died of burns inside her nuptial home. Except her husband all the remaining inmates were asigned for the offence of murder. The trial court acquitted all of them, but the High Court in an appeal filed by the State reversed the acquittal and convicted all of them and sentenced each one to imprisonment for life. Thus the convicted persons secured a right to prefer this appeal under Section 379 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code.
2. The deceased is Mussamad Sharifan Bi @ Savitri, wife of PW 2 Sukhdeen. His eldest brother Muneer Khan is the first accused, Rozan the eighteen-year-old daughter of Muneer Khan is the second accused (she died during the trial stage), Sathara Bai, wife of Muneer Khan is the third accused. Anar Bai, the twenty-year-old daughter-in-law of Muneer Khan is the fourth accused.
3.  The case against all the abovementioned accused is that all of them together poured kerosene and set Sharifan Bi, the deceased ablaze at about 8.00 a.m. on 20-11-1985. She was taken to the hospital. Her dying declaration was recorded by PW 12 Executive Magistrate on the same day at about 11.00 a.m. She died at about 6.00 p.m. on 22-11-1985. The statement recorded by the investigating officer under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code was used by the prosecution as evidence under Section 32 of the Evidence Act as the deceased had died.
4.  This is a case in which two broad aspects have to be highlighted at the outset. The first is this : the husband of deceased Sharifan Bi, the brother-in-law of the deceased (PW 3 Esmile is the husband of the deceased's sister), the brother of the deceased (PW 4 Wazir Khan) and even the daughter of the deceased (PW 6 Tahira Bi @ Tara) have all said in unison that Sharifan Bi committed suicide. Hence they were all treated as hostile by the prosecution and were confronted with the statement recorded under Section 161 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code. The second aspect is that the trial court was not disposed to act on the dying declaration as the solitary piece of evidence for entering a mass conviction of all the accused.
5.  The following is what PW 12 Executive Magistrate has recorded as spoken to by the deceased :
My jethani Sathara Bai and her daughter Rozan Bi, my husband's elder brother Muneer Khan and Anar Bai, wife of Habib poured kerosene and set fire inside my house at 8.00 a.m. today.
6.  If one goes by the said dying declaration it is apparently evident that the declarant had tried to rope in every other member of her nuptial home, barring her husband. Even the eighteen year old daughter and the twenty year old daughter-in-law were also roped in by making a sweeping statement as against all of them in the episode.
7.  It is extremely difficult for us to believe that all those persons would have combined together to perform the actual act as attributed to them for murdering the deceased. At any rate this is what the trial court has felt.
8.  The conclusion reached by the trial court cannot be held to be perverse or so unreasonable as no court would reach such conclusion. Hence it was not proper on the part of the High Court to reverse the order of acquittal merely basing on the said dying declaration of the deceased, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case. It does not inspire confidence as the true fact. On the other hand the dying declaration has all the trappings of a desire to catch everyone of the in-laws against whom she would have been nurturing some grouse.
9.  In the result, we allow this appeal and set aside the conviction and sentence passed on the appellants. The order of acquittal passed by the trial court is restored. If any of the appellants is in jail, we direct him to be released forthwith. Bail bonds will stand cancelled.
Appeal allowed.
