Madan Pal v State of Haryana
Supreme Court of India

30 October 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant herein stands charged along with one Kanta Devi, being the maid servant of the family with the murder of Krishna Devi, the first wife of the appellant herein, and thereby tried under Section 302/34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 The learned Sessions Judge convicted both the appellant and Kanta Devi, the maid servant, for the offence under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.
2.  On appeal before the High Court against the order of conviction and sentence both the appellant herein and Kanta Devi denied their involvement in the murder.
3. The High Court, however, thought it fit to pass an order of acquittal as regards Kanta Devi but ordered the conviction and sentence against the appellant herein and hence, further the appeal before this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
4.  Significantly, however, the High court has not delved into the issue as to the circumstances under which Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 was said to be invoked. Both the charges and also questions put on Section 313 Cr.P.C depict that it is not an individual act but the joint effort of both the persons. There is neither any evidence available on record to show as to who had in fact given the final blow, which causes the death of the deceased.
5.  On the wake of the aforesaid view and the factum of Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 being also involved, the High court convicted the accused under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 In our view, there is a manifest error in maintaining the conviction and sentence. In the absence of any other accused person, question of applicability of Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 would not arise.
6.  In that view of the matter, the order of the High Court cannot be sustained. It is thus seen that the same is otherwise manifestly illegal. The impugned order thus stands set aside and the accused stands acquitted.
The Appeal is, accordingly, allowed. Bail bonds shall stand discharged.
Appeal allowed.
