Hindustan Times and Others v State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
Supreme Court of India

1 November 2002
Writ Petition (C) No. 328 of 1992
The Judgment was delivered by : S. B. Sinha J.
By reason of this petition u/art. 32 of the Constitution of India, the writ petitioners herein have questioned the validity of an order dated September 24, 1991, as also one dated October 16, 1991, issued by the Special Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, whereby and whereunder a direction had been issued to the effect that at the time of payment of bills for publication of Government advertisements in all newspapers having a circulation of more than 25, 000 copies, 5 per cent. of the amount thereof, forming part of a fund for the purpose of granting pension to the working journalists, would be deducted.
Petitioner No. 1 herein is a company incorporated under the Companies Act and is engaged in the business of publishing newspapers including The Hindustan Times. Petitioner No. 2 is a shareholder of petitioner No. 1 and petitioner No. 3 is its director.
The petitioners have questioned the legality/validity of the said orders, inter alia, on the following grounds :
1. The impost, is not leviable either as a tax or as a fee having regard to the fact that the legislative field in relation to the payment of retiral benefits to the working journalists is covered by a Parliamentary Act known as the Working Journalists and other Newspapers Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 ("the said Act").
2. As the State of Uttar Pradesh had no legislative competence, it could not have issued the impugned orders in exercise of its power u/art. 162 of the Constitution of India or otherwise.
3. Assuming, that the welfare of the working journalists is a field falling within entry 24 of List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, any State legislation would be subject to the Central legislation and in that view of the matter too, the impugned orders are ultra vires art. 14 of the Constitution.The contention of the respondents, on the other hand, is that the scheme in question was made upon obtaining suggestions from the managements of the leading newspapers in terms whereof a beneficent measure for grant of pension to the working journalists was taken and in the event the petitioners are not agreeable thereto, they are free not to accept the offer of the respondents. In any event, as issuance of advertisements is a matter of contract by and between the State and the publishers of the newspapers, the petitioners cannot claim any legal right in relation thereto.
The matter relating to grant of pension to the accredited journalists is said to have been under consideration of the respondent-State for a number of years. A Bill to the said effect was presented in the Vidhan Sabha and referred to the Select Committee. However, following dissolution of the Vidhan Sabha, the said Bill lapsed.
With a view to give effect to the scheme, despite lapse of the said Bill, by reason of the impugned executive instructions issued u/art. 162 of the Constitution of India, respondent No. 1 upon inviting suggestions from several newspaper publishers made a scheme, known as the "Pension and Social Security Scheme for Full-time Journalists" etc.; the relevant portions whereof are as under :
"(1) This scheme will be for full time working journalists group scheme. In this no individual policy will be issued. Life Insurance Corporation will issue one policy in favour of Director of Information.
(2) The scheme will be voluntary. ....
This will be sharing scheme in which 50 per cent. of the amount will be taken from member journalists and the remaining 50 per cent. will be deposited by the State Government. The amount of contribution on the basis of average will be divided into the following three categories. ...
2. The following journalists will be entitled to adopt the said scheme :
(1) These working journalists who are regularly working for at least five years in newspapers agencies in Uttar Pradesh. The circulation of such newspapers should be at least 10, 000.
(2) Those workers who are covered by the definition of journalist and are in full time service. ....
(5) If any journalist after paying instalment for continuous ten years in Uttar Pradesh under the pension scheme is transferred to other States then he can voluntarily continue this scheme and continue to contribute the instalments and during this period he will have to contribute cent per cent. instalments. If he returns to Uttar Pradesh then from the date of his return to Uttar Pradesh he will be entitled to get 50 per cent. contribution from the Government."
By a letter dated October 16, 1991, the Special Secretary of the first respondent communicated the following to the Director, Information and Public Relations Department, Uttar Pradesh (Press Division)/Advertisement Division, Lucknow :
"On the above subject drawing your attention to para. 5 of the Government Order No. 460/Nineteen-1-91-32/77, dated September 24, 1991, I have been directed to state that for the implementation of the scheme the Governor sanctions the deduction of 5 per cent. from bills for publicity/tender advertisement of those papers/journals, besides the specified newspapers whose circulation is over 25, 000. The said Government order will be deemed to be amended."
Pursuant to or in furtherance of the said communication, 5 per cent. of the amount from the advertisement bill of the petitioners was deducted.
Admittedly, the petitioner objected thereto.
However by a letter dated April 9, 1992, the editor/in charge advertisement of information and public relation department of the respondent wrote to the chief advertisement manager of petitioner No. 1, to the following effect :
"Kindly refer to your letter dated March 26, 1992.
In this connection I have to inform you that deduction at 5 per cent. from your advertisement bills has been done in accordance with the government orders issued in this regard. If you are not agreeable to this deduction as per Government order then it will not be possible to use your newspaper for Government advertisement."
In the aforementioned premise, this writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
The impugned order, as noticed hereinbefore, was apparently issued only because the Bill presented before the Vidhan Sabha in this behalf lapsed. The respondents thus, sought to achieve the same purpose which it intended to do by reason of a legislative enactment. The question posed in this writ petition must be viewed from this angle also.
The backdrop of formulation of the said scheme as also the impugned orders clearly go to suggest that by reason thereof the respondents have exercised its constitutional powers and the matter does not relate to a contract qua contract.
The benefits sought to be granted to the working journalists, indisputably, is covered by entry 92 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution which reads thus :
"92. Taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements published therein."
Parliament, as noticed hereinbefore, enacted the said Act. It is also not in dispute that the matter relating to grant of benefits under the said Act, is subject-matter of various reports/awards of wage boards including the Bachawat Award wherein the matter relating to payment of pension to the working journalists was considered in the following terms :
"Pension :
6.89. Pension constitutes an important element of wages and its importance as a social security measure is well recognised the world over. Indeed, the Committee on Fair Wages 1949 categorically mentioned that living wages should enable the worker to provide for important misfortunes, including old age. The Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution and the Supreme Court verdicts fully support the position.
6.90. Though, on stricto sensu construction of the definition of the term 'wages' in s. 2(rr) of the Industrial Disputes Act which becomes applicable (i) newspaper employees by virtue of s. 2(g) of the Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, there was some hesitation as to whether provision of pension fell within the jurisdiction of the Wage Boards, the Wage Boards on a thorough consideration of the question took a view that it did. Accordingly, the questionnaire issued by the Wage Boards and its subsequent proceedings continued to abide by this decision till the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech on 29th February, 1988, came out with the following announcement :
'Working journalists have contributed a lot to the country by their intellectual toil, and should be considered by Parliament to provide a reasonable pension scheme for them. Government will be taking appropriate steps in this direction after consulting all concerned'.
6.91. This was followed by the appointment of an Expert Group by the Government 'to go into the question of providing a pension scheme for journalists as well as non-journalist employees of newspaper establishment'. Thus the scope got extended to non-journalists newspaper employees as well.
6.92. The above-mentioned budget speech and the order constituting Expert Group by the Government was taken by the Wage Boards as a message not to proceed further in the matter. Accordingly, no recommendations are being made in regard to pension and the various statements on capacity to pay do not include any burden that might fall on the newspaper establishments as a result of any pension Scheme."
It is, furthermore, not in dispute that no State legislation in terms of entry 24 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution has been enacted.Entry 92 of List I of the Seventh Schedule provides for taxes on the sale or purchase of newspapers and on advertisements published therein. Entry 55 of List II authorises the State to impose taxes on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers and advertisements broadcast by radio or television.
On advertisements published in the newspapers, no fee in respect thereto can be imposed by the State Legislature, inasmuch as entry 96 of List I and entry 66 of List II make it clear that the respective Legislatures have the requisite legislative competence to legislate only in respect of any of the matters contained in the lists.
As noticed hereinbefore, the State of Uttar Pradesh intended to make a legislation covering the same field but even if the same was to be made, it would have been subject to the Parliamentary legislation unless assent of the President of India was obtained in that behalf. The State executive was, thus, denuded of any power in respect of a matter with respect whereto Parliament has power to make laws, as its competence was limited only to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has the requisite legislative competence. Even assuming that the matter relating to the welfare of the working journalists is a field which falls within entry 24 of the Concurrent Lists, unless and until a legislation is made and assent of the President is obtained, the provisions of 1955 Act and the Working Journalists (Fixation of Rates and Wages) Act, 1958, would have prevailed over the State enactment.
Thus, the directive of the State to the effect that five per cent. of the amount to be deducted on the amount payable for publication of Government advertisements in all newspapers having a circulation of more than 25, 000 copies, would be part of the fund meant to be used towards retiral benefits of the working journalists, must be held to be bad in law. As the said Act, as also the Bachawat Award specifically deal with the matter relating to pension scheme for journalists, we have no hesitation in holding that the impugned orders were beyond the legislative competence of the State.In Sudhir Chandra Sarkar v. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. 1984 Indlaw SC 66 (SC); 1984 Indlaw SC 66, it was held that the pension and gratuity are well-known measures of social security. It was observed that the employer cannot have an absolute discretion not to pay any gratuity even when it is earned. It is not the contention of the respondents that the State had been delegated with any power to levy tax or impose any fee. Art. 162 of the Constitution is subject to the other provisions contained therein.
By reason of the impugned directives of the State, the petitioners have been deprived of their right to property.
The expression
"law, within the meaning of article 300A, would mean a Parliamentary Act or an Act of the State Legislature or a statutory order having the force of law :
In Bishamber Dayal Chandra Mohan v. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1981 Indlaw SC 304; 1981 Indlaw SC 304, this court held as under :"
"It is not the contention of the respondents that any service is rendered to the petitioners herein. It is also not the contention of the respondents that the petitioners are bound to pay the amount in question by reason of their statutory obligation to pay retiral benefits to the working journalists. It is also not the case of the respondents that the petitioners herein have not been discharging their statutory obligations in the matter of payment of retiral benefits to the working journalists working in their own establishment in terms of the provision of the Central Acts as well as in terms of the Bachawat Award.The term "taxation" has been defined in art. 366(28) of the Constitution of India in the following terms :"
"The impost by reason of the impugned orders may come within the purview of the aforesaid definition, (see Corporation of Calcutta v. Liberty Cinema, 1964 Indlaw SC 364; Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Bihar 1983 Indlaw SC 273; 1983 Indlaw SC 273 and Gasket Radiators P. Ltd. v. E.S.I. Corporation 1985 Indlaw SC 132 (SC); 1985 Indlaw SC 132 ). The question which is required to be posed and answered is as to whether the petitioners herein can be directed to bear the burden although they have no statutory liability in this behalf.
We may at this juncture notice that a Constitution Bench of this court in Koluthara Exports Ltd. v. State of Kerala, 2002 Indlaw SC 84; 2002 Indlaw SC 84, has observed that even if a State in exercise of its legislative power under entry 23, List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India can make a welfare legislation, yet the burden of the impost cannot be placed upon a person who is neither the member of the society nor the employer of a person who is member of such society. It was held that :"
"The burden of the impost thus, can be placed only when there exists relationship of employer and employee between the contributor and the beneficiary of the provisions of the scheme. In the instant case, also, no such relationship exists.
In any event, the State cannot make any compulsory exaction from any citizen unless there exists a specific provision of law operating in the field. In relation to a compulsory payment, it is well-settled, there is no room for any intendment.
In Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority v. Sharadkumar Jayantikumar Pasawalla, 1992 Indlaw SC 479; 1992 Indlaw SC 479, it has been held as follows :"
"The contention of Shri Verma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents to the effect that the petitioners are at liberty not to accept any advertisements issued by the respondents, may now be examined.
The newspapers serve as a medium of exercise of freedom of speech. The right of its shareholders to have a free press is a fundamental right. In Sakal Papers (P.) Ltd. v. Union of India, 1961 Indlaw SC 429, this court held as follows :"
"Advertisements in a newspaper have a direct nexus with its circulation. In Tata Press Ltd. v. Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd., 1995 Indlaw SC 124; 1995 Indlaw SC 124, it was held as under :"
"It is not in dispute that advertisements play important roll in the matter of revenue of the newspapers.
This court in Bennett Coleman and Co. Ltd. v. Union of India, 1972 Indlaw SC 337; 1972 Indlaw SC 337 observed as under :"
43. The various provisions of the newsprint import policy have been examined to indicate as to how the petitioners' fundamental rights have been infringed by the restrictions on page limit, prohibition against new newspapers and new editions. The effect and consequence of the impugned policy upon the newspapers is directly controlling the growth and circulation of newspapers. The direct effect is the restriction upon circulation of newspapers. The direct effect is upon growth of newspapers through pages. The direct effect is that newspapers are deprived of their area of advertisement. The direct effect is that they are exposed to financial loss. The direct effect is that freedom of speech and expression is infringed. ...
45. It is indisputable that by freedom of the press is meant the right of all citizens to speak, publish and express their views. The freedom of the press embodies the right of the people to read. The freedom of the press is not antithetical to the right of the people to speak and express."
It is neither in doubt nor in dispute that for the purpose of meeting the costs of the newsprint as also for meeting other financial liabilities which would include the liability to pay wages, allowances and gratuity, etc., to the working journalists as also liability to pay a reasonable profit to the shareholders vis-a-vis making the newspapers available to the readers at a price at which they can afford to purchase it, the petitioners have no other option but to collect more funds by publishing commercial and other advertisements in the newspaper.
The respondents being a State, cannot in view of the equality doctrine contained in art. 14 of the Constitution of India, resort to the theory of "take it or leave it". The bargaining power of the State and the newspapers in matters of release of advertisements is unequal. Any unjust condition thrust upon the petitioners by the State in such matters, in our considered opinion, would attract the wrath of art. 14 of the Constitution of India as also s. 23 of the Indian Contract Act. (see Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly 1986 (69) FJR 171; 1986 Indlaw SC 645 and Delhi Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress 1990 Indlaw SC 224; 1990 Indlaw SC 224 ). It is trite that the State in all its activities must not act arbitrarily. Equity and good conscience should be at the core of all governmental functions. It is now well settled that every executive action which operates to the prejudice of any person must have the sanction of law. The executive cannot interfere with the rights and liabilities of any person unless the legality thereof is supportable in any court of law. The impugned action of the State does not fulfil the aforementioned criteria.We are, therefore, of the considered view that the impugned orders dated September 24, 1991, and October 16, 1991, are unconstitutional and void and must be declared as such.
This writ petition is, therefore, allowed. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Writ Petition allowed
