Uttar Pradesh State Electricity Board v Sonelal and others
Supreme Court of India

4 October 2002
C.A. No. 6512 of 2002 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 19828 of 2002 (arising out of CC No. 7658 of 2002))
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
Leave granted.
1.  Learned counsel for Respondent 1, who is on caveat, accepts notice. Learned counsel submits that the matter may be disposed of at this stage. We dispense with service on formal Respondents 2 and 3.
2.  The writ petition out of which this matter has arisen is pending in the High Court. While dealing with this aspect of interim order, on 4-2-2002 statement of counsel for the appellant was noticed by the High Court that provisions of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act have been complied with. That order states that if it has been complied with and the workman has been reinstated and paid his current salary from the date of the award, the interim order passed by the Court shall continue otherwise it shall stand automatically vacated. The appellant moved an application seeking modification of the order dated 4-2-2002 on the ground that under some misconception counsel for the appellant stated that the aforesaid provisions have been complied with.
3. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that even if the provisions of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act were to be complied, it was not obligatory to reinstate the employee viz. Respondent 1. That application has been dismissed by the impugned order observing, inter alia, that it is the statutory responsibility of the employer to comply with the aforesaid provisions. The impugned order read with order dated 4-2-2002 presumes that reinstatement is necessary under Section 17-B. It cannot be disputed and has fairly been not disputed by the learned counsel for Respondent 1 that in terms of Section 17-B reinstatement is not necessary so long as the provisions of Section 17-B are complied with and full payment in terms thereof is made to the employee by the employer.
4.  In view of the aforesaid legal position, we set aside the impugned order and clarify that it will not be obligatory for the appellant to reinstate Respondent 1, subject, however, to the condition that the appellant pays full amount to Respondent 1 in terms of Section 17-B of the Industrial Disputes Act from the date of the award till date within four weeks from today and continues to pay the amount under the said provisions till the decision of the writ petition. The appeal is disposed of in terms of the above. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
