Leave granted.
1. A short but an interesting question of law falls for consideration in this appeal against the order of the High Court of Karnataka, wherein the High Court dismissed the Petition filed u/s. 482 Cr.P.C for quashing of the proceedings pending before the Principal Sessions Judge, Belgaum in Special Case No. 22/94; the question of law noticed above pertains to whether issuance of a notification u/s. 26 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, appointing the Special Judge for any specified area to try offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 would also hold good for the purpose of S. 3 of the Act of 1988 ( Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 ) as well?
2. Adverting to the factual score briefly at this juncture it appears that the Appellant being charge-sheeted by the Respondent Authorities was prosecuted in the Court of Principal Sessions Judge, Belgaum in Special Case No. 22/94 for the offences punishable u/ss. 7 and 13(1)(d) read with S. 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The factual score further depicts that during the pendency of the proceedings the appellant filed an application under Sections 3, 4, and 17 of the Act of 1988 read with Sections 173, 190 and 216 of the Cr.P.C praying therein to discharge him, on the ground that the learned trial Judge had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the case against him since the appointment of the learned Judge cannot be termed or said to be an appointment as Special Judge within the meaning of S. 3 of the Act of 1988. It was further contended that in any event the investigating officer who filed the charge-sheet, was not duly authorised u/s. 17 to investigate into the matter. The learned trial Judge however rejected the petition.
3. The appellant thereafter moved the High Court u/s. 482 Cr.P.C for quashing the proceedings upon setting aside the order as passed by the learned trial Judge. The High Court, however, with a detailed and reasoned judgment negated such a plea and consequently the petition was dismissed. It is by reason of the dismissal of the matter by the High Court, this Court was moved u/art. 136 of the Constitution and upon hearing the submissions, this Court thought it fit to dispose of the petition at the administration stage itself.
4. Coming to the matter under consideration, certain statutory provisions ought to be noticed at the initial stage and reference to S. 26 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, would be apposite and which reads as below:
"26. Special Judges appointed under Act 46 of 1952 to be special Judges appointed under this Act - Every special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 for any area or areas and is holding office on the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be special Judge appointed u/s. 3 of this Act for that area or areas and, accordingly, on and from such commencement, every such Judge shall continue to deal with all the proceedings pending before him on such commencement in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
It is the appellant's definite contention that the applicability of S. 26 is restrictive in its nature and thus applicable only to prior proceedings pending before the Special Judge on the commencement of the Act. Mr. S.S. Javali, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant contended that any other construction would render the legislative intent a complete otiose and thus a fresh notification under S. 3 of the Act is required to enable appointment of Special Judges for proceeding with the new cases under the Act. We are, however, unable to record our concurrence therewith. In order to have proper efficacy to the statutory intent the Act shall have to be read as a whole and introduction of S. 26 in the Statute Book has brought into existence a deeming fiction which have to be given effect to and any contra view would lead to a violent departure from the normal canons of construction and interpretation of statutes. The deeming fiction cannot but be read into the statute to include the situation as envisaged presently. The situation however would stand clarified in any event by having a look at the repeal and saving provision in particular sub-s. (2) of S. 30 which reads as below:"
".
Mr. Sanjay R. Hegde, learned Advocate appearing for the State Government being Respondent herein contended that on an analogy of reasoning, the appointment of the Special Judge for an area by a notification issued u/s. 6 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 be deemed to be the appointment of a Special Judge appointed under S. 3 of the Act for that area or areas. Strong reliance is also placed on the decision of this Court in Nar Bahadur Bhandari & another vs. State of Sikkim & others 1998 Indlaw SC 735 ), in support by Mr. Hegde, wherein Srinivasan, J, speaking for the Bench in paragraph 10 of the Report stated:"
5. The said sub-section while on the one hand ensures that the application of S. 6 of the General Clauses Act is not prejudiced, on the other it expresses a different intention as contemplated by the said S. 6. The last part of the above sub-section introduces a legal fiction whereby anything done or action taken under or in pursuance of the Act of 1947 shall be deemed to have been done or taken under or in pursuance of the corresponding provisions of the Act of 1988. That is, the fiction is to the effect that the Act of 1988 had come into force when such thing was done or action was taken
Significantly, in Nar Bahadur (supra) this Court did refer to a decision of the Constitution Bench in B.N. Kohli (Bishambar Nath Kohli & others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & others  ), wherein the repealing of Ordinance 12/49 was effected by Ordinance 27/49. S. 58(3) of the repealing Ordinance provided as below:"
It is while interpreting the aforesaid provision, Shah, J. speaking for the Constitution Bench observed as below:"
It is on the above perspective that the reasoning put forth by the High Court ought also to be noticed:"
6. On consideration of the above and having regard to the provisions of law as enunciated hereinbefore, in particular S. 26 thereof, the question of there being a contra view, apart from what has been observed above does not and cannot arise and consequently issuance of fresh notification appointing the Judges, does not and cannot arise and thus the Principal Sessions Judge, Belgaum has the authority and jurisdiction to entertain the complaint. The other issue though argued before the High Court as regards the status of the Investigation Officer by reason of provision of S. 17(c) has not been seriously raised and we also accordingly need not detain ourselves on that score. Suffice it however, to say that negation of such a contention does have our concurrence.
7. On the wake of the aforesaid, this appeal thus fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
