Union Of India & Ors v N. Jagga Rao & Ors
Supreme Court of India

23 October 2002
C.A. No.3061 Of 1991
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  The above appeal has been filed against the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench dated 08.05.1989 whereunder the status of railway servants was conferred in favour of the applicants who joined the Canteen prior to 16.07.1974 from that date and those who had joined the said canteen after the said date with effect from their respective dates of joining. Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side.
2.  There is no serious controversy over the fact that the subject matter and the inter-se rights of the parties are governed by the decision of this Court, M.M.R. Khan and Ors. Vs.Union of India and Others, whereunder it has been held as follows:
"The result, therefore, is that the workers engaged in the statutory canteens as well as those engaged in non-statutory recognized canteens in the railway establishments are railway employees and they are entitled to be treated as such. The Railway Board has already treated the employees of all statutory and 11 Delhi based non-statutory recognised canteens as railway employees w.e.f. October 22, 1980. The employees of the other non-statutory recognized canteens will, however, be treated as railway employees w.e.f. April 1, 1990. They would, therefore, be entitled to all benefits as such railway employees with effect from the said date, according to the service conditions prescribed for them under the relevant rules/orders."
3. The employees, in question, concedingly fall within the category of statutory canteens and as such in terms of the said decision, they are entitled to be treated as railway employees only with effect from October 22, 1980 and that they would be entitled to all the benefits as such railway employees w.e.f the said date according to the service conditions prescribed for them under the relevant rules and orders. The judgment under appeal is modified to the extent indicated above and the appeal shall stand partly allowed in the above terms. No costs.Justice Doraiswamy Raju.
Appeal partly allowed.
