Bombay Electric Supply And Tpt.Undertaking v Laffans (India) Pvt. Ltd. And Anr
Supreme Court of India

11 December 2002
C.A. No. 3615 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant is an undertaking of the Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, Respondent No. 2. One of its fields of activities is to supply electricity. Respondent No. 1 is a consumer of electricity and is engaged in the business of retail trade in textiles having its show room at Rustom Building, 21/23, Veer Nariman Road, Mumbai 400 023. The appellant had installed two meters in the premises of Respondent No. 1 for recording consumption of electricity. The meters installed at the premises of Respondent No. 1 were changed four times between May 1988 to December 1989 as the same were found to be defective.
2.  According to the appellant, since the meters installed at the premises of Respondent No. 1 had not recorded the correct consumption of electricity consumed by respondent No. 1 during the period 1st February, 1988 to 30th December, 1989, in order to assess the correct consumption of units of electricity during this period the average consumption for the period 2.2.1987 to 1.2.1988 was taken as a base and on the basis thereof the appellant raised a supplementary demand in respect of 1,13,212 units of electricity amounting to Rs.2,19,602.73 on 5.10.1990.
3.  Respondent No. 1 did not make the payment. Ultimately, Respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the raising of the additional demand made by the appellant. The writ petition was dismissed by a single Judge. Being aggrieved, respondent No. 1 filed an appeal before the Division Bench which was accepted and it was held that since the Respondent No. 1 had not raised a dispute, reference could not be made to the Electrical Inspector under Section 26(6) of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910.
4.  Counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 contended the point raised in this appeal stand concluded by a decision of this Court in Belwal Spinning Mills Ltd. and Ors. Vs. U.P. State Electricity Board and Anr.
5. The point involved in the above-referred case was slightly different from the one raised here but all the same these are general observations which go in favour of Respondent No. 1. Counsel appearing for theappellant has raised serious and arguable doubts regarding the correctness and view taken in the case of Belwal Spinning Mills Ltd. and Ors.
6.  In our view this matter requires to be determined by a three-Judge Bench as it raises important questions of law such as:
i) Whether, in a case where despite notice the consumer does not raise any dispute regarding the defect in the meter and no dispute relating to is referred by the consumer to the Electrical Inspector, was the licencee still entitled to refer such dispute to the Electrical Inspector?
ii) Whether on an interpretation of Section 26(6) of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, the maximum period of six months relates to the date of demand notice in respect of a period when the meter, installed by the licencee for recording the consumption of electricity by the consumer, was defective; or, whether the said period of six months relates separately to each period when the meter was defective and was replaced, where more than one meter were found defective and replaced by another meter? Let the matter be placed before the Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India for appropriate orders.
Order accordingly.
