Lallan Rai and others v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

14 November 2002
Cr.A. Nos. 93-95 of 2001
The Judgment was delivered by BANERJEE, J.
1. Four decades ago, the Constitution Bench in Mohan Singh (Mohan Singh vs. State of Punjab - 1962 Indlaw SC 149 ) has been rather lucid in its expression as regards differentiation between S. 149 and S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. In Mohan Singh this Court stated:
".... Like Section 149, S. 34 also deals with cases of constructive criminal liability. It provides that where a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone. The essential constituents of the vicarious criminal liability prescribed by S. 34 is the existence of common intention. If the common intention in question animates the accused persons and if the said common intention leads to the commission of the criminal offence charged, each of the persons sharing the common intention is constructively liable for the criminal act done by one of them. Just as the combination of persons sharing the same common object is one of the features of an unlawful assembly, so the existence of a combination of persons sharing the same common intention is one of the features of Section 34. In some ways the two sections are similar and in some cases they may overlap. But, nevertheless, the common intention which is the basis of S. 34 is different from the common object which is the basis of the composition of an unlawful assembly. Common intention denotes action-in-concert and necessarily postulates the existence of a pre-arranged plan and that must mean a prior meeting of minds. It would be noticed that cases to which S. 34 can be applied disclose an element of participation in action on the part of all the accused persons. The acts may be different; may vary in their character but they are all actuated by the same common intention. It is now well-settled that the common intention required by S. 34 is different from the same intention or similar intention. As has been observed by the Privy Council in Mahbub Shah vs. Emperor , common intention within the meaning of S. 34 implies a pre-arranged plan, and to convict the accused of an offence applying the section it should be proved that the criminal act done in concert pursuant to the pre-arranged plan and that the inference of common intention should never be reached unless it is a necessary inference deducible from the circumstances of the case"
2. Four decades later, however, a Three-Judge Bench of this Court in Suresh (Suresh & Anr. vs. State of U.P. - 2001 Indlaw SC 20691 ) had the following to state pertaining to S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
"S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 recognises the principle of vicarious liability in criminal jurisprudence. It makes a person liable for action of an offence not committed by him but by another person with whom he shared the common intention. It is a rule of evidence and does not create a substantive offence. The Section gives statutory recognition to the commonsense principle that if more than two persons intentionally do a thing jointly, it is just the same as if each of them had done it individually. There is no gainsaying that a common intention presupposes prior concert, which requires a prearranged plan of the accused participating in an offence. Such preconcert or preplanning may develop on the spot or during the course of commission of the offence but the crucial test is that such plan must precede that act constituting an offence. Common intention can be formed previously or in the course of occurrence and on the spur of the moment. The existence of a common intention is a question of fact in each case to be proved mainly as a matter of inference from the circumstances of the case.
The dominant feature for attracting S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "the Code") is the element of participation in absence resulting in the ultimate "criminal act". The "act" referred to in the later part of S. 34 means the ultimate criminal act with which the accused is charged of sharing the common intention. The accused is, therefore, made responsible for the ultimate criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all. The section does not envisage the separate act by all the accused persons for becoming responsible for the ultimate criminal act. If such an interpretation is accepted, the purpose of S. 34 shall be rendered infructuous.Participation in the crime in furtherance of the common intention cannot conceive of some independent criminal act by all accused persons, besides the ultimate criminal act because for that individual act law takes care of making such accused responsible under the other provisions of the Code. The word "act" used in S. 34 denotes a series of acts as a single act. What is required under law is that the accused persons sharing the common intention must be physically present at the scene of occurrence and be shown not to have dissuaded themselves from the intended criminal act for which they shared the common intention. Culpability under S. 34 cannot be excluded by mere distance from the scene of occurrence. The presumption of constructive intention, however, has to be arrived at only when the court can, with judicial servitude, hold that the accused must have preconceived the result that ensued in furtherance of the common intention. A Division Bench of the Patna High Court in Satrughan Patar vs. Emperor 1919 AIR(Pat) 111 ) held that it is only when a court with some certainty holds that a particular accused must have preconceived or premeditated the result which ensued or acted in concert with others in order to bring about that result, that S. 34 may be applied"
3. When then is the fact situation said to have been proved in the present case? It is in this context the factual score thus ought to be noticed at this juncture.
4. On the factual score, it appears that 14 accused persons were charged under Sections 302/149 and 307/34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 for committing the murder of Bindeshwari Rai on 19th March, 1992 at 8.00 p.m. All the 14 accused persons were held guilty for the murder by the learned Sessions Judge: whereas accused Rajendra Rai, Uma Shankar Rai, Sheo Bachan Rai, Shila Nath Rai, Dharam Nath Rai, Satyendra Sahni alias Satyendra Kumar Sahni and Bankey Rai have been convicted u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life. All the 14 accused persons, namely Rajendra Rai, Lallan Rai son of Rajendra Rai, Uma Shankar Rai, Prithvi Rai, Ram Janam Rai, Sudarshan Rai, Sheo Bachan Rai, Sipar Rai, Birendera Rai, Dharam Nath Rai, Bankey Rai, Shila Nath Rai, Lallan Rai son of Bankey Rai and Satyendra Sahni alias Satyendra Kumar Sahni have been held guilty under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and have been convicted thereunder. Each of them has been sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860. All the convicts are, however, presently on bail.
5. The convicts Uma Shankar Rani, Ram Janam Rai, Sudarshan Rai, Prithvi Rai, Lallan Rai son of Rajendra Rai have been held guilty under Section 307/34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and they have been convicted thereunder. Each of them has been sentenced to undergo R.I. for five years under Section 307/34 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
6. The High Court, however, on appeal on 10th May, 2000, confirmed the conviction and sentences passed by the learned Sessions Judge u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 against Rajendra Rai, Uma Shankar Rai, Shila Nath Rai, Bankey Rai, Dharam Nath Rai and Sheo Bachan Rai but passed an order for acquittal for the accused Satyendra Sahni of the charge u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
7. As regards Uma Shankar Rai, Ram Janam Rai, Sudarshan Rai, Prithvi Rai and Lallan Rai, the High Court also confirmed the conviction and sentences u/s. 307 read with S. 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860. The High Court however, acquitted all the accused persons convicted and sentenced under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and hence the appeal before this Court upon the grant of leave.
8. At this juncture, it would be convenient to advert to the prosecution case briefly, so as to appreciate the contentions raised. The case of the prosecution, as would appear from the fardbeyan of Birendra Rai (PW.9), in short, is that on the day of Holi festival i.e. 19.3.1992 at about 8 p.m., he along with his brothers Bindeshwari Rai, Ruplal Rai and Ram Dahin Rai was returning from Taraiya Bazar. When they reached their village, they saw all the 14 accused persons sitting at the house of appellant Rajendra Rai variously armed with weapons. It is alleged that on the instigation of appellant Rajendra Rai, all the accused persons encircled the informant and his companions. Thereafter appellant Rajendra Rai, Satyendra Sahni and Uma Shankar Rai inflicted injuries with sword on the head of Bindeshwari Rai. Thereupon, appellant Shila Nath Rai also gave a sword blow on his head. Like the abovenamed appellants, other appellants Bankey Rai and Dharm Nath Rai assaulted deceased Bindeshwari Rai with 'farsa'. When Bindeshwari Rai became senseless while appellant Sheo Bachan Rai caused injury with Bhala, the other accused persons caused injuries with their respective weapons. The informant further stated that when he wanted to to save his brother, appellant Uma Shankar Rai attacked him with sword but the blow was warded off. When P.Ws. Ram Dahin and Ruplal tried to intervene, appellant Lallan Rai son of Rajendra Rai fired his pistol causing injury to Ruplal Rai. It has been further alleged that the accused persons after committing the murder of Bindeshwari Rai, threw his body in a maize field, which was situated adjoining north to the road. The informant and the other witnesses have claimed to have identified the accused persons in the moonlit night. On the basis of the aforesaid statement, Officer Incharge of Taraiya Police Station took up investigation and ultimately having found a prima facie case, submitted charge sheet. Thereupon, the Chief Judicial Magistrate took cognizance of the offence and committed the case to the Court of Session calling upon the appellants to face trial.
9. The records depict that one Dr. Dharamnath Singh (PW.11) held the post-mortem examination on the dead body of Bindeshwari Rai and he found the following ante-mortem injuries on the person of the body:
(i). Multiple incised wounds about eight in number of varying dimension on the scalp, more on left side than on the right side, mid-portion.
(ii) Incised wound about 3"x1/2" bone deep on the left cheek.
(iii) Incised wound about 1"x 1/4" skin deep on the back of the neck.
(iv) Multiple bruises of varying dimension on the back of chest wall on both sides.
(v) Penetrating wound about 1/4
"in diameter muscle deep on the right side on the back of waist.
(vi) Incised wound about 3"x1" bone deep on the right side of chin.
On dissection, there were multiple fractures of scalp bone, laceration of underlying membranes and brain matter with collection of clotted blood in immediate vicinity of the injured parts. On further dissection fracture of the right side of ramus of the mandible was disclosed. Rigor mortis was present on all the limbs.
The doctor's evidence reveals that the death of Bindeshwari Rai was caused due to haemorrhage and shock as a result of injuries to vital organs like brain and mandible caused by sharp cutting weapon as also by sharp penetrating weapon such as Bhala.
The post-mortem examination was conducted with 24 hours. Incidentally, there is nothing in the cross-examination of the Doctor to discredit the evidence of the prosecution with regard to the nature of injuries as also to the manner of assault.
It is on this state of the situation that Mr. PS Mishra, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the appellants with his usual eloquence rather strongly contended that in view of the findings recorded for charges under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 by the High Court against which no appeal is preferred in this Court, it is clearly a case where the appellants are supposed to have been convicted for their individual acts and acts done in furtherance of the common intention of all, which developed, if at all, in course of the assault on Bindeshwari Rai. In the absence of any appeal against the said acquittal for the offence under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 it will not be legal to go by the evidence of existence of any pre-planning etc.
Though there is evidence that appellants who are convicted u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 caused injury upon deceased Bindeshwari Rai by lethal weapons on the head and various other parts of his body, the medical evidence is clear that death was caused due to haemorrhage and shock caused by the injuries to vital organs like brain and also mandible caused by sharp-cutting weapons may be Farsa and sword and also sharp cutting penetrating weapon such as a Bhala.
In the absence of evidence as to who caused fatal injury or which injury in particular was fatal, conviction u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 of as many as six appellants  is not sustainable at all.
It is well settled that culpable homicide is genus and murder is the specie and that all murders are culpable homicide but not vice-versa. A combined reading of the provisions in Chapter XVI of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with respect to offences affecting the human body and the exceptions and illustrations would show that without ascertaining as to who caused the death or that one of many injuries inflicted by a certain person alone was the cause of death, no one can be, much less a number of persons together, be convicted for their acts u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 simpliciter. More than one person together can be convicted only with the aid of S. 149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 or S. 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 if they act in furtherance of common intention. Since the appellants, however, are acquitted under Section 302/149 Indian Penal Code, 1860, the High Court could not have convicted as many as six persons u/s. 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Mr. Mishra further contended that it is settled law that several persons may have similar intention yet they may not have the common intention in furtherance of which they participated in action. Elaborate discussion of the principles and dominant features for attracting S. 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 are well discussed and explained in one of the latest pronouncements of this Court in Suresh (supra).
In para 8 of the judgment in Suresh (supra) this Court  stated:"
"incriminating facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the accused and incapable of explanation or any other reasonable hypothesis"
".
In Suresh (supra) this Court while recording the dominant feature for attracting S. 34 has the following to state:"
"
For true and correct appreciation of legislative intent in the matter of engrafting of S. 34 in the Statute Book, one needs to have a look into the provision and as such S. 34 is set out as below:"
A plain look at the Statute reveals that the essence of S. 34 is simultaneous consensus of the mind of persons participating in the criminal action to bring about a particular result. It is trite to record that such consensus can be developed at the spot. The observations above obtain support from the decision of this Court in Ramaswami Ayyangar & others vs. State of Tamil Nadu 1976 Indlaw SC 126 ).
In the similar vein the Privy Council in (Barendra Kumar Ghosh vs. King Emperor 1925 AIR(PC) 1 : 26 CrLJ 431) stated the true purport of S. 34 as below:"
The above discussion in fine bus culminates to the effect that the requirements of statute is sharing the common intention upon being present at the place of occurrence. Mere distancing himself from the scene cannot absolve the accused-though the same however, depends upon the fact-situation of the matter under consideration and no rule steadfast can be laid down therefor.
Turning attention to the factual score, once again, be it noticed that the High Court has rendered the submissions of the defence as regards the witnesses being on inimical terms as totally hypothetical guesswork de hors the realities and in justification thereof stated -"
". Incidentally, the evidence of PW.7 Ram Dahin Rai, PW.9 Birendra Rai and PW.10 Ruplal Rai, the informant, stand out to be in full corroboration of the prosecution's case that no sooner Bindeshwari Rai and his companions arrived at the place of occurrence, Rajendra Rai exhorted to kill and thereafter assaulted him with sword. The High Court on appreciation of the actual situation recorded the same and further stated that Uma Shankar Rai also caused injury on the head of Bindeshwari Rai by sword and when the latter fell down in a maize field, Shila Nath Rai assaulted him with sword and Bankey Rai with Farsa on his neck. It is on this score the High Court in fine concludes as regards the appreciation of evidence to the effect:"
The next issue seems to be rather important and think it expedient to quote the judgment impugned for its proper appreciation:"
It is on the basis of the observations as above, the High Court came to a finding that the appeal on behalf of the appellants Rajendra Rai, Uma Shankar Rai, Shila Nath Rai, Bankey Rai, Dharam Nath Rai and Sheo Bachan Rai ought to be dismissed and their conviction and sentence u/s. 320 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 as recorded by the trial court stood confirmed.
As regards the case of appellants Uma Shankar Rai, Ram Janam Rai, Sudarshan Rai, Prithvi Rai and Lallan Rai, the High Court did place strong reliance on the evidence of the injured witnesses ascribing them to be most acceptable and trustworthy evidence and as such confirmed the sentence u/s. 307 read with S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
It is the conviction u/s. 302 which is said to be not in accordance with law and as such Mr. Mishra has been rather vocal and emphatic on that direction. It is axiomatic that procedural law is the hand-maid of justice and the Code of Criminal Procedure is no exception thereto. Its incorporation in the Statute Book has been to sub-serve the ends of justice and non-observance of the technicalities does not and cannot frustrate the concept of justice since technicality alone would not out-weigh the course of justice.
We, however, hasten to add that in the event, however, there being prejudice leading to a failure of justice, it cannot but be treated to be an illegality, which is otherwise incurable in nature. In one of the early decisions of this Court. (Willie (William) Slaney vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh - 1955 Indlaw SC 80 ), the Full Bench declared and settled the law on this score and it seems for all times to come. This Court in a recent decision (Kammari Brahmaiah and others vs. Public Prosecutor, High Court of A.P. - 1999 Indlaw SC 988 ) once again reiterated the law so settled by Willie Slaney (supra) in the similar vein and same tune. Incidentally, Willie Slaney (supra) was decided in the year 1955 and on the basis of the then existing Code of 1898, whereas Brahmaiah (supra) has considered the new Code of 1973 and after adumbrating the observations of Willie Slaney, this Court in Brahmaiah observed:"
It is in this context S. 464 Cr.P.C. ought to be noticed at this juncture. S. 464 Cr.P.C. reads thus:"
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed and that the trial be recommenced from the point immediately after the framing of the charge.
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit;
10. Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction
As regards the interpretation of S. 464 this Court has the following to state in Kammari (supra) at paragraph 6:"
Incidentally, S. 464 corresponds to the provisions contained in S. 232(2), 535 and 537(6) of the old Code.
It is in this context the law laid down by this Court in Kammari (supra) ought also to be noticed. This Court in paragraph 12 of the report stated as below:-"
11. Similar is the observation of this Court in Narinder Singh vs. State of Punjab 2000 Indlaw SC 338 ) recording therein that if the ingredients of the Section are present, conviction in regard thereto can be sustained.
12. The evidence available on record in particular that of injured eye witnesses; namely, PWs. 7, 9 and 10 and the "Fardbayan" which was recorded without any loss of time to the effect that all the accused persons encircled the informant and other witnesses and inflicted injuries on Bindeshwari Rai (deceased) by deadly weapons resulting into his death - it is trustworthy and acceptable and question of decrying the evidentiary value thereof does not and cannot arise, more so, having regard to the corroborative evidence available on record by the doctor who conducted the post-mortem. The entire gamut of the matter in issue leaves no manner of doubt the concerted action by reason of simultaneous conscious mind of persons participating in the action to bring about the death of Bindeshwari Rai and it is this piece of evidence which brings in the element of S. 34 even though no charge was framed thereunder. This conviction and sentence u/s. 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 can be maintained by adding S. 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 thereto that is to say under Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
13. As regards the conviction u/s. 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, be it noted that upon consideration of the injury report as sustained by Ruplal Rai (PW.10), Ram Dahin Rai (PW.7) and Birendra Rai (PW.9), the factum of causing grievous hurt though established but conviction under Section 307/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 in the interest of justice ought to be altered to under Section 326/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. It is ordered accordingly. The sentence, however, be also altered to a period of two years without however imposition of any fine.
14. The appeals thus stand disposed of in the manner indicated above. The appellants be taken into custody to serve out their respective sentences and in the event they have already served out their sentence, their bail bonds shall stand discharged.
Appeals disposed of.
