Leave granted.
1. These appeals are filed against the judgment and decree dated 27.10.1998 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in RSA Nos. 1319-22 of 1996. By the impugned judgment and decree, the High Court set aside the judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate court and held that plaintiffs are entitled to recover the possession of lease hold property and decreed the suit accordingly.
2. Before dealing with the contentions of both the parties, we would refer to the relevant facts in short. One Nellikai Vyasa Rao was the owner on mulgeni right of TS No. 234 corresponding to RS No. 359 of Attawar village of Mangalore City. Out of the said property, on 1.11.1903, a registered mulgeni lease was granted for a land admeasuring approximately 35 cents  by Nellikai Vyasa Rao in favour of Ammanna Maistry. The relevant condition of the permanent lease deed - mulgeni chit dated 1.11.1903 executed by one Ammanna Maistry in favour of Nellikai Vyasa Rao, which requires consideration is as under:-
"In case I do not pay rent within time every year or if there is any short payment I am liable to pay the said sum with interest at 12% per annum from the date it is due till payment on the security of the building that may be built on the property and other improvements therein. In the event of my feeling that I do not require the said property, the said property alongwith the buildings and the improvements shall have to be handed over only to you on receiving the value of the buildings and improvements estimated by four Gentlemen and I shall not have any right to alienate the property either the right of permanent tenancy or the building etc., by way of sale, mulgeni or in whatsoever manner to others. If I effect alienation contrary to this in any manner or if I allow the property to be attached and sold by any court in connection with my personal debt, immediately, such alienation and also this permanent lease shall be liable to be totally cancelled and the property shall be reverted to your possession and enjoyment."
3. On the death of lessee Ammanna Maistry, his mulgeni holding was partitioned among his legal heirs pursuant to the decree dated 31.3.1955 passed in partition suit no. O.S.235 of 1950, as under:-
Portion No.
To
Amba Bai and S. Jyothi (daughter and grand-daughter of lessee.)
Chandrashekhar (sons of deceased Ammanna Maistry)
Gangadhar
4. It is also admitted that by a gift-deed dated 17.11.1960 Gangadhar gifted 11 cents to his sister Amba and sold remaining 11 cents to Sanjiva Sapalya by a sale deed dated 31.3.1960. Again on 3.10.1974 Amba transferred her holding to Sucharita. For the aforesaid transfer, plaintiffs did not invoke and enforce the forfeiture clause on the ground that alienations were within the members of the family of the deceased-lessee.
Original Suit No. 786 of 1990
5. On 30.3.1981, Sucharita (1) by sale deed sold some portion of the land in favour of defendant nos. 1 to 4; (2) on the same day, under another sale deed, sold some other portion of the land in favour of defendant nos. 5 and 6; and (3) thereafter on 13.5.1982 sold remaining portion of the land in favour of defendant no. 7. On the alienation of entire mulgeni holding i.e. 11 cents, by Sucharita, the plaintiffs invoked the forfeiture clause on the ground of breach of the condition referred to in the parental lease and, therefore, filed Original Suit No. 25/83, which was subsequently numbered as Original Suit No. 786 of 1990 for possession of the mulgeni holding.
Original Suit No. 929 of 1990
6. On the death of Chandrashekhar , his heirs filed O.S. No.541 of 1980 for partition of the property held by him and a decree was passed dividing the leased properties between the heirs who are defendant nos. 1 to 3 and 8 to 12 and they acquired proportionate leasehold rights over the land. For this partition of the property, it is the say of the plaintiff that the suit invoking forfeiture clause was not filed on the ground that alienations were within the members of the family of the deceased-lessee.
7. Thereafter- (1) defendant no.1 by sale deed dated 14.3.1980 sold 0.25 cents 1.12 Sq. meters for Rs.3, 000/- in favour of the 6th defendant;
(2) The 2nd defendant along with her 5 minor children by a sale deed dated 14.3.1980 sold an extent of 3 1/2 cents of land for Rs. 57, 000/- in favour of the 6th defendant;
(3) Defendant no.1 by a sale deed dated 27.4.1983 sold 0.12 cents but actually 11 1/4 cents for Rs. 1, 30, 000/- in favour of the 4th defendant;
(4) The 4th defendant in his turn executed a gift deed dated 27.4.1983 in favour of the 5th defendant;
(5) The 3rd defendant by a sale dated 25.2.1988 sold her portion measuring 2 1/2 cents of land for Rs. 1, 05, 000/- in favour of the 4th defendant. Hence, Original Suit No. 929 of 1990 was filed seeking possession of the above land by invoking forfeiture clause.
8. Both the suits were tried separately and the trial court arrived at the conclusion that the lease deed does not specifically prohibit alienation of the part of the property, but merely because in the document as there is no recital which bars to alienate a portion of the property, would itself be not conclusive and the Court has to read the document according to the intention of the parties. The Court also held that if there is an express condition, not to alienate the whole leasehold property, then portion of the leasehold property could not, also, be transferred by implication. The Court held that the properties are situated within the metropolitan area to which The Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 'Rent Act') is applicable and, therefore, plaintiff was not entitled to actual possession of the schedule property but only to constructive possession of the land subject to payment of all improvements thereon as provided under the lease-deed.
9. Being aggrieved thereby, RA Nos. 46 and 52 of 1992 were filed against the judgment and decree dated 31.1.1992 passed in OS No. 929 of 1990 and Ra Nos. 148 and 150 of 1994 were filed against the judgment and decree dated 30.9.1994 passed in OS No. 786 of 1990, before the District Court at Mangalore. The First Appellate Court held that what has been alienated in both the suits was only to the extent of 29 cents from the leasehold property which was 40 cents and the remaining 11 cents of the leasehold property is not the subject matter of alienation. The Court, therefore, held that as there is no condition which prohibits partial alienation of the property in the mulgeni lease, it would not give right to the plaintiffs to enforce the forfeiture clause. The Court further held that the lessor has to seek the relief mainly against the lessee even though the lessee has assigned the property in favour of his assignee as by virtue of S. 108 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as "the T.P. Act") the liability of the lessee will not extinguish by mere reason of such alienation. Hence, the last recognized lessee is a necessary party. The lessor can seek relief against the lessee and also the assignee and he may execute the decree for possession only against the assignee, but the decree has to be obtained against the lessee. Sucharita was last recognized lessee, who was necessary party to the suit and the defendants were proper parties. Hence, the appeals were allowed and suits were dismissed.
10. In appeals against the judgment and decree of First Appellate Court, the High Court referred to the judgments which were considered by the First Appellate Court and which were referred to at the time of hearing of the appeals and arrived at the conclusion that the said decisions would be applicable where there is partial alienation of the leasehold property, but held that in the present case there was alienation of the entire leasehold property. The High Court observed that the decisions in A. Venkataramana Bhatt and Another vs. Krishna Bhatt and Others 1925 AIR(Madras) 57 ], David Cutinha vs. Salvadora Minazes and others 1926 AIR(Madras) 1202 ], Terrell vs. Chatterton [1922] 2 Ch. 647 ] and P. Veda Bhat vs. Mahalaxmi Amma [AIR (34) 1947 Madras 441] would not applicable as there is alienation of the entire leasehold property. The Court has not dealt with any other contention.
11. Being aggrieved by the judgment of High Court, the defendants have filed the instant appeals.
12. At the outset, for the nature of Mulgeni lease, we would refer to the decision in Vyankatraya Bin Ramkrishnapa vs. Shivrambhat Bin Nagabhat [(1883) VII Bombay Series 256], wherein the High Court of Bombay considered the same and held as under:-
"In the minute of the Revenue Board (see p.28 of a book, exhibit A, in the suit of Vyakunta Bapuji vs. The Government of Bombay [(12 Bom. HC Rep. App.1), better known as the Kanara Case] it is said:-"
" The Court in that case traced the history of mulgeni tenure and observed thus:-"
13. Lastly, it is not suggested that the law has either by Statute or judicial decision defined the mulgeni tenure.
14. Under these circumstances it would be impossible, we think, to hold that restriction against alienation is so repugnant to the mulgeni tenure in the contemplation of law, that a clause to that effect must be held to be void. But it was said that such a clause in a permanent lease makes the land forever inalienable and is, therefore, void on the ground of public policy. That view however, would not appear to have been taken by the framers of the Transfer of Property Act, for we find that by S. 105 it recognizes leases in perpetuity, and that Section 10, which forbids a clause against alienation in general, makes an exception in the case of leases where it is introduced for the benefit of the lessor.
"15. Nothing is pointed out to take any other view with regard to the nature of the mulgeni tenure and we, therefore, adopt the same.
The submissions of the learned counsel for the parties which require consideration are:-
(i) Whether in case of perpetual lease, the condition not to alienate the property would be illegal and void?
(ii) Whether notice u/s. 111(g) of the T.P. Act is necessary before filing of the suit in the present case?
(iii) In any case, there is no express condition restraining partial alienation of the leasehold property, therefore also, the judgment and decree passed by the High Court is illegal.(iv) Whether the heirs of the original lessee are necessary parties in case of determination of lease?
Contention Nos. I and II
For appreciating these contentions, we would first refer to S. 10 of the T.P. Act which inter alia provides that"
"The section does not carve out any exception with regard to perpetual or permanent lease. It applies to permanent or temporary lease. In view of the specific exception carved out in case of lease, in our view, there is no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the condition which restrains the lessee from alienating leasehold property is in any way illegal or void. Similarly, contention that notice in writing is required as contemplated u/s. 111(g) before terminating the lease is also without any substance because in the present case, the lease deed was executed prior to the coming into force of the Transfer of Property (Amendment) Act, 1929 (20 of 1929). The relevant part of the amended section provides that a lease of immoveable property determines"
". The words 'gives notice in writing to the lessee of' were substituted by the Amendment Act which came into force from 1st April 1930 for the words 'does some act showing'. So prior to the aforesaid amendment which requires giving of notice in writing was not essential for determining the lease and what was required was some act of showing intention to determine the lease. This issue is concluded by the decision of this Court in Namdeo Lokman Lodhi vs. Narmadabai and others [ 1953 Indlaw SC 102 ] and Shri Rattan Lal vs. Shri Vardesh Chander and others [ 1975 Indlaw SC 241 ]. The First Appellate Court, therefore, has also rightly rejected the said contention.Contention No. III However, the next contention which requires consideration is - whether there is express condition which prohibits partial alienation of the leasehold property?
The finding of High Court on the question of partial alienation, in our view, is without considering the facts as discussed in detail by the trial court as well as by the First Appellate Court. Both the courts on facts held that there was partial alienation of the leasehold property. It appears that the High Court took into consideration the alienations because of the partition suits filed between the family members of the deceased lessee, but forgot the fact that the lessor in the suit itself had stated that as the said alienations were between family members, forfeiture clause was not invoked at that time. Same thing is stated before this Court in written submission filed by the learned counsel for the appellant-defendants. The First Appellate Court has specifically arrived at the conclusion that out of the leasehold property which was 40 cents what has been alienated in both the suits was only to the extent of 29 cents and remaining 11 cents acquired in the partition by Sanjiva Sapalya was not the subject matter of alienation. It appears that the High Court has overlooked this aspect and decided the entire matter without application of mind to the facts and contentions of the parties.
In the present case, the aforequoted lease deed was executed by the lessee and not by the lessor. In the lease deed it is provided that the lessee (I) will not have any right to alienate the property, either the right of permanent tenancy or the buildings etc. (which may be built by the lessee on the property) by way of sale of mulgeni or in whatsoever manner to others and if such alienation is affected, the permanent lease shall be liable to be totally cancelled and the property shall be reverted to the possession and enjoyment of lessor, on receiving the value of the buildings and improvements estimated by four gentlemen. Therefore, there is express condition accepted by the lessee not to alienate the leasehold property. However, there is no express condition to the effect that lessee will have no right to alienate part of the property. With regard to the nature of the mulgeni tenure, it has been observed by the Bombay High Court in Vyankatraya Bin Ramkrishnapa's case (supra) that this class of people may be considered rather as subordinate landlords than as tenants of the soil more especially as though many of them cultivated their lands by means of hired labourers or other sub-rented them to the temporary tenants. Further, S. 111(g) itself requires that for forfeiture, lessee should commit breach of 'an express condition' which provides that on breach thereof, the lessor may re-enter. The words 'express condition' itself stipulates that condition must be clear, manifest, explicit, unambiguous and there is no question of drawing any inference. In our view, as there is no express condition restraining partial alienation of the leasehold property, it would not be open to the transferee of the lessor's right to invoke the forfeiture clause for determining the perpetual lease and such conditions cannot be inferred by implication.
On similar clause, it appears that there is uniformity of interpretation by various High Courts that unless there is an express condition restraining partial alienation, forfeiture clause would not apply.
In A. Venkataramana Bhatta vs. Krishna Bhatta 1925 AIR(Madras) 57 ], the Court held thus:-"
15. A covenant against assignment does not prevent the tenant from assigning for any part of the term or from assigning a portion of the premises and unless the covenant is expressly worded to exclude a partial alienation of the premises, a partial alienation will not work forfeiture under a clause which prevents alienation of the premises. It is always open to the landlord to put into his lease a covenant against alienation either complete or partial, if he intends that forfeiture should result from partial alienation as well, but where he does not do so, the covenant will not apply to a partial alienation. Grove vs. Portel (1902) 1 Ch. Dn. 727.
"25. In David Cuthiha vs. Salvadora Minazes and others 1926 AIR(Madras) 1202 ], the Court observed thus:-"
16. In Chatterton vs. Terrel [ [1923] A.C. 578 ] Lord Wrenbury says:
17. It is said and said with truth, that if there be a covenant not to assign or underlet the premises, it is not a breach to assign or sub-let part of the premises. It was not so stipulated if those be the words, for the words or any part thereof are not found in the covenant.
" The above judgments are followed in P. Veda Bhat vs. Mahalaxmi Amma [AIR (34) 1947 Madras 441]. Same view is also taken in Keshab Chandra Sarkar and others vs. Gopal Chandra Chanda 1937 Indlaw CAL 57 ] and in Indraloke Studio Ltd. vs. Smt. Santi Debi and others 1960 Indlaw CAL 193 ].
Contention No IV Further, the First Appellate Court rightly held that for determining the lease the lessees are necessary parties. Principle is- privity of contract is between the lessor and lessee and not between the lessor and the transferees. If there is breach of contract, that is to say, express condition of lease, then it gives option to the lessor to determine the lease and re-enter the properties let out. For that purpose, lessee is a necessary party and transferees would be only proper parties. But without the presence of lessees, lease cannot be determined and decree for possession of the property cannot be passed in favour of the lessor. S. 108 (j) of T.P. Act specifically provides that the lessee shall not, by reason only of such transfer, cease to be subject to any of the liabilities attaching to the lease. In the present case, the liability to hand over vacant possession is that of the lessee. Privity of contract is with the lessee and not with the assignee. Further, u/cl. (q) of Section 108, on determination of lease, the lessee is bound to put the lessor into possession of the property. Therefore, the First Appellate Court rightly relied upon the decision rendered by Chagle, C.J. in Treasurer of Charitable Endowments vs. S.F.B. Tyabji, [AIR (35) 1948 Bombay 349], wherein dealing with a similar contention, it was observed:-"
".
Admittedly, in the present case, the heirs of the deceased lessee are not joined as party-defendants. In second suit O.S. No. 786 of 1990, the lessee Sucharita is not joined as a party to the suit by contending that only defendants who were assignees are required to be joined as party to the suit proceedings. Hence, the First Appellate Court rightly held that on ground of non-joinder of necessary parties, the suit was required to be dismissed.
Lastly, the learned counsel for the appellant referred to the provisions of S. 23 of the Rent Act, which reads thus:-"
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law, but subject to any contract to the contrary, it shall not be lawful after the coming into operation of this Part, for any tenant to sub-let whole or any part of the premises let to him or to assign or transfer in any other manner his interest therein:
18. Provided that the State Government may, by notification, permit in an area the transfer of interest in premises held under such leases or class of leases and to such extent as may be specified in the notification:
19. Provided further that nothing in this Section shall apply to a tenant having a right to enjoy any premises in perpetuity.
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees".
20. On the basis of aforesaid section, the learned counsel submitted that it shall not be lawful for any tenant to sublet or transfer the premises after commencement of the Act. However, the said provision in not made applicable to a tenant having a right to enjoy any premises in perpetuity. Therefore, under the 'Rent Act' lessor is not entitled to take possession of the premises on the ground of alienation of the part of the leasehold property from a present tenant as the Rent Act would govern the relationship between the lessor and lessee. He submitted that as found by first appellate Court, Rent Act is applicable to the suit premises and, therefore, suit for taking possession was not maintainable as subletting by the permanent tenant is not unlawful under the Rent Act. In our view, this contention was not raised before the High Court and hence it is not required to be decided in this appeal.
21. In the result, the appeals are allowed and the judgment and decree passed by the High Court is set aside. The suits filed by the plaintiff(s) are dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
