Commissioner Of Income Tax v M/S. South India Sugar Ltd.
Supreme Court of India

18 December 2002
C.A.No. 4328/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. In respect of the assessment year 1992-93 the assessment order was passed on 25.11.1994. The Assessing Officer computed the value of the closing stock of the manufacturing goods as far as the assessee was concerned by including the excise duty payable thereon. The assessee impugned this addition before the Commissioner (Appeals). By order dated 28.2.1995, the CIT (A) rejected the submission of the assessee that the quantum of excise duty was not includible in the computation of the value of the closing stock. The CIT (A), however, accepted the alternative submission of the assessee, namely, that if the cost of the goods had been enhanced by the excise duty correspondingly it should be allowed to claim the excise duty as an expense in the profit and loss account.
Accordingly the CIT (A) remanded the matter to the Assessing Officer for the purpose of determining whether in fact the assessee had paid any amount before the due date of filing of return towards excise duty which would entitle it to deduction under Sec.43-B of the Act. The assessee was directed to produce date-wise particulars of excise duty paid before the return of income for the assessment year in question and attributable to the closing stock with adequate evidence within two weeks of the order. The CIT (A) also directed that if such details were filed, the Assessing Officer would determine the same and allow the deduction of excise duty paid before the due date as a deduction in computation of income. Pursuant to the order of the CIT (A) by an order dated 26th April, 1995 the Assessing Officer re-computed the total income at Rs.2,42,15,720/-. Deduction under Sec.43-B of the Act towards excise duty paid before the filing of the return was allowed to the extent of Rupees one crore eighty seven lakhs and fifty seven thousand.
2. Aggrieved by the CIT (A)'s order, the assessee had in the meanwhile preferred an appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. The Tribunal, following a Special Bench decision of the Tribunal in the case of Food Specialities, (206 ITR 119), held that the excise duty was not part of the manufacturing goods and, therefore, there was no reason to include the same in the value of the closing stock. The Department took up the matter by way of reference before the High Court under Sec.256(2) of the Act. The High Court rejected the reference.
While the appeal was being argued before us learned counsel appearing on behalf of the assessee stated that the issue was in fact academic as his client was not seeking to contend, for the assesssment year in question atleast, that the excise duty should not have been included in the computation of the closing stock. It is stated that his client had already paid the excise duty before the filing of the return and had claimed deduction which has been allowed on such basis by the Assessing Officer. According to the learned counsel for the respondent the order dated 26.4.1995 concluded the issue so far as the assessee was concerned and the assessee was not interested in reopening the matter in respect of that assessment year.
3. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, however, contends that it is possible that on the basis of the Tribunal's order, the matter may have been reopened and the assessee allowed a double deduction as it were, by deduction of the excise duty from the computation of the cost of the closing stock as well as the deduction under Sec. 43-B of the Act. However,the learned counsel is not in a position to assert that any such order has been passed giving effect to the order of the Tribunal.
4. Having regard to the submissio~s of the parties we are of the view that this matter should be, and is, disposed of by observing that as far as the assessment year in question is concerned the assessment order dated 26.4.1995 shall be taken as the final assessment order. If the order of the Tribunal has been given effect to in respect of the assessment year in question, the same shall be modified and the order dated 26.4.1995 shall be operative . The issue as far as the assessment year in question is therefore really an academic one. Had the facts been pointed to the Tribunal it is unlikely that the Tribunal would have allowed the assessee to raise the issue in respect of the assessment year in question.
We, therefore set aside the order of the High Court as well as the order of the Tribunal as far as this assessment year is concerned but we make it clear that it will be open to the assessee to raise the issue in respect of any future assessment in respect of any other year. As we are setting aside the order of the Tribunal on this limited ground, we do not think it appropriate to remand the matter to the High Court for determination of the question raised in respect of the particular assessment year in question.
5. The appeal is disposed of.
Appeal disposed of
