State Of U.P v Kedar & Anr
Supreme Court of India

29 October 2002
Cr.A. No.1021 Of 1995
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.  The State is in appeal against the refusal to grant leave for the purpose of filing the appeal in terms of the Rules of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The contextual facts depict that three accused persons were charged for the offences under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced for trial before the learned Sessions Judge, Agra.
2.  During the pendency of the trial, one of the accused persons unfortunately suffered death by reason where for two persons stood the trial and the learned Sessions Judge on the basis of the evidence available on record acquitted both the accused persons and the principle reason for such an order of acquittal is by reason contradiction of oral testimony with the medical evidence.
3. This order of acquittal, however, was further appealed against by the State before the High Court and on the application for leave, the High Court thought it prudent not to grant such a leave and hence rejected the appeal and thus refused to entertain the appeal. It is against this order of rejection and refusal to entertain, that the State has moved under Article 136 of the Constitution.
4.  On perusal of the order as passed by the trial court, we do not find any infirmity therein, neither the same can be attributed to be perverse. The oral evidence definitely stand contradicted from the medical evidence and totally negates the medical evidence and all the same the learned Judge thought it prudent to reach the conclusion of non-acceptability of the oral evidence upon a proper discussion in the order.
5. We do find justification for such a finding as recorded by the learned Judge. As such, the rejection of leave cannot be decried in any way.
6. Be it, however, noted that without going into the issues as to the availability of reason even in the matter of grant of leave and in view of the state of affairs prevalent on the factual score, we are not inclined to interfere in the matter. As such this appeal fails and is dismissed. Bail bonds shall stand discharged.
Appeal dismissed.
