Shri Sudhir Kumar Paul v Shri Harihar Paul And Ors
Supreme Court of India

3 October 2002
C.A. No. 1727 Of 1995
The order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In this appeal we are concerned with the land comprised in premises Nos. 55 and 56, K.N. Sen Road, Calcutta. The respondents herein were the owners of the said land and the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants were tenants. As far back on 1st May, 1929 the predecessor-in-interest of the respondents leased out the said land in favour of the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants for a period of five years on payment of rent. The said lease deed stipulated that the lease is for the purpose of setting up of huts and for carrying on pottery business therein. The said lease deed also stipulated that the tenants would not claim any compensation in the event the land is acquired and it is the owners who would receive the compensation.
2.  However, they would only claim compensation in respect of the huts set up by them. In the year 1967, the land of which the appellants were tenants was acquired under the Calcutta Improvement Trust Act. Accordingly, the compensation was assessed in respect of the said land. Since there was a dispute as regards the apportionment, the matter was referred to the Calcutta Improvement Trust Tribunal. Before the Tribunal, there was an inter se compromise between the tenants in regard to the apportionment of the compensation amongst themselves. The tribunal awarded compensation to the tenants as well in regard to the owners of the land. Aggrieved, the owners preferred an appeal before the High Court. The High Court was of the view that in view of the stipulation contained in the Kabuliyat dated 1st May, 1929, the tenants were not entitled to any compensation in regard to the alleged right in the acquired land.
3. Consequently, the appeal was allowed and the order of the tribunal to that extent was set aside. It is against the said judgment the appellant is in appeal before us. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant urged that since the period of Kabuliyat was only for a period of five years, it became inoperative after the expiry of the said period and the appellants were entitled to compensation in respect of their right in the acquired land.
4.  We do not find any merit in the contention. It is not disputed that there was only one lease deed i.e. of 1st May, 1929 and thereafter no fresh lease deed was executed. It is also not disputed that the status of the appellants after expiry of five years was that of holding over of the land and their right in the landwas to be governed by Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.Thus, holding over of the land by the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants was in the same terms and conditions of the earlier Kabuliyat.
5.  Learned counsel then urged that the Kabuliyat ceased to have any effect as the appellant acquired the status of a statutory tenant after coming into force of the Act and, therefore, the appellant is entitled to compensation in regard to the acquisition of their right in the acquired land.
6. Since this argument was not raised before the High Court, we are, therefore, not inclined to entertain the same.
7.  Lastly, it was urged that the stipulation in the Kabuliyat that the tenants would not claim any compensation in the event of acquisition of land is outside the terms regulating the relationship of landlord and tenant and, therefore, the same cannot be relied up on. Exhibit B-1 is a composite document and the stipulation that the tenants would not claim any compensation in the event of acquisition of land was very much part and parcel of the relationship of the lessor and the lessee.
We, therefore, reject the argument.
8.  For the aforesaid reason, we do not find any merit in this appeal. It fails and is dismissed accordingly. The interim order dated 9.12.1994 stands vacated.
Appeal dismissed.
