Ganga Paswan and Another v State of Bihar
Supreme Court of India

13 August 2002
Cr.A. No. 526 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  According to prosecution the appellants with Deep Narayan Paswan and Ram Bilas Paswan came with guns in their hands on the date of the incident and shot dead deceased Sahjan Dusadh at 8.00 p.m. Ram Bilas was not tried as he was absconding. The appellants were roped in by an order passed by the learned trial court under section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Besides other evidence the prosecution led the evidence of PW1 - father of the deceased, PW2 - grand son of the informant and PW3 - son of the informant. The trial court, on consideration of evidence convicted Deep Narayan Paswan under section 302 IPC and for other offences, the appellants were convicted under section 302 IPC read with section 34.
2. All the three accused were sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life for conviction under section 302, insofar as Deep Narayan Paswan is concerned, and under section 302 read with section 34 so far as appellants are concerned. Two appeals were filed in the High Court, one joint appeal by the appellants (criminal appeal no. 425/89) and the other (criminal appeal no. 498/89) by Deep Narayan Paswan. By a common judgment and order the appeals were dismissed by the High Court. Deep Narayan Paswan, we have been told, has not challenged the judgment of the High Court. The present appeal has been filed by the appellants Ganga Paswan and Bangali Paswan.
3.  It has been established from evidence on record and has not been rightly disputed by Mr. Mishra, the learned counsel who argued the appeal on behalf of the appellants that the prosecution has been able to prove that all the four accused came with guns in their hands, whereafter the incident of shooting of Sahjan Dusadh took place. The contention of Mr. Mishra strenuously, urged however, is that the shot was fired by only Deep Narayan Paswan and no role has been attributed to the appellants except in the testimony of PW1. Learned counsel submits that there are material contradictions in the testimony of PW1, when seen in the light of testimony of his son and grand son i.e. PW3 and PW2 respectively. It is also contended that the informant PW1 had land dispute with the appellants and therefore the appellants have been falsely implicated.
4.  The trial court as also the High Court, on appreciation of the testimony of the witnesses, in particular, the eye-witnesses PW1, PW2 and PW3 has come to the conclusion that appellants are guilty of the murder of the deceased by aid of section 34 read with section 302 IPC. We have also gone through the evidence of these witnesses. We find no material contradiction. When an incident is watched by number of persons, everyone has his own way of narration. Too much cannot be made out of the minor contradictions. The land dispute which the informant had with the accused is a double edged weapon. It is not a mere presence of the appellants with weapons that they were found guilty of the offence for which they were charged. The submission that the gun shot was fired by Deep Narayan Paswan and not the appellant, by itself, on the facts of the case, has no relevance. The question in the present appeal is not whether any injury was inflicted by the appellants or not . The question is whether they shared or not common intention with Deep Narayan Paswan to do away the deceased when all came together with the guns in their hands. The trial court as also the High Court on appreciation of evidence rightly concluded that the appellants shared common intention to murder the deceased.
5.  Learned counsel relies on a decision of this Court in Suresh and Another v. State of U.P.1, in support of the contention that mere presence near the place of occurrence at or about the time of crime in the absence of other evidence, direct or circumstantial, would not make them guilty of offence under section 302 IPC with the aid of section 34. There is no dispute about this proposition. It is well settled that with the aid of section 34 a person can be made liable for an action of an offence not committed by him but by another person with whom he shared the common intention as section 34 recognises the principle of vicarious liability in criminal jurisprudence.
6. In the present case, we have already reached the conclusion that it has been rightly held that the appellants shared the common intention.
7.  Likewise the decision in Parshuram Singh v. State of Bihar2 on which reliance was placed by learned counsel has no applicability to the present case. In the decision relied upon, the Court found that the person who was sought to be roped in by virtue of section 34 had a lathi in his hand and prosecution had failed to prove his common intention to murder the deceased.
8.  For the aforesaid reasons we find no substance in the appeal. It is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
