M/S Ispat Industries Ltd v Union Of India & Ors
Supreme Court of India

30 September 2002
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.14542/2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard on the question of admission.
1.  The PIL filed in the High Court remained pending for admission for about 4 years. A preliminary objection to the maintainability of the petition itself has been raised in the High Court. It appears that on 26.3.2002 the matter appeared in the cause list and on that day itself Maharashtra State Electricity Board- the Respondent No. 5 in the High Court filed a counter wherein it made a statement showing its willingness to suffer an interim order. The High Court acting on that statement passed an interim order which interim order operates to the detriment of other respondents, and therefore, prima facie the same should not have been passed unless all the parties were given an opportunity of hearing in that regard.
2. We still expect the High Court would give the other respondents before it an opportunity of hearing specially the petitioner before us and we see no reason if an appropriate application is made before the High Court why the same shall not be heard and decided expeditiously.
3.  That remedy being available to the petitioner before us and other respondents in the High Court, we are not inclined to admit this special leave petition.
4.  The learned counsel for the petitioner states that an appropriate application setting out objections to the grant of interim relief as also reiterating the preliminary objection, which has already been raised, to the maintainability of the petition shall be filed within 10 days after serving a copy on the counsel for all the appearing parties. On that being done, we request the High Court to take up the matter for hearing and pass an order on the grant or otherwise of the interim relief within a period of six weeks from the date of making of the application.
Subject to the above said observations, the special leave petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.
