Ramamurthy v State of Karnataka
Supreme Court of India

1 October 2002
Cr.A. No. 628 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal arises out of a judgment of the High Court of Karnataka reversing the order of acquittal made by the trial court for an offence under Section 302 IPC by recording conviction against the appellant and sentencing him to imprisonment for life.
2.  The facts revealed in the case are that one Narayanaswamy, aged about 25 years, resident of Ramaganaparthyi Village was done to death by a sharp weapon used for cutting mulberry leaves at about 9.00 a.m. on 2-3-1989 in the house of PW 4, Krishnappa of Sonnehalli Village and which was noticed by PW 2, Pillamma, his wife and PW 3, Manjula, his daughter, who were present then at home. PW 2 Pillamma stated that Narayanaswamy, the deceased, was known to them for four years prior to his death. On the fateful day at about 7.00 or 8.00 a.m. the accused took out Narayanaswamy stating that they wanted to meet friends for collection of funds for construction of the temple. At that time PW 2 was sitting outside the house combing the hair of her daughter and her son was inside the house in kitchen having his coffee while her mother-in-law was also staying inside the house. At about 9.00 a.m., the deceased Narayanaswamy returned and he went inside the house. Later on, the accused, Ramamurthy, came holding a gunny bag in his left hand under the arms and went inside the house. Thereafter, she heard a sound "dubbu-dubbu".
3. According to the custom observed by the community, she could not enter the house as she had her menstrual periods then, but she peeped through the door and saw the accused assaulting the deceased with a kathire which weapon (MO 1) is used for cutting mulberry leaves. Having seen the injury to the deceased on left portion of the head, she got frightened and ran screaming towards the A.K. Colony which is about 50 to 60 ft away from her house whereupon several persons accompanied her including, one Munivenkatappa back to her house. Thereafter, PW 1 S.M. Narayanaswamy, came to their house and sent for her husband and all of them went to house of Ramachandrachar along with her husband and made a report to the police who arrived at the spot and took up the case for investigation. This evidence of PW 1 is substantially corroborated by PW 3 Manjula.
4.  PW 9, Dr. Sathyanarayana, who conducted the post-mortem, stated that the deceased has received injuries as follows:
"A male of 176 cm height, shoulders breadth of 40 cm. Hair length of 5 cm and of dark complexion. There were multiple cut and stab injuries over entire half of skull, facial, mandible bones and the bones were separated from the stuff skull bones with bleeding. Brain was coming out.
2. A 10 cm cut wound on the middle of chest.
3. A 10 cm cut wound on the left arm."
5. He also stated that to cause such injuries the weapon must be sharper than MO 1 which is produced in the case. In answer to the court's question he stated that if it was sharper than what it is now, injuries could occur.
6.  On coming to know of the murder of Narayanaswamy, PW 1 S.M. Narayanaswamy, who is the Mandal Pradhan of Kundalaguriki Village, visited the house of PW 4 Krishnappa when he asked PW 2 Pillamma and her children as to occurrence in their house they answered that Ramamurthy, the accused present before the court, had killed Narayanaswamy by assaulting with a chopper on his head and ran away. Thereafter he lodged a complaint after discussing the matter with Ramachandrachar.
7.  The trial court, after adverting to the prosecution case and summarising the evidence of each one of the witnesses without evaluation as to their creditworthiness held that there was no motive established in the case but rounded off the discussion in the following words:
"Therefore, the murder without motive cannot be a murder. Though in this case the death of the deceased Narayanaswamy took place, the ingredients of Section 300 IPC are not constituted. Because, there is no motive, no intention and no knowledge regarding the murder of Narayanaswamy, by the accused, though there is preparation. There is evidence to show that Ramamurthy, accused had kept a gunny bag in which the weapon was hidden. So, there is preparation to murder. But there is no motive or intention or knowledge to do it. Therefore, ingredients of Section 300 are not constituted. If so, the charge against the accused has to fail, if it is so, it has to be held that the prosecution has failed to prove the guilt of the accused beyond any reasonable doubt. Therefore, the accused has to be acquitted of the offences charged against him."
8. There is no marshalling of the facts arising in the case much less due comprehension of the situation either in law or fact.
9.  The High Court, on appeal, examined the matter in great detail and found that the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 is trustworthy and could be relied upon inasmuch as they were the natural witnesses, being inmates of the house where the crime is stated to have been committed; that no material had been placed before the Court to indicate that PWs 2 and 3 bore any animus against the accused; that mere absence of motive could not be taken to be a circumstance when there are eyewitnesses to the incident who have cogently set out their evidence and which is of acceptable nature. On that basis, the High Court found the appellant to be guilty of the offence charged against him.
10.  Learned counsel pointed out the discrepancy arising out of the evidence of the doctor PW 9. The incident took place on 2-3-1989 while the doctor PW 9 was examined on 24-4-1993, nearly 4 years after the incident. Even a sharp weapon by improper preservation or non-user could become blunt by exposure to the elements in the nature apart from due to the fact of its use in killing Narayanaswamy. The mere fact of the doctor stating that weapon sharper than MO 1 could have caused the injuries noted in the postmortem report would not itself prove the fact that MO 1 could not have been used in the crime in question.
11.  The learned counsel analysed the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 threadbare but could not dislodge the finding of the High Court that they are natural witnesses to the incident and their version could not be attacked at all in any manner. All that is stated is that it is not probable for Narayanaswamy to have come to the house twice - once on the previous night and on the next day.
12.  Next, it is submitted that the said deceased having gone out with the accused Ramamurthy could not have returned to the house of PW 4 Krishnappa. The dead body of Narayanswamy having been found in the house of PW 4 Krishnappa there cannot be any doubt as to his presence in their house at the time of his death. Whether he had gone out of the house and returned or not, fact remains that witnesses have seen the accused entering their house and thereafter Narayanaswamy had been done to death.
13.  The argument that when Ramamurthy had gone out, he had better opportunity of doing away with deceased rather than at the house of PW 2, does not carry the matter far because the manner in which or the place where the crime should be committed would depend upon the attitude of the accused. He might have thought that doing away with the deceased inside the house will have less chance of discovering of his acts rather than in an open area. In the circumstances, we find that none of the arguments suggested against the conclusions reached by the High Court can be sustained.
14.  It is urged on behalf of the appellant that the Judges who decided the matter were previously Sessions Judges and one of them having framed charges while the other having recorded evidence in the Sessions Court would naturally be biased in favour of the prosecution and, therefore, they ought not to have heard the matter and should have recused themselves and the matter should have been placed before another Bench for consideration and, in this context, relied upon a decision of this Court in S.K. Warikoo v. State of J and K 1997 Indlaw SC 1374. That was a case in which when a review petition had been filed, one of the members of the Bench recused himself stating that he had dealt with the matter though at a preliminary stage of the letters patent appeal in the High Court and it would not be appropriate for him to hear the matter himself.
15. It is submitted that course should have been adopted by the learned Judges in the present case also. It does not appear from the record that it was brought to the notice of the learned Judges that in their capacity as Sessions Judges one of them had framed the charges and the other had recorded the evidence and, therefore, it would not be appropriate for them to hear the matter.
16.  Apart from that fact, merely because a Judge framed the charges will not, by itself, be a circumstance which gives rise to bias in favour of the prosecution or against the accused in any manner. Instances are not wanting that even after framing the charges, the accused are acquitted on the basis of evidence adduced in the case, without being influenced by the factors that led to framing of charges.
17. Judicially trained minds would examine the matters in their appropriate light, with detachment, notwithstanding that views one way or other had been expressed in initial stages of the proceedings or in disposing of the interlocutory applications. This argument arises out of sheer desperation having failed in all other contentions. We find no merit in this argument. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
