Sushila Kumari v State of Rajasthan and others
Supreme Court of India

21 March 2002
C.A. No. 16828 of 1996
The order of the court was as follows:
1.  The short question that arises in this appeal is: whether the proceedings under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (in short "the Tenancy Act") shall be allowed to continue pending disposal of the proceedings under sub-section (2) of Section 10 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners' Estates Act, 1963 (Act 11 of 1964) (in short "the Estates Act").
2.  The High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur by its order dated 17-5-1995 in SBCWP No. 768 of 1983, impugned in this appeal, took the view that the proceedings under the Tenancy Act need not remain stayed till the decision of the Compensation Commissioner under the Estates Act. The appellant is the widow of the Maharaja of the erstwhile State of Bikaner.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
3.  The order under challenge is in the nature of an interlocutory order. Having regard to the ambit of the question before us, it is not necessary to delve into the interpretation of Sections 6, 7, 8 and 10 of the Estates Act. Further, as the determination under sub-section (2) of Section 10 of the Estates Act depends upon the true interpretation of the said provisions and we are informed that an appeal against the order of the Compensation Commissioner passed under Section 10(2) of that Act, is pending before the Board of Revenue, it would be inappropriate to express any opinion on that aspect.  However, on the facts and in view of the question involved in this case, we are of the view that it would be just and proper that the proceedings under the Tenancy Act shall remain stayed till the appeal under the Estates Act is decided by the Board of Revenue.
4.  Having regard to the pendency of the case under sub-section (2) of Section 10 of the Estates Act for quite some time, we direct the Board of Revenue to expedite the hearing of the appeal. It is needless to mention that the Board of Revenue has to dispose of the appeal on merits in accordance with law, uninfluenced by any observations made by the High Court in the order under challenge.
With these observations we dispose of the appeal. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
