State of Maharashtra v Mahalaxmi Stores
Supreme Court of India

20 November 2002
C.A. No. 9157 of 1995
The Order of the Court is as follows
1. This appeal arises from the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court at Bombay passed in Sales Tax Reference No.1 of 1995 dated 22nd February, 1995.
2. The Maharashtra Sales Tax Tribunal referred the following question u/s. 61(1) of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 to the High Court:
"Where on the facts and circumstances of the cases and on a true and correct interpretation of the provision of S. 2(17) of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, was the Tribunal justified in holding that crushing of boulders resulting in metal of different sizes ordinarily known as 'Gitti' does not amount to manufacture?"
3. The facts, insofar as they are relevant for our purpose, are as follows:
4. The assessee purchases big sized stones - boulders from registered dealers and crushes them into small sizes, known as 'Gitti'. It approached the Commissioner of Sales Tax for determination of the question whether converting bigger size boulders into 'gitti' would amount to manufacture. The Deputy Commissioner held that the process of conversion amounts to 'manufacture' within the meaning of S. 2(17) of the Act. Against the order of the Deputy Commissioner, the assessee went in appeal before the Maharashtra Sales Tax Tribunal. The contention of the assessee that converting boulders into 'gitti' does not involve any manufacturing process within the meaning of the Act, was accepted by the Tribunal. From that order, the afore-mentioned question was referred to the High Court at Bombay. Following the judgments of this Court in Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax vs. Pio Food Packers 1980 Indlaw SC 189 ), Chowgule & Co. Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. vs. Union of India & Ors. 1980 Indlaw SC 276 ) and Sterling Foods vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. 1986 Indlaw SC 177 ), the High Court held that the conversion of boulders into 'gitti' did not amount to 'manufacture'. It is this view of the High Court that is assailed in this appeal by the Revenue.
5. S. 2(17) of the Act defines the term 'manufacture and it reads thus:
"Manufacture with all the grammatical variations and cognate expressions means producing, making, extracting, alternating, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise processing, treating or adapting any goods but does not include such manufacture or manufacturing processes as may be prescribed."
6. From a perusal of the definition, extracted above, it is clear that the processes of producing, making, extracting, alternating, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise processing, treating or adapting of any goods fall within the meaning of the term 'manufacture'. But it may be pointed out that every type of variation of the goods or finishing of goods would not amount to manufacture unless it results in emergence of new commercial commodity. In the instant case, the very nature of the activity does not result in manufacture because no new commercial commodity comes into existence.
7. This Court in Commissioner of Sales Tax, Uttar Pradesh vs. Lal Kunwa Stone Crusher (P) Ltd. 2000 Indlaw SC 211 ), on an identical question, expressed the view that when stone boulders were crushed into stone chips, gitti and stone ballast, the process could not be termed as 'manufacture'. That case arose under the Utter Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948. The definition of 'manufacture' in S. 2(e-1) of the U.P. Act appears to be similar to the definition under consideration.
8. In view of the judgment of this Court in Lal Kunwa Stone Crusher (P) Ltd. (supra), with which we are in respectful agreement, we find no illegality in the impugned judgment of the High Court. In the view that we have taken, the judgment of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Kher Stone Crusher vs. General Manager, District Industries Centre, Jabalpur & Anr. 1990 Indlaw MP 1 ) cannot be treated as good law.
The civil appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
No costs.
