State of Tamil Nadu v S. Krishnamurthy
Supreme Court of India

29 January 2002
Cr.A. No. 653 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The State of Tamil Nadu is in appeal against the judgment and order of the High Court of Judicature at Madras made in Criminal Appeal No. 810 of 1990 whereby the High Court reversed the judgment and conviction dated 27-11-1990 made by the VIth Additional Special Judge, Madras in Calendar Case No. 21 of 1989, who found the respondent guilty of offences punishable under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d)(n) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. 1988 and sentenced him to undergo RI for one year with a tine of Rs. 500 in default to suffer RI for a further period of two months.
2.  Briefly stated, the prosecution case is that the respondent was employed as a Special Temporary Assistant in Mylapore Triplicane Taluk Office, Madras during the month of September 1988. It is stated that PW 1 and PW 2 approached the respondent for changing the patta of Chintadripet property purchased by PW 1 for which purpose the respondent demanded a sum of Rs. 300 as bribe. PW 1 was not inclined to pay the said sum and having considered this demand as abhorrent, he and PW 2 approached the Vigilance and the Anti-Corruption Office on 19-9-1988. Based on this complaint PW 17, the investigating officer laid a trap to which PWs 1. 2 and 3 are witnesses.
3. It is stated that after explaining the procedure adopted in the phenolphthalein test, PW 17 asked PW 1 to approach the respondent and make the payment to him and on 19-9-1988 at about 3.15 p.m., PWs 1 and 2 approached the respondent and made the payment of Rs. 300, which the accused received and put in his pocket. At that time, by a prearranged signal. PW 17 and others came to the scene and conducted the phenolphthalein test in the presence of PWs 1 and 2, which was found to be positive and recovered the money from the respondent, and after further investigation charge-sheeted the respondent, as stated above.
4.  The defence of the respondent was that he did receive the money as stated by the prosecution but the same was not as a bribe but as a donation for Teachers Day.
5.  The learned Sessions Judge based on the evidence of the prosecution held the respondent guilty and sentenced him, as stated above. The High Court after perusing the evidence de novo, came to the conclusion that the delay in approaching the Anti-Corruption Officer by PWs 1 and 2 throws considerable doubt on the prosecution case. This is because PWs 1 and 2 were not strangers or first-time visitors to the Taluk Office and that it has also come in evidence that PW 1 during one of his earlier visits had, on demand, paid a sum of Rs. 100 towards the donation for Teachers' Day to PW 4 from whom he did not receive any receipt.
6.  Therefore, PW 1 was in the know of the practice in the said office as to collection of donations for the Flag Day as well as for the Teachers Day fund. It observed that in the context of the practice followed in the said office and the defence put forward by the accused that he received a sum of Rs. 300 from PW 1 towards collection for Flag Day fund. The demand by the respondent in the ordinary course would not have provoked PW 1 to treat his demand as abhorrent. If really PW 1 was annoyed with such a demand which if he were to think was not for a public cause, there was no reason why he should have waited for a few days before approaching the Anti-Corruption Authorities.
7.  On the said basis, the High Court came to the conclusion that though the prosecution has proved that the respondent did receive a sum of Rs. 300 from PW 1, the same was not towards bribe, as stated by PW 1, hence, the offence alleged against him was not established. It also noticed the fact that granting of patta certificate was not the sole responsibility of the respondent and it was a cumulative act of various officials of the Taluk Office, therefore, the High Court also came to the conclusion that a demand for an individual bribe in the facts and circumstances of the case cannot be accepted.
8.  In this appeal, we have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the evidence. We are unable to come to the conclusion that the finding given by the High Court is either perverse or based on no evidence. The prevalence of the practice in the office in question of collecting the Flag Day fund and the Teachers' Day fund seems to have been an authorised practice, though we do not approve of such practice. While considering a criminal appeal, if the existence of such practice is established and the defence taken by the accused is in conformity with such practice, we are in agreement with the High Court that the mere fact that the respondent received a sum of Rs.300 would not ipso facto lead to the conclusion that the money in question was received by him as a bribe for showing an official favour.
9.  Having considered the material on record, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
