Coinpar and another v General Manager, Telecom District and others
Supreme Court of India

27 February 2002
C.A. No. 7127 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Respondent 4 herein filed a complaint before the District Consumer Redressal Forum (hereinafter referred to as "the Forum") on the ground that disconnection of his telephone was illegal and arbitrary. The Department took a preliminary objection before the Forum that such a complaint cannot be entertained by the Forum.
The said objection was overruled and the complaint was allowed. The Department, instead of filing an appeal before the State Consumer Redressal Commission filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
2. Learned Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the aforesaid holding that the Forum under the Consumer Protection Act (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") has the jurisdiction to entertain and decide the dispute between the subscriber and the Department, though remedy by way of arbitration is also available under Section 7-B of the Telegraph Act.
3.  Aggrieved, the respondent herein preferred a writ appeal before a Division Bench of the High Court. The appellate court was of the view that the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum under the Act has no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint of the consumer in view of the expressed remedy by way of arbitration provided under Section 7-B of the Telegraph Act. Consequently, the appeal was allowed and the judgment of learned Single Judge and that of the Forum was set aside.
4.  The complainant who filed the complaint before the Forum, who was also respondent in the appeal, has not chosen to challenge the order of the High Court and accepted the said judgment.
5.  The appellant which claims to be an association, working in public interest, preferred an appeal against the judgment of the High Court with an application for permission to file special leave petition. The said permission was granted.
6.  After the matter was heard, we find that the appellant was neither a party in the case before the Forum nor before the High Court. It is not shown before us in what manner the appellant is aggrieved against the judgment of the High Court. The complainant has accepted the judgment of the High Court and thus the said judgment has attained finality. The appellant having no locus standi cannot be permitted to challenge the judgment of the High Court.
7.  The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed, leaving the question of law open to be decided in some other cases. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
