hree Digvijay Cement Company Limited and another v Union of India and another
Supreme Court of India

17 December 2002
C.A. No. 46 of 1993 (Along with C.A. Nos. 45, 47 and 48 of 1993)
The Judgment was delivered by : Y.K. SABHARWAL, J.
1. The appellants are cement manufacturers. They challenge the legality and validity of Clause 9A of the Cement Control Order 1967 . Clause 9A and some other clauses were incorporated by amendments made in the Control Order in the year 1982. Clause 9A requires every producer to pay to the Cement Regulation Account  an amount at the rate of Rs. 9/- per metric tonne of production of non-levy cement. This payment to be made by the producer on production of non-levy cement was withdrawn on 15th December, 1986. One of the manufacturers (Andhra Cements) filed the writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the clause in September, 1986; two of them  filed writ petitions in 1987 and Digvijay Cement in the year 1992. Their principle contention before the High Court was that the amount payable under Clause 9A was in the nature of tax and there was no authority of law to impose that tax. Undoubtedly, no tax can be levied or collected except by authority of law. The contention of the writ petitioners did not find favour with the High Court and, therefore, these appeals were filed on grant of leave.
2. Cement is a schedule industry under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. Section 18G of the Act, inter alia, empowers the Central Government to provide for regulating the supply and distribution of any article relatable to any schedule industry. The acute shortage of cement in the country resulted in the making of the Control Order in exercise of powers conferred by Sections 18G and 25 of the Act. The cement manufacturing units in India were located in different places. Some of the units manufacturing cement were located at a long distance from consumption centres. A huge amount on freight had to be incurred in transporting the cement from various factories to the market. The manufacturing cost varied depending upon the age of the unit, manufacturing process and technology utilized etc. The transportation cost varied considerably depending upon the location of the unit. In the Control Order a mechanism was devised for equalizing the freight cost on the cement. An equalization account was provided for in the Control Order. Different ex-factory retention prices were provided in respect of various cement manufacturing units keeping their varying cost of production. It provided for the manufacturer to get a retention price to cover his cost and yield a reasonable return to the manufacturer. A uniform FOR  destination price for cement was fixed in respect of the whole of India irrespective of the distance over which the cement had to be transported. The excess of FOR destination price realized by a cement manufacturer over his retention price, subject to certain adjustments, had to be paid by the cement manufacturers into the Cement Regulation Account (CRA). In cases where freight actually incurred was in excess of the specified amount, the differential amount was paid to the manufacturer out of the CRA.
3. The operation of the Control Order brought out certain serious problems affecting the cement industry. The control resulted in the fall of the fresh investments in the cement industry. Further, there were consistent demands for revision of the retention prices on the basis that the cost of manufacture had increased considerably. The burden of CRA increased rapidly because of the rapid increase in fuel and transport cost. The CRA went into deficit, it was unable to meet its commitments.
4. Considering the problems, the Government on 23rd March, 1981 constituted a high level Committee to review the developments of the cement industry and recommend measures to accelerate its progress including incentives and fair prices. The terms of the reference of that Committee were:
"(i) To review the present system of pricing in the cement industry , including the merits of establishing uniform prices for different varieties of cement, suggest modifications to ensure the healthy growth of this industry including the achievement of production at optimal levels and recommended fair prices payable to producers for the next pricing period commencing from April 1982;
(ii) To review the incentives (including rebates) and concessions) available to cement factories and suggest what change in these should be made to rapidly augment the domestic production of cement. In this connection, also review the incentives available for the erection of cement factories in remote, difficult and deficit areas and recommend what alternatives should be made in these to accelerate the production of cement in these areas in a cost-effective manner;
(iii) To review the progress of modernization and introduction of technological improvements (including efficiency in the use of energy; research and development and quality control) in domestic cement factories and recommended measures (including system of incentives to accelerate these in order to reduce costs and effect economies in domestic production; and(iv) To consider any other matter relating to rational development of the cement industry"
5. After detailed and exhaustive study of all aspects in relation to cement industry a large number of recommendations were made by the aforesaid Committee including recommendation for a partial decontrol so that the cement manufacturers are allowed to sell a certain specified percentage of their production in the open market without any price control. It was expected that the cement prices in the open market would be far higher than the controlled prices and this would create incentives for the fresh investment in the cement industry. The Committee felt that the need for freight subsidy by payment out of the CRA would have to be continued otherwise serious problems would arise in remote and far-flung areas. It was noticed that there is already sizeable deficit in the CRA which would make it unable to make its past payment commitments. The Committee, therefore, recommended, as an integral part of the package of amendments, that an amount of Rs. 10/- per MT should be recovered from the cement manufacturers for payment into the CRA on every tonne of cement produced, irrespective of whether it was levy cement or non-levy cement.
6. With some modifications, the recommendations of the Committee were accepted by the Central Government. The Central Government allowed partial decontrol. It allowed sale of non-levy cement to the extent of 33.34% and not 25% as recommended by the Committee. Further, instead of recommended payment of Rs. 10/- per MT, the Central Government reduced the payment to the CRA at the rate of Rs. 9/- per MT. It was felt that the payment into CRA on decontrolled quantity of cement was necessary because to the extent of decontrol, there will be no contribution into the CRA of the differential amount between FOR destination price and the manufacturer's retention price. It was felt that the Government's duty and obligation to pay freight subsidy on the controlled output of levy cement which accounted for 66.66% of the total production continued and was expected that this burden would increase sharply because of substantial increases in the transport cost. The CRA would, therefore, balance in this situation of decontrol only if the said contribution of Rs. 9/- per MT was received into CRA on the non-levy cement. It was also contemplated that the sale price of the non-levy cement would be far higher than the price of the levy cement and, therefore, there will be no unnecessary burden on the cement manufacturers inasmuch as this will be passed on to the customers in the shape of higher prices. It seems that by and large, the cement industry welcomed the new package pricing policy. It complemented the High Level Committee for departing from the conventional approach to the problems of pricing and distribution and submitted report to the Government which will stimulate the cement industry and ensure its healthy growth.
7. It appears that out of a large number of cement manufacturers in India, only four manufacturers, namely the appellants, challenged clause 9A and consequent payment under the said clause, three of them filing the writ petitions after the liability to pay had been withdrawn and one manufacturer in September 1986. The High Court by the impugned judgment did not accept the contention that the payment under Clause 9A amounted to tax and, thus upheld the validity of the impugned clause. The High Court held that the partial decontrol and the impugned contribution was one single integrated and inseverable package.
8. The contention urged on behalf of the appellants is that the payment under Clause 9A constitutes levy and collection of tax without authority of law. It is contended that Clause 9A is ultra vires Section 18G of the Act. The impugned clause requires the manufacturers to compulsorily pay Rs. 9/- per MT on the non-levy cement produced by them. There is no authority under the Act to levy or recover such a payment. It was contended that no tax can be imposed by any subordinate legislation unless the principle statute specifically authorises such imposition. The submission is that the Act does not authorise levy and recovery of any such tax and, therefore, Clause 9A is ultra vires the Act.
9. Cl. 3 of the Control Order contains prohibition to remove the cement from the precincts or premises of the manufacturer. Cl. 4 empowers the Central Government to direct sale or transport of cement to any person or class of persons and on such terms and conditions, as may be specified in the order. The obligation on the producer to maintain and produce the accounts as the Central Government may require is provided in Cl. 6. Cl. 7 provides that the ex-factory prices admissible to the producer for the different varieties of cement shall be as specified in the Schedule, namely, the retention price. Cl. 8 provides the price at which the producer can sell the cement.
10. Cl. 9 provides for payment by the producer of the cement into the CRA. Cl. 9 reads as under:
"Payment to cement regulation account.
(1) Every producer shall, in respect of each transaction by way of sale of cement effected by him or in respect of every removal of cement made by him, u/cl. 3 pay within one month of the close of the month in which such sales or removals take place to the Development Commissioner for Cement industry, an amount equivalent to the amount, if any, by which the free or rail destination price of such cement exceeds the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:-
(i) the ex-factory price of such cement calculated in accordance with the rates specified in the Schedule;
(ii) selling and distribution expenses calculated at the rate of Rs. 4.00 per tonne;
(iii) the excise duty paid thereon; and
(iv) in the case of packed cement, the charges fixed by the Central Government in respect of packing under the first proviso to cl. 8 and where a producer uses second hand jute bags in excess of the limit, if any, specified under the second proviso to that clause such charges as proportionately reduced.
provided that the expenditure incurred by the producer on freight by the cheapest mode of transport or where any other mode of transport has been specified by the Central Government under clause 4, by such mode of transport in respect of such transaction shall be reimbursed to the producer by the Development Commissioner for Cement Industry from out of the Cement Regulation Account referred to in clause 11"
11. Cl. 10 provides for the maximum price at which cement could be sold.
12. Cl. 11 stipulates the maintenance of CRA and the purpose for which the amount credited into CRA could be spent. Cl. 11 reads as under:-
"Cement regulation account.
11. (1) The Development Commissioner for Cement Industry shall maintain an account to be known as the Cement Regulation Account to which shall be credited the amounts paid by the producer u/cls. 9 and 9A and such other sums of money as the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, grant from time to time.(2) The amount credited under sub-cl. (1) shall be spent only for the following purposes, namely:-
(i) paying or equalizing the expenditure incurred by the producer on freight in accordance with the provisions of this Order:
(ii) equalizing concession, if any, granted in the matter of price, freight supplies to Government or public or for purposes of export under the second proviso to cl. 8 or for import;
(iii) expenses incurred by the development Commissioner for Cement Industry in discharging the functions under this Order subject to such limits, if any, as may be laid down by the Central Government in this behalf.
(iv) such reimbursement of expenses by the Development Commissioner for Cement Industry as may be incurred by the producers of cement for the purpose of increasing the production for securing the equitable distribution and availability at fair prices of cement.
(3) The Development Commissioner for Cement industry shall cause accounts to be kept of all moneys received and expended by him from out of the Cement Regulation Account and he shall prepare and submit such report and returns relating to the said account as may be required by the Central Government from time to time.
(4) The balance, if any, remaining unspent in the Cement Regulation Account shall be disbursed in accordance with such directions as may be given by the Central Government in this behalf"
13. The amendments made to the Control Order on 28th February 1982, that are relevant for appreciation of respective contentions are as under:
"Applicability.
1A. The provisions of the said Order except clause 9A thereof shall apply only in relation to levy cement.
Definitions.
2. In this Order, unless the context otherwise requires -
(a) to (oo) ....
(d)"
9A. Every producer shall, in respect of the production of non-levy cement pay to the Cement Regulation Account an amount at the rate of rupees nine per metric tonne of such production, within one month of the close of the month in which such production takes place
".
It is apparent that except Clause 9A, no other clause of the Control Order applies to non-levy cement. There is no control on supply, distribution or price of the non-levy cement. The non-levy cement is free from price and distribution control in contrast to levy cement. Whereas in respect of levy cement, under Clause 9, the cement producers were required to pay into CRA the difference between FOR destination price charged by them and the retention price admissible to them, in respect of non-levy cement under Clause 9A, they were required to pay in CRA Rs. 9/- per metric tonne. According to the appellants, in respect of non- levy cement whatever money is paid by the buyer of the cement to them becomes their money and thereafter the requirement of payment as provided in Clause 9A in a compulsive payment and hence a tax. For such a tax, it is contended, there is no sanction of law. The contention is that the impugned clause is a compulsion on manufacturers of non-levy cement to pay Rs. 9/- per metric tonne as above, which constitutes levy and recovery of tax that cannot be imposed by any subordinate legislation unless the principle statute specifically authorises such imposition. There is no such authorization in the Act. Therefore, it is contended that Clause 9A is ultra vires the Act. In support of the submission that the impugned levy under Clause 9A, in fact, is a tax, learned counsel for the appellants has placed reliance on the decision of the House of Lords in Attorney-General vs. Wiits United Dairies (1922(91) Law Journal Reports (Kings Bench) 897). In that case, the Food Controller was empowered by the Defence of the Realm Regulations to make orders regulating or giving directions with respect of the production, manufacture, treatment, use, consumption, transport, storage, distribution, supply, sale or purchase of or other dealing in or measures to to be taken in relation to any article as appear to him necessary or expedient for the purpose of encouraging or maintaining the food supply of the country. It was found that there was disparity in the prices of milk prevailing in different areas and in order to equalize these prices, the Food Controller purporting to exercise powers conferred on him by the Defence of the Realm Regulations, entered into agreements with the defendant-company by which the latter were permitted to purchase milk within certain defined area on terms that they should pay him a sum of two pence per gallon for this privilege. The defendant-company which was required to make this payment, refused to do so and to the information laid against it raised the contention that the charge amounted in effect to a tax levied in an unconstitutional manner. The company succeeded in the Court of appeal and the Attorney General brought the matter in appeal before the House of Lords.
In dismissing the appeal, Lord Buckmaster after accepting the argument based upon the extreme difficulty of the situation in which the country found itself owing to the war, and the importance of securing and maintaining vital supplies essential for the life of the community, proceeded to consider the question whether a power to make such a levy was granted. The statute had confined the duties of the Food Controller to regulating the supply and consumption of food and taking the necessary steps for maintaining proper supplies. It was observed that:"
14. There are only two sources from which those powers can possibly be derived. One is the Act creating the Ministry, and the other the Regulations under the Defence of the Realm Act. Neither of these either directly or, in any opinion, by inference enabled the Food Controller to levy the payment of any sums of money from any of His Majesty's subjects. The statute of 1916 confines his duties to regulating the supply and consumption of food and taking the necessary steps for maintaining a proper supply of food. The powers so given are no doubt very extensive and very drastic, but they do not include the power of levying upon any man payment of money which the Food Controller must receive as part of a national fund and can only apply under proper sanction for national purposes. However, the character of this payment may be clothed, by asking your Lordships to consider the necessity for its imposition, in the end it must remain a payment which certain classes of people were called upon to make for the purpose of exercising certain privileges, and, the result is that the money so raised can only be described as a tax the levying of which can never imposed upon subjects of this country by anything except plain and direct statutory means
In Attorney General for New South Wales vs. Homebush Flour Mills Ltd. 56 CLR 390 at 400) the High Court of Australia held that when the exaction of money in a Government in obedience to what is really a compulsive demand; the money paid is paid as a tax.
Reliance was also placed on the decision of Privy Council in Lower Mainland Dairy Products Sales Adjustment Committee vs. Crystal Dairy Ltd. [1933] A.C. 168 ). The case was concerned with the legality of certain adjustment levies imposed on farmers by an adjustment Committee created by an enactment of British Columbia by which the disparity in the production of fluid milk as compared with milk products was sought to be countered. It was contended on behalf of the State that the levies were not taxes but merely a scheme for pooling profits in a provincial trade. Lord Thankerton speaking for the Board said."
Reliance was also placed in A. Venkata Subba Rao vs. State of Andhra Pradesh  ). In this case the Government of Madras passed various orders for procurement and distribution of paddy and rice. Persons were appointed as procuring agents and wholesalers and their duty was to procure rice from specified areas at prices specified by the Government from time to time and to deliver it at prices so specified to the Government or to the persons nominated by it or to other licensed purchasers. The purchasing agents were to get the difference between the purchase price and the sale price. During the year 1947-48 the Government increased the price and this resulted in excess profits to procuring agents. The Government insisted that this excess sum so earned by the procuring agents should be paid to the Government and this sum was directed to be collected as surcharge. It was held by the Supreme Court that recovery of this money amounted to a tax imposed by an executive fiat without any legislative sanction on the capital value of the stocks of foodgrains held on a particular date.
This Court observing that if there is no legal basis for these demands by the Government, it is not possible to characterize them anything else than as taxes; they were imposed compulsorily by the executive and are sought to be collected by the State by the exercise, inter alia, of coercive statutory powers, though these powers are vested in Government for very different purposes. This Court has approved the statement of law and the essential characteristics of tax as contained in the aforesaid observations of Lord Thankerton.
For deciding the validity of Clause 9A, in view of the aforesaid legal position, it is to be determined whether the contribution payable amounts to compulsory exaction of money and hence has an essential feature of taxation. The core question that has to be decided is as to whom the money paid by the buyers of non-levy cement belongs. The real question, therefore, is; are the appellants merely holders of the money paid to them by their customers for purchase of non-levy cement and are not, in fact, entitled to it or the money, in fact, belongs to them? In support of the contention that the money, in fact, does not belong to the appellants and they are merely holders thereof, learned counsel for the respondents, besides placing reliance on two decisions, one of the Calcutta High Court upholding the validity of Clauses 4A and 4B of the Aluminium Control Order, 1970 and the other of Delhi High Court upholding validity of Cl. 9 of the Control Order, has placed, rather emphatically, strong reliance on the background, scheme and the circumstances under which Clause 9A was inserted in the Control Order by 1982 amendment. We have already noticed that Clause 9A was inserted while simultaneously introducing partial decontrol of cement. No fault can be found with the object behind the levy in question. As a result of partial decontrol, the cement manufacturers were expected to earn huge profits by sale of non-levy cement in open market. There was no limitation or restriction on sale price.
The effect of Clause 9A was to make them contribute, out of those profits, Rs. 9/- per metric tonne into the CRA. Howsoever laudable the object behind the levy and collection of any sum of money may be, but if it does not have sanction of law, it has to be struck down. The contention that the partial decontrol and contribution under Cl. 9 are inseparable and part of the same scheme, though looks attractive at the first brush but closer examination thereof shows that it has no substance. The question before this Court is only about the validity of Clause 9A for want of legal sanction to impose the levy and collect that amount and not about the validity of the partial decontrol. From the affidavit of the respondents filed in this Court as well, it appears that on payment of the sale price of the non-levy cement by the buyers to the sellers, i.e. the cement manufacturers, the amount so paid becomes their property - amount belongs to them, though they may have passed on the burden to the customers, it cannot be held that the appellants are merely holders of that amount. It would be useful in this connection to quote from the affidavit filed on behalf of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion which itself shows that the money received by sale of non-levy cement becomes the money of the sellers. The affidavit states:"
The decisions relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents have no relevance. In Union of India and others v. Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Limited and Anr. 1982 Indlaw CAL 255 ) while examining the validity of the aforenoticed provisions of Aluminium Control Order, 1970, it was held that the person challenging the validity of the clause which related to the fixation of retention price of indigenous aluminium (Clause 4A) and fair price of aluminium (Clause 4B) is merely the holder of the money. In that case, the Government had fixed the sale price of indigenous aluminium which was considered to be fair and within the pecuniary limits of the consumers. The Government finding that mere fixation of sale price would serve no purpose of the consumers and consequently the objectives u/s. 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 cannot be achieved, introduced the concept of retention price in order to obviate the difficulties of the consumer. The Calcutta High Court held that as the retention price fixed for HINDALCO was lower than the sale price, HINDLCO has to pay to the Aluminium Regulation Accountant, the sum which is the difference between the sale price and the retention price. Under these circumstances, it was held that the steps taken by the Government by fixation of the retention price for each producer and the sale price and the provision for payment to the Aluminium Regulation Account were necessary in the interests of the consumers so as to maintain supply of aluminium consistent with the demand thereof and to make it available to the consumer at a fair price.
Likewise, in R.D. Aggarwala and another vs. The Union of India and Anr. 1974 (2) ILR(Delhi) 520 ), the Delhi High Court was concerned, with the validity of Cl. 9. In that case, the contention that was urged was:"
" The High Court held that the contention was based on the assumption that the producer was deprived of the balance of the freight in his hands. It was clear that the producer was not entitled to the said balance of freight according to the scheme of the Control Order. The Court said:"
15. The High Court, therefore, held that the balance of FOR destination price does not belong to the purchaser under the scheme of the Control Order and cannot, therefore, be regarded as tax qua the producer.
16. Factual matrix of the two cases relied upon by learned counsel for the respondents and of the present case is entirely different. As already noticed, there is no control on price of sale of the non-levy cement. Except Clause 9A, no other clause of the Control Order is applicable to non-levy cement. There is no sale price, there is no retention price and the manufacturers are free to sell the non-levy cement at whatever price they like. There is no power in the subordinate legislation to impose levy on that cement which is not covered by the Control Order.
17. It is no doubt true that in taxing legislation, legislature deserves greater latitude and greater play in joints. This principle, however, cannot be extended so as to validate a levy which has no sanction of law, however, laudable may have been the object to introduce it and howsoever laudable may have been the purpose for which the amount so collected may have been spent.
18. It is clear from the above discussion that the impugned levy under Clause 9A is a compulsory exaction. The amount paid by the customers of non-levy cement belongs to the appellants. Such a levy amounts to levy of tax and, therefore, invalid for want of sanction to levy such a tax. Clause 9A, is, therefore, ultra vires Section 18G of the Act. To this extent we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court.
19. The next question is: whether the appellants are entitled to refund of the contribution made by them under Clause 9A of the Control Order? There is no automatic right of refund. In Mafatlal Industries Ltd. and ors. vs. Union of India and ors. 1996 Indlaw SC 1515 ), the Constitution Bench has held that the right to refund of tax paid under an unconstitutional provision of law is not an absolute or an unconditional right. Similar is the position, even if Art. 265 can be invoked. The principles of unjust enrichment are applicable in claim of refund. The claimant has to allege and establish that he has not passed on the burden to another person. The Constitution Bench has held whether the claim for restitution is treated as a constitutional imperative or as a statutory requirement, it is neither an absolute right nor an unconditional obligation but is subject to the requirement as explained in the judgment. Where the burden of duty has been passed on, the claimant cannot say that he has suffered any real loss or prejudice. Real loss or prejudice is suffered in such a case by the person who has ultimately borne the burden and it is only that person who can legitimately claim its refund. But where such person does not come forward or where it is not possible to refund the amount to him for one or the other reason, it is just and appropriate that amount is retained by the State, i.e. by the people. The doctrine of unjust enrichment is a just and salutary doctrine. The power of the Court is not meant to be exercised for unjustly enriching a person. The doctrine of unjust enrichment is, however, inapplicable to the State for the State represents the people of the country. No one can speak of the people being unjustly enriched.
20. In the present case, it is clear that the burden of payment under Clause 9A was passed on to the customers. The President of the Cement Manufacturer Association, soon after the insertion of the amendment in February 1982, in a communication dated 12th March, 1982 sent to the Secretary of Ministry of Commerce, Department of Industrial Development, Government while giving break-up of the price of non-levy cement added in the said price, a sum of Rs. 9/- per MT payable under Clause 9A on production of the non-levy cement. Further, it appears that the levy under Clause 9A was accepted by the entire cement industry except the challenge made by the four appellants by filing the writ petitions; one just before the contribution under Clause 9A was withdrawn and three after it was withdrawn. Besides the principles of unjust enrichment on equitable principles which squarely apply here, the appellants are not entitled to claim refund of amount paid into CRA under Clause 9A. It is evident that the amount so deposited was expanded for the purpose under the Control Order. Under these circumstances, we directed that pursuant to declaration of invalidity of Clause 9A of the Control Order, the amount of contribution already paid under Clause 9A will not be liable to be refunded to the appellants.
21. The appeals are accordingly allowed to the above limited extent. In the facts and circumstances of the case, parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeals allowed.
