W.L. Marian India Private Limited v V. Sudhakar and Others
Supreme Court of India

7 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.21077-21078/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant is a tenant of the respondent No.1. It is aggrieved by the order of the High Court passed on an application filed by the respondent No.1 landlord in insolvency proceedings against the respondent No.1 whereby the High Court directed the interim receiver to recover certain amounts from the appellant and also disallowed future adjustment of rent payable by the appellant to the respondent No.1. The order was confirmed in appeal by the Division Bench. When the matter came up before this court, an interim order was passed on 10.12.2001 staying "realisation of the dues prior to the impugned judgment."
2.  It may be mentioned that the High Court had granted liberty to the appellant to recover the cost said to have been incurred by it in respect of which it was claiming deductions from the rent payable by it to the landlord. A suit has been filed by the appellant raising such claim. Since the issue raised in this appeal would have to be considered in the civil suit, we dispose of this appeal by confirming the interim order passed by this Court subject to such further orders that may be passed by the civil court in the pending suit filed by the appellant. We modify the impugned order of the High Court to that extent only.
3. It is being made clear that the observations of the High Court should not be taken as binding on the Civil Court and that either party will be at liberty to pray for interim orders from the Civil Court, as they may be advised and may be entitled to in law. It is also being made clear that this order is by way of an interim measure and should not be construed as in any way, interfering with any decree which may have been passed in favour of the respondent landlord against the appellant.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of. No costs.
Appeal disposed of.
