Laxman v K.G. Patil and Another
Supreme Court of India

16 October 2003
C.A. No.732 Of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is against the judgment of the High Court dated 20th March 2001 in M.F. A. No.4865 of 2000.
Briefly stated the facts are as follows:
2. An accident had taken place whereunder the appellant was injured. He filed the claim against the 1st respondent who is the owner of the vehicle as well as the 2nd respondent which is the Insurance Company. The Insurance Company was given leave to defend the matter by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal.
3. One of the contentions of the Insurance Company before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, was that the accident took place not due to the rash and negligent driving of the driver of the vehicle but due to the appellant's riding his horse rashly and negligently. The Tribunal has, on the basis of evidence before it held that the accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of the driver. The Tribunal accordingly awarded a sum of Rs.1,13,500/-.
4.  The Insurance Company filed an appeal before the High Court. The High Court has by a very cryptic order remanded the matter back to the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal on the ground that according to the Insurance company, it was the claimant who was rash and negligent.
5. The High Court held that this is an additional ground which would require evidence to be adduced and issues to be considered afresh. The High Court has given an opportunity to both the parties to lead fresh evidence.
6.  In our view the High Court fell into an error in not noticing that this was a ground which had already been urged before the Tribunal. The Tribunal had already held that the Insurance Company has not been able to prove this fact.
7. This was thus not an additional ground. As the Insurance Company had chosen not to lead any evidence before the Tribunal, there was no question of remitting the matter back on this ground.
8.  We, therefore, set aside the impugned order of the High Court. We restore the appeal to the file of the High Court. The High Court shall decide the appeal on merits, on the basis of evidence and material which are on record before the Tribunal. The High Court to dispose of the appeal on merit.
9.  The appeal stands disposed of accordingly. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
