Hussain Beg (D) Through Lrs. and Others v State of Himachal Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

20 November 2003
C.A. Nos. 1685-1686/1998

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The common judgment passed by the High Court in regular second appeals is under challenge in these appeals.
2.  The appellant filed two suits, i.e., Civil Suit No.51/71 for redemption of mortgage in respect of house property and Civil Suit No.116/74 for declaration of title and for possession of agricultural land. Civil Suit No.21/37 of 1971 was filed by the State for redemption and possession of the suit properties. The Trial Court after a full dressed hearing, dismissed the suits filed by the appellant and decreed the suit filed by the State. Aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court, the appellant filed first appeals before the First Appellate Court. The First Appellate Court while maintaining the judgment and decree relating to the agricultural lands, allowed the appeal to the extent of house property and a small built-up portion in the agricultural land.
3. In this situation, the appellant as well as the State filed second appeals before the High Court to the extent they were aggrieved by the judgment of the First Appellate Court. The High Court allowed the appeal filed by the State and dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant. In other words, the judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court was restored in entirety.
4.  The learned Senior counsel for the appellant urged that the Trial Court as well as the High Court committed a serious error in not properly appreciating and constructing the documents having bearing on the issue of ownership of the appellant over the suit property. According to the learned counsel, the Trial Court as well as the High Court mis-read the documents. Mis-reading or wrong construction of document itself was a substantial question of law which the High Court could go into and consider. He also submitted that the First Appellate Court was right in decreeing the suit of the appellant to the extent of house property and also the built-up area in the agricultural land having regard to the documents Exhibits P8 and P10.
5. In opposition, the learned counsel for the respondent-State supported the impugned judgment adopting the reasons recorded in the impugned judgment itself. The learned counsel took us through some portions of the judgments of the Trial Court, the First Appellate Court and the High Court to contend that no fault can be found with the impugned judgment. He added that the Trial Court and the High Court were right in placing proper construction of the document Exhibit D1 dated 24.10.1927 and also the document Exhibit P7 dated 10.2.1987 B.K. (1930); absolute title of the appellant could not flow from these documents which are basic documents. In regard to the documents Exhibit P8 and P10, the learned counsel submitted that those documents per se did not establish that any absolute ownership was conferred on Mst. Tajo. This being the position, the judgment under appeal does not call for any interference.
6.  The Trial Court referring to these documents and in the light of the evidence on record, concluded that Exhibits P8 and P10 did not confer absolute right of ownership on Mst. Tajo and if all the documents are read together, only life interest was conferred on her in the light of the background of the case how the only right of maintenance was given to her earlier and subsequently, permission was given to her to alienate the property to meet the debt. The First Appellate Court, looking to the order made by the Settlement Officer in file No.104/S.O. and also Exhibit P10, drew inference that as far as house property was concerned, absolute ownership was conferred on Mst. Tajo. As far as agricultural lands were concerned, the First Appellate Court concurred with the findings recorded by the Trial Court to the effect that Mst. Tajo had only the life interest in those lands.
7.  The High Court in the impugned judgment, reading the document dated 21.10.1927 together with the document dated 10.2.1987 B.K., arrived at a conclusion that Mst. Tajo had only life interest in the properties, i.e., the house properties as well as the agricultural lands. The High Court looking to the condition permitting Mst. Tajo to sell the property to have an amount of Rs.2, 000/- and subsequently, permitting to sell for any amount and taking note of the fact that the properties were not sold but actually mortgaged, concluded that Mst. Tajo had only life interest in the said properties. As far as the orders passed by the Settlement Officer and the document Exhibit P10 are concerned, the High Court observed and recorded in the impugned order that the appellant failed to produce any record to show that Mst. Tajo was Malgujar and further held that the rights of Mst. Tajo could be gathered on the basis of the two documents, i.e., 24.10.1927 and 10.2.1987 B.K. (1930) referred to above.
8.  We have perused these two documents of 1927 and 1930. We are in complete agreement with the construction of both these documents made by the Trial Court as well as by the High Court. It is not possible for us to agree with the contention advanced on behalf of the appellant that Exhibits P8 and P10 altered the position in any way so as to confer absolute ownership on Mst. Tajo. The First Appellate Court's conclusion was only based on inference from these documents, but these documents themselves do not show that the ownership of Mst. Tajo was absolute and not for life.
In the light of the evidence and reading the documents as they are, the High court was right in concluding against the appellant.
9.  We have no good reason to take a different view. Hence, finding no merit in these appeals, we dismiss them, but, with no order as to costs.
10.  At this stage, the learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the L.Rs. of the appellant are in possession of the house property in respect of which the suit for redemption of mortgage was filed; since they are living for a long time and using the house for a residential purpose, in case they approach the State Government for assignment or for allotment or to sell the property, as the case may be, the State Government may consider their application sympathetically. Learned counsel for the State submitted that if such application is made, the same will be considered sympathetically, if permissible in law, and in accordance with law. We place his statement on record.
Appeals dismissed.
