Rupinder Kaur Suri And Ors. v Digvijay Cement Co. Ltd.
Supreme Court of India

17 April 2003
CIVIL APPEAL No.3500 OF 2003 (Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.12052/2002)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Leave granted.
2. Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side.
3. The tribunal after considering the materials on record has chosen to determine the annual dependency at Rs.19,800 and applying the multiplier of 16 worked out the compensation payable as Rs.3,16,800. Adding to the said amount a further sum of Rs.30,000/- towards conventional damages the total compensation was determined at Rs.3.46,800/-. Adjusting the sum of Rs.15,000/- said to have already been paid by the employer as ex gratia payment the net amount payable was arrived at by the tribunal as Rs.3,31,800/- with interest @ 12% from the date of filing the petition i.e. 8.3.1984 till the date of realization. On the other hand the High Court seems to have not only applied a reduced multiplier of 12 but has chosen to reduce from the amount determined further sum of Rs.30,600/- said to have been spent by the company towards the group insurance scheme policy.
Ultimately, the High Court arrived at the final figure of Rs.1,58,400/- and after giving to the credit to the sum already said to have been withdrawn in a sum of Rs.1,33,000/- directed the payment of Rs.25,400/-, with proportionate interest, in the manner indicated therein. The learned counsel for the appellant, apart from contending that the reduction of the multiplier and the further deduction made was not warranted also urged that the cross objections filed were not duly and properly considered.
4. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent strenuously contended placing reliance upon a decision of this Court reported in U.P. State Road Transport Corporation and others vs. Trilok Chandra and others (1996 (4) SCC 362 1996 Indlaw SC 2879) that the reduced multiplier was the proper and just one on the facts of this case and no exception could be taken to the same. Further, objection was also taken to the award of interest @ 12% instead of 9%, besides contending that the deduction of the amount spent for obtaining policy under the group insurance was rightly made by the High Court and that the same does not warrant interference.
5. We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on either side. This Court while dealing with the case relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent was more concerned with the question of the maximum number of the multiplier or the necessity for having a ceiling or otherwise on the multiplier to be applied and to that extent varied the one fixed earlier in G.M. Kerala vs. Susamma Thomas ( 1994 (2)SCC 176) 1993 Indlaw SC 1302 of a maximum multiplier of 16 and clarified the position that it can be even up to 18 in a given case. As to what multiplier has to be applied in a given case will depend upon several variable, distinct and concrete materials in a given case such as the age of the deceased, the age of the dependents, the ultimate quantum that may result therefrom to a certain extent, as well.
Ultimately what is to be ensured in the process is that the compensation awarded was a reasonable compensation, under the Act and the method of arriving it is really the process or procedure to be adopted to arrive at. Viewed in that context and keeping in view not only the age of the deceased in this case but also the age of the claimants, the wife and the minor children the multiplier of 16 adopted by the tribunal below seems to be more reasonable and justifiable one than that adopted by the High Court. That apart, as to the deduction further made by the High Court purporting to be the sum (Rs.30,600/-) said to have been spent towards the group insurance scheme, we are of the view that the same is impermissible in law and could not have been properly or reasonably been deducted from the compensation arrived at.
6. The further objection, though seriously taken with reference to the award of interest at 12% on the compensation determined, we are of the view that during the relevant point of time, in terms of the prevailing position of law as declared by this Court, 12% interest could legitimately have been awarded and therefore the award of interest cannot be said to be so vitiated as to call for our interference. We see no merit in this objection as well. Consequently, we order that the compensation as determined by the tribunal will stand restored. The appellants will be entitled to only the balance of the amount after adjusting the amount already said to have been withdrawn by the appellants, as found noticed by the High Court. In the light of what we have said and the manner in which we have approved of the compensation determined it is unnecessary for us to deal with, separately the grievance made by the appellants that their cross objections have not been duly adverted to or considered by the High Court. The appeal shall stand allowed in the manner and to the extent indicated above. No costs.
Appeal allowed
