State of Uttar Pradesh v Ekhraj & Ors.
Supreme Court of India

29 January 2003
Cr.A. Nos. 112-113 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These are State appeals against the acquittal of the respondents by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The respondents herein and one Jauwad were tried by the learned Sessions Judge, Ghazipur for the offences under Sections 147, 148 and 307 read with 149 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
2. Learned Sessions Judge accepted the alibi evidence produced by Abdul Majeed, A.1 and acquitted him. But he found two of the accused viz: - Jauwad and Kanhaiya guilty of offence under Section 307 read with 149 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to seven years RI while rest of the accused were sentenced to five years RI under Section 307 read with 149 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
3.  As against acquittal of accused No.1, Abdul Majeed, the State preferred an appeal before the High Court and as against their conviction the other accused persons filed an appeal before the High Court. During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court Jauwad died hence his appeal stood abated. The High Court while rejecting the State appeal filed against. A.1, Abdul Majeed allowed the appeal filed by the convicted persons and set aside the conviction imposed against them. The State of Uttar Pradesh had preferred these appeals before us against all the accused persons including Abdul Majeed. A.1 who was acquitted by both the courts below.
4.  During the pendency, it is stated that Abdul Majeed has also die so this appeal stands abated in regard to that respondent. The High Court came to the conclusion that the prosecution witnesses could not have identified the accused for want of visibility and the statement of the prosecution witnesses that they identified these accused persons by their voice cannot be relied upon to base a conviction. It also noticed discrepancy between the medical evidence and ocular evidence hence thought that it is not a fit base for a conviction on the material produced by the prosecution. On the said basis it allowed the appeal of the respondent while it dismissed the State appeal against since deceased A.1.
5.  Having gone through the material on record and heard the learned counsel for the appellant we are of the view that this is not a fit case which calls for any interference by us. Accordingly, the appeals fail and the same are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.
