Bhakra Beas Mgt. Board and others v State of H.P. and others
Supreme Court of India

30 January 2003
C.A. No. 2580 of 1997 (Along with C.A. No. 2581 of 1997)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals are preferred by Bhakra Beas Mgt. Board and others. Approximately 73,000 acres of land was acquired during 1962-1963 for the purpose of construction of Pong Dam Reservoir. Section 4 Notification was issued on 1.4.1963. There were large number of claimants and the 4th respondent herein Daya Chand was the claimant No. 268. In the land acquisition proceedings an award was passed in his favour on 27th February, 1973. Daya Chand had not filed any application under Section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act seeking reference for enhancement of the compensation, but many other land-owners, whose properties were acquired under the same Notification, sought reference under section 18 and in one such case, the Additional District Judge, Kangra at Dharamshala passed an award on 11.11.1986 granting enhancement of compensation therein. Based on the award passed, the respondent No.4 filed application under section 28-A of Land Acquisition Act for re-determination of the land value. In most of the cases in which land was acquired under these land acquisition proceedings, there were disputes between the landlords and the tenants. Tenants claimed apportionment and the Land Acquisition Officer ordered that 1/3rd of the compensation should be given to the tenants and 2/3rd shall be shared by the landlords.
2. In view of the dispute between the landlords and tenants, the matter was referred to the Reference Court for apportionment under section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act. That reference application was finally decided on 28th August, 1980 and it was held that the entire amount payable under the award is to be given to the landlord and the tenant was not entitled to any compensation. Though this decision was taken by the Additional District Judge on 28.8.1980, the 4th respondent herein in his application under section 28-A filed on 1.1.1987 did not claim the full amount of compensation and his application under section 28-A was allowed and the compensation payable to him was re-determined in the light of the judgment of this Court in U.O.I. vs. Shanti Devi. The Collector, who re-determined the compensation did not grant the full compensation to the 4th respondent, including the tenant's share.
3.  The 4th respondent thereafter filed another application under section 28-A based on the award passed in favour of one Bakshi Ram son of Mangtu by the Additional District Judge, Kangra at Dharamshala. In the second application filed under section 28-A, the 4th respondent claimed the remaining 1/3rd amount which ought to have been granted to him. As stated above, under section 28-A in the earlier proceedings, he was given only 2/3rd of the enhanced compensation. The second application filed under section 28-A was allowed and the Collector granted the additional amount payable to him. The award passed under section 28-A by the Collector in the second application is challenged before us. We heard the learned counsel for the appellants, learned counsel for the respondents and learned counsel for the State.
4.  Counsel for the appellants contended that the second application filed under section 28-A by the 4th respondent is not maintainable, as the same question has been decided by this Court in Union of India and another vs. Pradeep Kumari and others. The counsel for the 4th respondent submitted that the second application under section 28-A was filed as the full amount was not granted to the 4th respondent, even though he was entitled to get it. It is further stated that the second application even if it was not strictly in accordance with law, should be construed as an additional application seeking the payment, which was really due to the 4th respondent as per the earlier order.
5.  It is true that second application under section 28-A is not maintainable and no claimant can go on filing applications under section 28-A as soon as there is any variation in the determination of the compensation in respect of any other landowner whose land is acquired under the same Notification. But in the instant case, where the 4th respondent filed his first application, the Collector, who might have been dealing with series of other applications, should have noticed the fact that the petitioner therein being landlord in respect of the land, was entitled to the full amount and not the 2/3rd of the compensation.
6. The dispute regarding apportionment between landlord and tenant, by that time, was decided by the Reference Court and it was held that time, was decided by the Reference Court and it was held that the tenant was not entitled to get any portion of the amount of compensation. Irrespective of the fact that the landowner did not seek specific relief for award of the entire compensation, it was the duty of Collector to give that benefit to the landowner. Therefore, we do not find any error or illegality in awarding the additional compensation to the 4th respondent by rectifying the mistake earlier committed. We do not find any merit in these appeals. The appeals are dismissed accordingly.
Appeals dismissed.
