D.D.A v Trilok Singh Sawhney
Supreme Court of India

10 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.14266/2003

The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the respondent in person.
2. The delay in filing letters patent appeal has not been condoned and the appeal has been dismissed on that ground alone by the High Court which has been assailed as a wholly untenable order resulting in miscarriage of justice.
3.  The respondent submits that in view of a decision of this Court reported in 1981 Indlaw SC 428 (Ajit Singh Thakur Singh and anr. vs. State of Gujarat) it would constitute a valid ground to refuse the condonation of delay if the same has not been explained for the period during which the matter was within limitation.
4. It is true, no doubt, that the delay in filing an appeal etc. has to be explained reasonably and in that connection it may be observed that there have been several decisions of this Court observing that in matters where the appeals are filed by the State or such other organisations, it is not always possible to pursue the matter as it is done by an individual or a private litigant. The procedural matters involving official conduct of business sometimes are lengthy, causing some delay but in every case to refuse to condone the delay may result in miscarriage of justice.
5.  In the present case, it is informed that the decision on the basis of which the High Court has passed its judgment in favour of the respondent, the same decision stands overruled by a judgment of this Court in D.D.A. vs. Mrs. Vijaya c. Gurshaney and anr. 2003 Indlaw SC 667. Considering all the facts and circumstances of the case, in our view it would have better served the ends of justice if the High Court would have condoned the delay and entertained the appeal and decided it on merits.
6.  In the result, the appeal is allowed, the order of the High Court refusing to condone the delay is set aside and the matter is remanded to the High Court to consider and decide the same on merits.
Appeal allowed.
