Padmanath Goswami v Banamali Das Alias Banoram Das
Supreme Court of India

10 April 2003
C.A. No. 3343 of 2003 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 10523 of 2000)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The suit filed by the respondent against the petitioner being Title Suit No. 112 of 1986 was decreed by the Munsif. An objection to the suit being barred by limitation was decided against the petitioner-defendant.
2. In appeal, however, the learned Assistant District Judge, Barpeta had set aside the judgment and decree passed by the Munsif and the suit was dismissed. That order was challenged by the respondent in the High Court in Second Appeal No. 62 of 1993. By the impugned order, the judgment of the Assistant District Judge has been reversed and that of the trial court restored. The defendant in the title suit is before us.
3.  The High Court has not answered the question of the suit being barred by limitation or not. It has held that the question of limitation is irrelevant and academic. One of the substantial issues between the parties was that of the law of limitation and the applicability of the relevant article of the Limitation Act.
4. As abovestated, the trial court answered the limitation issue in favour of the plaintiff-respondent and the first appellate court answered that in favour of the appellant-defendant. Only after coming to the conclusion that the suit was within limitation, the Court could go into the question of the status of the khatian, that is, whether it was illegal and without authority of law. Under no circumstances, the question of limitation could be said to be irrelevant and academic as held by the High Court in the impugned judgment.
5.  Without expressing any opinion either on the question of limitation or other points that have been decided in Second Appeal No. 62 of 1993, we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and remand the second appeal for fresh decision of the High Court. The High Court would also decide the question of limitation.
We request the High Court to expeditiously decide the second appeal.
6.  The parties are directed to appear before the Registrar General of the Gauhati High Court on 2-5-2003.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
