Ibrahim Latif Khan and another v U.O.I. and others
Supreme Court of India

14 January 2003
C.A. No. 11748 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellants herein were allegedly employees of retail shop owned by Tata Textiles. The Tata Textile Undertaking was taken over pursuant to Takeover of Management Act, 1983. These appellants were out of employment from 18.10.1983 to 10.10.1984. These appellants filed a writ petition before the High Court of Bombay claiming back wages for this period. They also claimed regular pay pursuant to their appointment in National Textile Corporation (hereinafter referred to as NTC'), after taking over of the management of Tata Textile under the Act. After these appellants were given employment, they were given some fixed amount as their pay. By the impugned judgment the Division Bench had directed that these appellants be paid 50% of the back wages for the period from 18.10.1983 to 10.10.1984. As regards the payment of salary and allowances subsequent to their appointment i.e. from 1.11.1984 to 30.6.1995, it was held that they were entitled to get 50% of difference between minimum wages actually received by them and the wages payable to them in the regular pay scale.
2. In this appeal the appellants urged that the back wages should not be restricted to 50%. It is also contended that these appellants should have been paid the full salary and allowances on regular pay scale. The prayer of the appellants is objected to by the respondent.
3.  Counsel for the respondents submitted that these appellants were not regular employees of Tata Textiles, which had been taken over under the Act. They were working only in the retail shop which was run by the agent of the Tata Textile. It is also contended that these appellants are now employees of N.T.C. and N.T.C. itself is in serious financial difficulties and that the scheme for revival has been approved by B.I.F.R. which is under implementation.
4.  Having regard to the above facts, we do not think that there shall be a direction to pay full back wages to the appellants. The appellants have been given reasonable amount as their back wages and the discretion exercised by the Division Bench in a petition under Article 226 does not seem to be erroneous or unreasonable under the facts and circumstances of this case. We do not find any reason to interfere in the same. The civil appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
