Kunnor Anup Kumar Singh v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

17 April 2003
S.L.P. (Cr.) No. 5211 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The case relates to an incident of the year 1983. Deceased was working as a domestic help in the house of the 1st accused. The 3rd accused is the son of 1st accused. The appellant was 2nd accused before the accused no. 3 were charged with offence under Sections 302, 331 and 348 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code. The 1st accused was charged with offence under Sections 302, 321 and 348 read with Section 109 IPC. The father and son were acquitted of all the charges.
However, appellant was convicted by the Sessions Court for offence under Section 324 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year. Three criminal appeals were filed before the High Court, one by the appellant challenging his conviction for offence under Section 324; another by the State against the order of acquittal in respect of accused nos. 1 and 3 and the third also by the State against the acquittal of the appellant for offence under Sections 302, 331 and 348 read with Section 34, IPC.
2.  The High Court by impugned common judgment dismissed both the appeals filed by the State. The appeal filed by the appellant challenging his conviction under Section 324 was partly allowed inasmuch as the conviction for offence under Section 324 IPC was maintained but sentenced but sentence was reduced to three months rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.3000/-, and in default of payment of fine, to undergo simple imprisonment for one month. The appellant has challenged the impugned judgment and order of the High Court to the extent it confirms his conviction for offence under Section 324.
3.  The case of prosecution in brief, in so far as relevant for the present purpose, is that the deceased, according to accused no.1, had committed theft of Rs.30/- from his house. The deceased was working as a domestic help in the house of accused no.1. When the accused no.1 enquired about the theft from deceased, he denied it. The said accused along with his son (accused no.3) gave beating to the deceased. Later, he was also beaten by accused no.2 Complainants were made by the deceased against the appellant and the main accused, i.e. accused nos. 1 and 3. As above noticed, accused nos. 1 and 3 have been acquitted of all the offences.
Trial Court also did not find them guilty for offence under Section 324. The order of the Trial Court was affirmed in appeal by the High Court. It appears that two complaints were made by the deceased against the appellants on the same date, i.e., 10th June, 1983. The High Court in the impugned judgment has referred only to one of the said complaints (Ex. P-5) and on that basis confirmed the conviction of the appellant for offence under Section 324.
4. The second complaint of the deceased (Ex. P-23) was a statement recorded by the Inspector of Police. Ex. P-23 has not been considered by the High Court, which in our opinion, has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice to the appellant. A perusal of Ex. P-23 shows that the deceased stated before the Inspector of Police of having been given severe beating by accused nos. 1 and 3. There is no serious or specific allegation of the deceased having been beaten by the appellant, except a casual reference. The High Court without examining Ex. P-23 has confirmed the conviction of the appellant. What is stated in Ex.P-23 is also in conformity with the case of the prosecution.
Even otherwise, it is evident from facts that the main persons were accused no. 1 and accused no. 3 and they having been acquitted, there was no evidence to uphold the conviction of the appellant. In view of these circumstances, we are unable to sustain the conviction of the appellant for offence under Section 324 IPC.
5.  The appeal is thus, allowed. The impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of offence under Section 324 I.P.C. The fine, if deposited, shall be refunded to the appellant.
Appeal allowed.
