Hari Singh N. Chhabria v Antia P.C. and another
Supreme Court of India

30 March 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) 23525 of 2002 (and SPL(C) 9769-9770 of 2002)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  It is stated by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the applicants that his clients do not wish to proceed with the petition and that his clients will take appropriate proceedings to impugn the compromise decree which according to the learned counsel does not in any event bind his clients. I.As. are dismissed as withdrawn.
(SLP(C) No. 23525 of 2002)
Leave granted.
2.  By consent of the parties the order under appeal as well as the order of the trial court dated 3rd August, 2001 are set aside and the matters remanded to the trial court for disposal afresh in accordance with law.
3.  Mr. V. Jagadesan, Chartered Accountant, resident of 108, TTK Road, Chennai-18, is hereby appointed as Receiver to take charge and possession of the movable and immovable properties, which are the subject matter, of the Memorandum of Compromise dated 8th August, 1997.
4. The Receiver will manage the affairs of the estate and realise the gains and profits of the immovable properties and also get in and collect outstanding debts and claims due from the said properties with all the powers and duties provided under Order XL of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
5.  That the parties herein and all the persons claiming under them will deliver up quiet possession of the said properties movable immovable together will all the title-deeds, agreements for lease, agreements for sale, if any, account books, papers memorandum and writings relating thereto to the said receiver within a period of two weeks from date.
6.  The receiver will issue notices to the tenants and occupiers of the said immovable properties to attorn and pay their rents in arrears and current rents to the said receiver.
7.  The receipt or receipts of the said Receiver shall be a sufficient discharge for all such sum or sum of money or property as shall be paid or delivered to him as such receiver as aforesaid.
8.  The Receiver will out of the monies to be received by him pay the municipal and other public charges due in respect of the said properties and shall be entitled to retain his hands a sum of Rs. 200/- or such other sum as the Trial Court may fix for current expenses, but subject thereto shall pay his net receipts so soon as the same come to his hands into the Trial Court to the credit of the suit.
9.  The receiver shall once in every six months file his accounts and vouchers in Court. The first of such accounts shall be filed on 30th September, 2003 commencing from 1st March, 2003 and subsequent accounts at intervals of six months thereafter to the High Court with copies thereof to each of the parties. The accounts shall be passed by the appropriate officer in the High Court.
10.  The receiver shall have power to bring and defend suits in his own name and shall also have power to use the name of the Plaintiffs and the Defendants for such purpose.
11.  The Receiver will be at liberty to appoint Mr. Hari Singh N. Chhabria and Anita P.C. as his agents for the purpose of conducting the pending suits or for such other purpose as he may think fit upon notice to and with the concurrence of the parties.
12. The agents, shall, however, operates strictly under supervision of the Receiver. Any non-compliance with the directions of the Receiver by either of the agents must be brought to the attention of the trial court and the said parties shall hereafter be debarred from being appointed as agents in future.
13.  The Receiver will be entitled to such remuneration as may be decided by the Court to first instance.
14.  Till such time as the Receiver takes possession in terms of this order, the interim order already passed by this Court on 21st February, 2003 will continue.
The Appeal is disposed of in accordance on the aforesaid terms.
Appeal disposed of.
