State of Himachal Pradesh Through v Khem Singh and Another
Supreme Court of India

6 November 2003
Cr.A. No.1972 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Appellants in this Appeal were put up for trial before the Sessions Judge, Chamba in Sessions Case no. 18 of 1989 charged of the offence under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860. and some other offences. By judgment and order dated 25 th March, 1991 the Sessions Judge, Chamba, while convicting two of the respondents herein acquitted Keshru. No appeal was preferred by the State against the acquittal of the aforesaid Keshru while the two convicted accused, respondents herein, preferred an appeal being Crl.A. No. 121 of 1991. The appeal preferred by the respondents herein was allowed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla by judgment and order dated June 5, 1992.
The State is in appeal before us by Special leave.
2.  It is not in dispute that three persons namely Nirmal, his wife- Hardei and his brother Garbha were put to death on the night intervening the 31st July and 1st August, 1989. The case of the prosecution is that these three persons were living in village Kalyog in the district of Chamba. Their house was located in a remote area and other houses were at some distance from their house. They were last seen by Janki in the evening of 31st July, 1989 while they were repairing the roof of their house. Following day i.e. on August 1, 1989 it was found that their cattle was grazing in the maize fields of the villagers. This prompted the villagers to report the matter to the deceased and with that in view Narotam (PW-4) and some other villagers came to the house of the deceased at about 7 P.M. When there was no response to their knocking the door, they peeped from the window and found three dead bodies lying in the house.
3. Since the police station was at a considerable distance, and having regard to the terrain of the area it took about 7-8 hours to reach the police station, the matter was reported to the police next day at 9 P.M. i.e. On August 2, 1989. The case of the prosecution is that police reached the place of occurrence at about 11 P.M. and started the investigation. Witnesses were examined under Section 161 Cr.P.C. on 3rd August, 1989 and the accused were ultimately arrested on 4th August, 1989. The case of the prosecution is that the accused suffered disclosure statements leading to the recovery of the weapons of assault as also recovery of jewellary and clothes which were carried away by the accused after killing the three inmates of the house. The case of the prosecution is that on the night of the 3rd August, 1989 all the three accused went to the house of PW-4 and confessed their involvement in the murder of the three deceased. The prosecution alleged that the appellants had a motive to commit the offence since Khem Singh was adopted as a son by Nirmal (deceased) and he had been thrown out from the house of Nirmal just a month before the occurrence. He had threatened his adoptive father, namely Nirmal, with dire consequences.
4.  With the assistance of the counsel for the parties, we have gone through the evidence on record and the judgments of the courts below. We find that the High Court has considered the evidence on record carefully and recorded a finding of acquittal. The case rests purely on circumstantial evidence. So far as the extra-judicial confession made to Narotam (PW-4) is concerned, the confession is said to have been made at about 1 O' clock in the night and he came to the place of occurrence where investigation was in progress the following morning at about 7.30 A.M. But he did not inform the police of the fact that the accused had confessed before him.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the State fairly stated before us that such a statement of this witness is not recorded in the case diary. The High Court also found the defence case to be very probable that Narotam (PW-4), who reached the place of occurrence at about 11.45 P.M. may not have returned to his village that night, which was about 4-5 Kms. away from the place of occurrence. The evidence discloses that though Narotam (PW-4) admitted that he was sleeping in a room alongwith his wife, when the accused came and confessed before him, neither his wife got up nor did he tell her about the confession made to him. Narotam (PW-4) also admitted that he did not inform anyone in his village or at the place of occurrence, where 50 to 60 people had gathered, about the confession made to him. The evidence of Tej Singh (PW-2) on the other hand is to the effect that on the night of 3rd August, 1989, PW-4 did not go back to his village, but stayed and slept in the village of occurrence. In this state of the evidence on record, we can find no error in the finding recorded by the High Court rejecting the so-called extra-judicial confession made before Narotam (PW-4).
6.  So far as the recovery of jewellery and other items, subject matter of robbery, are concerned, the High Court has disbelieved the prosecution case. We find from the statement of Panch witness- Mehar Singh(PW-3) that when they were being led by the accused to recover those items, police officers were already present at the place from where the recoveries were to be made. There is also the evidence of Tej Singh (PW-2)- another panch witness, to the same effect and further to the effect that the accused Khem Singh was asked to lift a stone by a police officer present there, and on lifting the stone the stolen articles were found.
7. The High Court was, therefore, justified in holding that the recovery did not appear to be a genuine recovery, because quite apart from the fact that it was recovered from a place which was an open space and accessible to all, the police officers seemed to have prior knowledge of the fact that the items, subject matter of the robbery, had been concealed at a particular place. We are, therefore, satisfied that the alleged recoveries made were not pursuant to the disclosure statements suffered by the respondents under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. We, therefore, agree with the finding of the High Court on this aspect also.
8.  All that remains to be considered is the existence of motive. The existence of a motive, though relevant in a case, based on circumstantial evidence, is not conclusive. It must be considered alongwith other proved incriminating circumstances which make the chain of circumstances so complete as to be consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt of the accused, and not any other hypothesis. No other incriminating circumstance has been proved.
We are, therefore, satisfied that the High Court was justified in acquitting the respondents.
This appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
