Krishi Upaj Mandi Samiti v Raghuveer Singh
Supreme Court of India

10 September 2003
C.A. No. 1852 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is directed against the order passed by the High Court dismissing the writ petition filed by the appellant. In an industrial dispute raised, an Award was passed on 17.6.1994 directing the appellant to reinstate the respondent herein into service and to pay all arrears of salary and an amount of Rs. 240/- as cost of proceedings. This Award was passed by the Labour Court when the appellant did not continue to appear in the proceedings. The appellant made an application on 22.9.94 to set aside this ex-parte Award before the Labour Court. The Labour Court, by the order-dated 4.11.99, rejected the application recording reasons and stating that no case was made out for setting aside the ex-parte Award. In that, it is pointed out that on 2.6.94 there was a representation on behalf of the appellant and the order sheet is also signed by the parties on that day; that being the position, the appellant ought to have been aware of the next date of hearing. The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the ex-parte Award dated 17.6.1994 as well as the order dated 4.11.99. The High Court dismissed that writ petition holding that under Rule 25A of the M.P. Industrial Disputes Rules, 1957 after the Award was passed, it was pronounced in open court, that itself amounted to publication of the Award and it became enforceable under Section 17-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
2. When the application for setting aside the ex-parte Award was not maintainable, the challenge to the ex-parte Award could be made by filing writ petition within a reasonable time. That having not been done, the High Court found that the challenge to the ex-parte Award was belated. Even otherwise, the High Court did not find it appropriate to interfere with the Award passed by the Labour Court as well as the order rejecting the application to set aside the ex-parte order made. We do not find any good ground to interfere with the impugned order having considered the submissions made by the learned Senior counsel for the appellant.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Labour Court was not at all justified in awarding full backwages to the respondent when the matter was pending for a long time. He cited following decisions in support of this submission:
(i) U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs. Muniruddin 1990 Indlaw SC 373
(ii) Ras Behari vs. Haryana Agricultural University through Vice Chancellor, Hissar and others 1986 Indlaw SC 742
(iii) Haryana Urban Development Authority vs. Devi Dayal  2002 Indlaw SC 151 and
(iv) Hindustan Motors Ltd. vs. Tapan Kumar Bhattacharya and Anr. 2002 Indlaw SC 1979)
4.  The decisions are on facts of those cases, but, here is the case where no rebuttal evidence whatsoever was placed to support the contention or the case of the appellant. In the absence of rebuttal evidence, the evidence that was placed on record by the respondent was accepted by the Labour Court and rightly so in our opinion. It was contended that during the long period of seven years between 1987 to 1994 the respondent must have been employed elsewhere and full payment was not justified. We are not in a position to accept this submission, also when the appellant who has clearly stated in his deposition that he was unemployed during that period and had no other means. This being the position, we do not find any merit in the appeal, Consequently, it is dismissed. No costs.
Appeal dismissed.
