Messrs Tafcon Projects (I) Private Limited v Union of India and Others
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
C.A.No.4064/2001
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.  In April, 1999, tenders were called for "from parties with proven credentials in the field of organising Tourism related Expositions" by the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India to organise the India International Travel Expo and Mart (IITEM) for the years 2000, 2001 and 2002. There were 12 tenderers who had applied. Out of the 12 tenderers, four were short-listed. The Selection Committee found that all the four tenderers appeared to be equal including experience and other factors. The Committee was of the view that the main criteria for assigning the tender to the most suitable party should be the guarantee of "upfront payment" to the Ministry of Tourism. It also appears that M/s. Tafcon, the appellant before us, guaranteed the highest upfront payment of Rs.45 lakhs for the three years period as against Rs.39 lakhs of another concern. As far as the writ petitioner (Who is respondent No.3 before us) was concerned, it had offered Rs.7.50 by way of upfront payment. The Selection Committee therefore recommended the appellant to be called as the "highest bidder" for deciding the mode of "upfront payment" and "firming up the number of buyers for 2000-2002".
2.  The recommendations of the Committee were considered by the Union of India. On 15th December, 1999, the appellant's offer was accepted by the Union of India and an agreement was entered into. In the meanwhile, in November, 1999 respondent No.3 filed a writ petition before the High Court for a writ of mandamus against the Union of India to consider respondent No.3 for endorsement/approval for 'Travel and Tourism Fair 2000' being organised on the basis of the tender notice and for issuance of further writ for setting aside the bid dated 22nd April, 1999 settled in favour of M/s. Tafcon and to quash the appointment of M/s. Tafcon as 'Event Manager.'
3.  The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by his order dated 17.1.2000. Pursuant to the agreement entered into between Union of India and the appellant, the appellant held the IITEM between 22nd January and 24th January, 2000.
4.  In the meanwhile, respondent No.3 impugned the decision of the learned Single Judge dismissing its writ petition by way of an appeal. The appeal was allowed by the Division Bench which set aside the appointment of the appellant as 'Event Manager' and directed the issue of fresh tenders for holding the IITEM for the years 2001-2002.
5.  Two separate special leave petitions were filed from the decision of the Division Bench - one by the appellant M/s. Tafcon Porjects (I) Pvt.Ltd. (CA No. 2507/2001) and the second by the Union of India (CA No.4064/2001). On 3.3.2001 leave was granted in CA No.2507/2001. Notice was directed to be issued on the prayer for interim relief and the operation of the High Court's order was stayed in the meanwhile. This ad interim stay was confirmed on 3.9.2001. Similar orders were passed in CA No.4064/2001.
6.  Contempt proceedings had been initiated by respondent No.3 before the High Court against the appellants in both the appeals, inter alia, on the ground that they had continued to advertised IITEM as being held by M/s. Tafcon despite the High Court's order setting aside the appointment of M/s. Tafcon as 'Event Manager'. We are told by learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.3 that the contempt proceedings have since been dismissed on the ground that the matter was pending before this Court.
7.  Respondent No.3 also moved an application before this Court being IA No.2 of 2003 seeking an order to the effect that the appeals preferred from the decision of the Division Bench have become infructuous as the three years mentioned in the tender notice had already expired. Directions were given for filing of affidavits. Today the IA was taken up for hearing. It is not in dispute that the IITEM for this year is due to be held tomorrow. We were, therefore, of the view that no useful purpose would be served in keeping the appeals pending since the only issue is whether M/s Tafcon should be permitted to hold the IITEM this year or not.
8.  We find from the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court that there were primarily three grounds on which the High Court had allowed the respondent No.3's appeal and set aside the appointment of M/s. Tafcon as 'Event Manager' i.e.:
"1.That the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism had not taken any final decision with regard to the appointment of M/s Tafcon as 'Event Manager';
2. no final decision had been taken by the Minister in this connection;
3. that Rule 3 of the Transaction of Business Rules, 1961 which are framed under Art.77 of the Constitution of India specifically provided for all businesses to be transacted only according to the general or special directions of the Minister in Charge and that there was no order placed on record to show that the Minister had issued any direction to the Secretary permitting him to take a decision with regard to the appointment of an 'Event Manager'."
9.  We will assume for the purpose of this judgment that Rule 3 of the Transaction of Business Rules, 1961, has been correctly interpreted by the High Court. But we are of the view that the High Court has factually erred in holding that no final decision had been taken in the matter by the Secretary and by the Minister. The records which have been referred to in great detail by the High Court show that the matter was placed before the Secretary atleast thrice. In the first case the committee's recommendation together with the opinion of the Director Tourism and his request for approving the recommendation of the Committee was placed before the Secretary who put his signature on the file without any comment. On the second occasion the Director General, (Tourism) placed the file before the Secretary with the concurrence of the Internal Finance and "following due codal formalities" with the proposal that the 'Event Manager' should be allotted the work as valuable time was being lost and less than six months were left for the event. On this occasion the Secretary said:
"'Yes' May go ahead at A without any financial commitment at this stage."
10. The third occasion was when the Additional Director General Tourism came up with the matter before the Secretary stating that only five months were left for the event and that immediate action was required to formally appoint the Event Manager for IITEM, 2000. On this occasion, the Secretary said that the details had already been placed before the Minister. In addition, the Secretary said:
"Any further delay may put the preparations in great difficulty. As such, the party may be allowed to go ahead as proposed, in making the preliminary arrangements in anticipation of formal approval by Minister (CA and T)."
11.  On the same date, the Secretary also noted that the party who had been recommended, namely, M/s. Tafcon, had been allowed to go ahead with the arrangements and that the Minister (CA and T) may kindly approve the action taken.
12. In these circumstances, the first finding of the High Court was factually incorrect. It appears also from the records, as noted by the High Court, that the file had been pending with the Minister for some time and despite expressions of urgency, the Minister did not sign the file since he was busy with "elections and other important matters". What the High Court has overlooked is that the relevant file was again placed before the Minister on 30th August, 1999 by the JS and FA with a note which stated that Tafcon had been appointed as 'Event Manager' for three years. This was signed by the Minister with the endorsement "file returned".
13.  The High Court deduced from this signature of the Minister that no approval was in fact granted by him to the appointment of M/s. Tafcon either expressly or impliedly. We are unable to agree. Where the Minister has signed the various notes put up before him seeking his approval, his signature, without more, must mean that he has approved the steps taken by the Department.
14.  Both the factual grounds on which the High Court had rested its decision being found erroneous by this Court, the impugned decision must be set aside. Learned counsel for the respondent has also sought to argue that he had misunderstood the clause of the tender insofar which paid "The selected agency shall place a net profit of over 10% at the disposal of the Ministry of Tourism, to be utilised for development of tourism." According to the respondent No.3 the clause required that all profit over 10% was to be placed at the disposal of the Ministry of Tourism. It is submitted that based on this misconstruction his client had offered Rs.2.50 lakhs per year for the three year period.
15.  We need express no view on this matter because in any event the respondent No.3's offer of an upfront payment of 2.50 lakhs per year, which was much lower than that offered by the appellant M/s. Tafcon. Therefore whichever meaning is accepted, ultimately M/s. Tafcon's offer was much better than that of the respondent No.3 and its selection cannot be faulted. Besides the respondent No.3 had bid pursuant to the tender notice and participated in the proceedings before the Selection Committee. It cannot now take advantage of any alleged vagueness in the tender notice.
16.  One further aspect needs clarification, that is, the period of tender notice. It appears from the official records which were noted by the High Court that the event was a three year one. The mentioning of the actual years did not limit the period. That is also how the offers of the tenderers were assessed and scrutinised. In any event the respondent No.3 having effectively stopped the operation of the three years period by reason of the writ proceedings before the Division Bench of the High Court, the appellant must not be denied the benefit which it would otherwise have got had the writ petition not been filed. The appeals are, accordingly, allowed. The decision of the High Court is set aside. I.A.No.2 of 2003 is dismissed.
Appeals allowed.
