Wild Life Protection Department and another v Roshan Lal
Supreme Court of India

15 January 2003
C.A. No. 7516 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal by special leave has been filed by the Wild Life Protection Department of the State of Punjab challenging the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
2.  The respondent herein was employed as a seasonal casual daily worker under the aforesaid department from 7.3.1993 onwards. According to the appellant the respondent was found grazing cattle in the Sanctuary area and it being an objectionable conduct, the Chief Warden made a complaint against the respondent on 15.10.1996 and according to the appellant in view of this complaint the respondent voluntarily left the job on 19.11.1996.
3.  The respondent alleged that he had been illegally terminated without following the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act and he made a demand seeking his re-instatement in February, 1997. As the re-instatement was not granted, he took the matter to the labour court and the labour court, in turn, by the award dated 18th March, 1999 held that the respondent failed to prove that he had worked for a period of 240 days continuously during the last 12 months preceding the date of termination. In that view of the matter the labour court answered the question against the respondent. Aggrieved by the same the workman filed a writ petition and the High Court held that the respondent-workman had given categoric evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously during the last 12 months preceding the date of termination and this statement was not rebutted by cross examining the workman. We have also perused the statement given by the workman and it appears that there was not even a suggestion on the part of the appellant that the respondent had not worked for 240 days during preceding 12 months period. The Wild Life Guard was examined as a witness and he was also not in a position to say whether the workman had worked for 240 days during the last 12 months preceding the date of termination and he candidly admitted that he was not in a position to prove that the workman had not worked continuously for 240 days during the last 12 months preceding the date of termination. In view of the aforesaid circumstances we do not find any merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant. The High Court has rightly concluded that the respondent was entitled to be reinstated.
4.  Now the question that arises for our consideration is about the payment of back wages. Admittedly the High Court was pleased to grant full back wages during the entire period the respondent was out of service. It is an admitted fact that the respondent was only a seasonal casual daily worker and moreover, it is not quite possible that he might have remained without any work during entire period he was out of service, though he is a skilled worker. It is true that he has given a statement that he remained unemployed during the period when he was out of service and it was very difficult for him to maintain his day to day life. It is stated that the respondent has already been reinstated. Having regard to these facts, we feel just and proper to direct that the respondent be paid 50% of the back wages payable to him during the period he remained out of service. The appellant shall pay the amount as directed above, within a period of three months from today.
5. The appeal is disposed of accordingly with no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
