Messrs Oscar Builders Private Limited and Another v State of Maharashtra and Others
Supreme Court of India

14 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.7240/2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant is aggrieved by the order passed by the Division Bench in Appeal No.266/02 in Writ Petition 524/02. The appellant is a promoter of a flat constructed in Bombay. The appellant is required under Section 10 of Maharashtra Ownership Flat Act, 1963 (M.O.F.A) to register a society of flat purchasers within four months of allotment. As the appellant did not allegedly comply with the provisions under Section 10, the purchasers of the flat formed a society and got it registered under the Co-operative Societies Act which the appellant contended is without his knowledge and by suppressing material facts and he was not heard in the matter by the registering authority. The appellant filed an appeal against the registration but his appeal was dismissed. He filed a revision also against that order, which ended in dismissal.
2. Thereafter the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court, the learned Single Judge rejected the writ petition on the ground that the appellant has got remedy under Section 21(A) of the Maharashtra Coop. Societies Act, 1960, where he can seek de-registration on certain grounds. The appellant filed appeal before the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court against the order passed by the Single Judge and same was dismissed. Aggrieved by the same the present SLP is filed before us.
3.  The counsel for the appellant submits that he had already preferred a revision and as the same was dismissed the petition that may be filed under Section 21(A) of the Maharashtra Coop. Societies Act, 1960 would not be considered by the Registrar.
4.  Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we direct that in the event the appellant filing a petition under Section 21(A) of the Maharashtra Coop. Societies Act, 1960, seeking de-registration of the registration granted to the Registered society by respondent Nos.5 and 6, the same shall be considered on merits and shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible without prejudice to the observations made by the appellate authority and the revisional authority in their respective orders.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
