State of Punjab v Darbara Singh
Supreme Court of India

28 January 2003
Cr.A. No. 107 of 1996 (Along with Cr.A. No. 108 of 1996)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent in this appeal and two others by name Gurcharanjit Singh and Prem Singh were tried by the Sessions Judge, Ropar for the offences punishable under Section 302 read with 34 IPC and under Section 7 of the Arms Act. During the pendency of the trial Gurcharanjit Singh died hence the proceedings stood abated against him and the trial proceeded against the respondent herein and Prem Singh only. Learned Sessions Judge found the respondent herein guilty for the offices under Section 302 read with 34 IPC and under Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959, the principal sentence awarded by him was life imprisonment, while the co-accused Prem Singh was acquitted.
2. Being aggrieved by the said judgment and conviction the respondent herein preferred an appeal before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana which allowed his appeal and set aside the conviction. The State of Punjab is in appeal before us against the said judgment of the High Court.
3.  The original complainant Chajja Singh has filed the connected appeal against the said judgment of the High Court.
4.  The High Court after re-appreciating the evidence in question came to the conclusion that the eye-witnesses examined by the prosecution are related witnesses and they had sufficient motive to implicate the accused persons. It also found discrepancies in their evidence and it noticed the fact that though admittedly there were independent witnesses present at the time of the incident in question none of them was examined. The High Court also noticed the fact from the prosecution evidence that the investigating officer as a matter of fact had arrived within five minutes of the incident in question and complaint was got recorded only after 9.30 a.m. while the incident in question had occurred at 8.15 a.m. and the FIR was registered only after 11 a.m. Taking into consideration the above discrepancies it came to the conclusion that it is not safe to rely upon the evidence of interested eye-witnesses hence reversed the finding of the learned Sessions Judge.
5.  We have gone through the material on record and heard learned counsel for the parties. We find no reason to interfere with the judgment of the High Court. For the above-said reasons, the appeals fail and the same are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.
