State of Andhra Pradesh v Anika Davam
Supreme Court of India

30 October 2003
Cr.A. No.1816 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is an appeal preferred by the State of Andhra Pradesh challenging the acquittal of respondent, the sole accused. The respondent, Anikadavam alias Shaik Shamahuddin alias Gidda was convicted by the Additional Sessions Judge, Ongole for the offence punishable under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life, for causing the death of Anantha Koteswara Rao alias Engineer. He preferred an appeal and the High Court acquitted him of the charges framed against him.
2.  The prosecution case is that the deceased Anantha Koteswara Rao alias Engineer was confined to District Jail, Nellore. On 21st September 1990, PWs 1 and 2, armed constables took Anantha Koteswara Rao from District Jail, Nellore for being produced in a Court at Ongole. There were two other prisoners also, who were to be produced along with him in Court. The escort party along with the prisoners reached Ongole at about 11 p.m. in the night. They stayed in District Armed Police Head Quarters. In the early morning, they went to nearby hotel to take breakfast.
3. The deceased Anantha Koteswara Rao and the two other prisoners went to answer the call of nature and while returning, the accused Gidda with his two brothers talked with deceased. One of them sprinkled on him some liquid and Gidda was alleged to have stabbed on the left chest of the deceased. The injured was taken to the Government hospital. At about 7.30 a.m. Sub Inspector of Police recorded the statement of the deceased and thereafter, on the next day his dying declaration also was recorded by the IInd Addl. Munsif-Magistrate, Ongole. On the same day, later in the evening, third dying declaration of the deceased, Anantha Koteswara Rao was recorded by another Magistrate. .
4.  On the side of the prosecution PW 1 to 17 were examined. Based on the evidence produced, the Sessions Judge found the accused guilty. The High Court, while reappreciating the evidence, found that the prosecution had not succeeded in identifying the accused. The counsel for the State submitted that in all the three dying declarations the deceased consistently stated that Gidda, who was the owner of Simla Hotel, had stabbed him. The High Court observed that though the name of Gidda is mentioned but it had not been proved that the respondent herein was one and the same person. PW 1, the police constable, who accompanied the deceased was an eye witness to the occurrence. He deposed that when the deceased was returning after answering the call of the nature, he was stabbed by Gidda. It is true that he saw Gidda running after the deceased with a knife but his evidence was not relied upon by the Sessions Court for various reasons.
5. The Sessions Court also had serious doubt about the reliability of the PW 1. It is also important to note that for the prosecution case, the incident happened inside the Simla Hotel but according to the deceased and PW 1 the incident happened outside the hotel i.e when the deceased went for answering the call of the nature. The other police constable who was escorting the deceased, could not corroborate. The evidence adduced by the prosecution was not at all satisfactory and naturally created suspicion in the mind of the Court.
6.  In view of the various infirmities in the Sessions Court judgment, the High Court rightly held that the prosecution failed to prove the identity of the assailant.
7. In our view, this is not a fit case to interfere with the acquittal passed by High Court. We do not find any merit in the appeal. Hence the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
