Union of India v M.K. Zutshi and Others
Supreme Court of India

23 April 2003
C.A. No. 3436 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The controversy raised in this appeal is as to whether a direction could be given to divert some posts from the direct recruitment quota of 50% so as to accommodate respondents herein as Junior Telecom Operators ('JTOs', for short).
2.  The respondents were working as Transmission Assistants and Wireless Operators ('TA' and 'WO', for short). They had to undergo some examination for getting promotion to the post of JTOs. On account of leakage of question papers, examinations, which were scheduled to be held in 1992, could not be effectively and validly held till 1992, could not be effectively and validly held till 1994. Under the given set of circumstances of the case, the Tribunal, on examination the grievances made by the respondents, gave direction to the appellant to divert some posts from the direct recruitment quota of 50% so as to accommodate 7 respondents herein. Aggrieved by the direction given by the Tribunal, the appellant filed Writ Petition before the High Court. The High Court by the impugned judgment dismissed the Writ Petition upholding the direction given by the Tribunal.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the Tribunal committed an error in giving direction to divert certain posts from direct recruitment quota so as to accommodate the respondents herein; if such a course is adopted it may be difficult to maintain respective quotas as possibly, others may also start claiming for similar directions. According to the learned counsel, the High Court, without examining this question, disposed of the Writ Petition. The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that no interim order was granted by this Court in this appeal. Under the circumstances, in the absence of any interim order passed by this Court, the respondents were promoted as JTOs and possibly, some of them may have retired.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case and particularly, taking note of the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondents, that pursuant to the direction given by the Tribunal, as affirmed by the High Court, they were promoted to the post of JTOs, we do not think it just and appropriate to interfere with the impugned judgment and order.
At any rate, we leave the said question of law open with regard to the position as to whether certain posts could be diverted from one category to the other.
4.  In this view, the appeal is disposed of, but with no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
