State of Maharashtra v Marwadi Vidyalaya Trust Co-operative Society and Others
Supreme Court of India

15 January 2003
C.A. Nos. 333-334 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and none represented the respondents.
2.  The appellant - State of Maharashtra is aggrieved by the direction given in the impugned order in relation of payment of 50% of back wages from 01.09.1992 to 23.12.1997 and out of which 25% was to be paid by the State of Maharashtra. The respondent No.1 runs a high school by name, Marvadi Vidyalaya High School. It is an aided and recognised secondary school. Due to the unavailability of students, managing committee of the school passed a resolution on 30.07.1991 to dis-continue technical wing of the school. The teachers of the technical wing of the school made complaint to the Deputy Director of Technical Education that the management is purposely not admitting the students to the technical wing. The Deputy Director directed the management to give an advertisement for the admissions to VIIIth standard in the school.
3. However, when there was no work-load for the teachers in the technical wing, the services of the teachers were terminated by the management with effect from 01.09.1992. The aggrieved teachers, whose services were terminated, filed appeals before the School Tribunal demanding re-instatement and back wages. The Tribunal allowed their appeals and directed the management to re-instate the seven teachers and also to pay the back wages out of their own funds.
4.  The management, aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, filed Writ Petition No. 538 of 1998 before the High Court. The learned Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition confirming the order passed by the Tribunal. Thereafter, the management pursued the matter by filing Appeal No.470 of 1998 before the High Court. The Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal. While maintaining the order of re-instatement passed by the Tribunal, the Division Bench of the High Court directed for payment of 50% of back wages with continuity of service. Out of this 50% of back wages, the management was directed to pay 25% and the remaining 25% of back wages were directed to be paid by the State of Maharashtra Neither the management nor the teachers have challenged the impugned order. It is only the State of Maharashtra that has brought these appeals before us to this limited extent of direction given to it to pay 25% of the back wages.
5.  Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the management of the school did not follow proper procedure and did not take proper steps before terminating the services of the seven teachers under Rule 25-A of Maharashtra Employees of Private Schools (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1981.
6.  According to him, even they did not take proper action under Rule 26 of the said rules. Learned counsel also informed us that out of the seven teachers, two of them have died and two of them have already reached the age of superannuation and the remaining teachers were absorbed in other schools in 1997 and onwards. The controversy is only now with regard to payment of 25% of back wages by the State for the period between 01.09.1992 to 23.12.1997. It is not disputed that the school in question is an aided school. The State of Maharshtra gives 100% grant to the said school, it being a recognised school, besides being aided. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the High Court has denied 50% of the back wages to the seven teachers.
7. However, the 50% of the back were directed to be paid half equally by the management and the State Government. Rule 25-A and Rule-26 deal with regard to termination and retrenchment of the services of the employees. We are now concerned with regard to the payment of back wages by way of grant. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the High Court had passed the order directing the management and the State of Maharashtra to pay 50% of the back wages to be shared equally between them. In this view we do not think it appropriate to interfere in the impugned order.
Consequently, the appeals shall stand dismissed. No costs.
Appeals dismissed.
