State of Punjab & Ors. v Ramu
Supreme Court of India

15 January 2003
C.A. No. 8146 of 2001
The Order of the Court is as follows:
1.  This appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab by special leave. The respondent was employed as a Beldar' in the River Works Drainage Division of the Government of Punjab on 1st February, 1988. It is alleged by the respondent that his services were terminated illegality on 1st November, 1989. The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the respondent was appointed only for seasonal drainage work during the rainy season and he has worked only upto 1st November, 1989 and thereafter he was removed from the service as there was no further work in the said Division. The matter was brought before the labour court and the labour court held that the respondent had worked for more than 240 days during the last 12 months immediately preceding the date of termination and therefore his termination from service without following the procedure laid down under Section 25 F of the Industrial Disputes Act was bad.
2. The appellant was directed to reinstate the respondent with continuity of service and with full back wages due to him for the period the remained out of service.Aggrieved by this award the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. The High Court declined to interfere with the award passed by the labour court. Hence, this appeal.
3.  The counsel for the appellant contended that the Drainage Department of the State of Punjab is not an industry under the definition of the Industrial Disputes Act as it has been engaged in discharging the sovereign functions of the State of Punjab by providing the service of public utility. More so the drainage Department is a service department and executes the flood control works and the functions of the Department are not commercial is nature. Though such a plea was raised by the appellant in the pleadings before the labour court, but, it seems that the argument was not advanced. No such argument was raised by the appellant before the High Court also.
Therefore, we do not think it appropriate to consider this question at this stage. More so the appellant has not furnished any details of the nature of work being carried out by the Department. When the witness was examined on behalf of the Department he also did not state anything regarding the nature of the work and functions carried out by the Department to establish that it was not an industry.
4.  The next question arises for our consideration is about that payment of back wages to the respondent for the period he remained out of service. We are told that the respondent has already been reinstated in service. It is also noticed that the respondent had worked only for a short period in the Department. More so he was a Beldar' and he must have been doing some work when he was not in service of the Department. He himself has stated in this statement that he was helping his father in cultivation. .
Further, if he had remained in service, he would not have been earning throughout the year in view of the nature of work he was doing. Having regard to these fact we do not consider that the respondent is entitled for full back wages as ordered by the labour court.
5. Accordingly, we direct that the respondent be paid 50% of the back wages payable to him during the period he remained out of service. The payment, by the appellant, shall be made within a period of three months from today.
The appeal is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
