Dr. Sabiha Sultana v S. Mohd. Anwaruddin
Supreme Court of India

18 November 2003
C.A. No. 15456 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Regrettably this civil appeal of 1996 arising out of a litigation as old as 24 years by this time must suffer an inevitable remand as there is no other escape.
2.  The plaintiff-appellant before us, filed a suit for specific performance of an oral agreement to sell. The existence of the agreement was disputed but the trial court found the agreement proved and decreed the suit. Admittedly, the plaintiff is in possession of the property. The defendant preferred an appeal. The Appellate Court concentrated only on one plea raised by the defendant-appellant before it that the agreement was hit by the provisions of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988. Upholding this plea, the learned Single Judge of the High Court allowed the First Appeal and directed the suit to be dismissed. The plaintiff preferred a Letters Patent Appeal. In L.P.A., the Division Bench of the High Court found that the Benami Transactions Act, 1988 was inapplicable to the agreement between the parties as it is of a date prior to the commencement of the Act. Having arrived at this finding, ordinarily, the Division Bench should have set aside the judgment of the First Appellate Court and remanded the case for hearing on other issues and decision afresh.
3. However, the Division Bench entertained yet another plea raised on behalf of the defendant (appellant before the Division Bench) that the agreement was opposed to public policy and hence void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872. This plea has prevailed with the Division Bench resulting in the dismissal of the appeal. Feeling aggrieved by that, this appeal has been preferred by special leave.
4.  This is a peculiar case on the facts as pleaded by the parties. The plea that the oral agreement entered into between the parties attracts the applicability of Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 vitiating the agreement is not found to have been taken in the written statement. The learned counsel for the plaintiff-appellant submits that on the facts as alleged, Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act would not be attracted at all as the agreement was not in total prohibition of the law.
5. On the other hand, he submitted further, if the case as made out by the defendant in his own pleadings is to be accepted, regarding the manner in which the flat came to be allotted to him from the Housing Board then there will be no question of the agreement being vitiated by reference to Section 23 above-said. We are of the opinion that it is the First Appellate Court which is the final Court of facts and it should have recorded its findings on all the relevant issues and then decided as to what decree the parties were entitled. The applicability of the Section 23 of the Contract Act would also depend on the facts found. As we do not find it an appropriate case to enter into dealing with the questions of facts as alleged in the pleadings of the parties and as emerging in the evidence adduced, the proper course is to remand the case to the First Appellate Court for hearing and decision afresh.
6.  The appeal is allowed. The judgment and decree passed by the Division Bench of the High Court as also of the First Appellate Court are set aside. The First Appeal shall stand restored on the file of the High Court and shall be heard and decided afresh and expeditiously in view of the time already lost. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
