State of Rajasthan v Daulat Ram and Others
Supreme Court of India

16 October 2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  State of Rajasthan has come up in appeal before this Court against the judgment of the Jaipur Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan. By the impugned judgment the High Court allowed the appeal filed by the respondents herein against the judgment of the learned Sessions Judge, Jhalawar (Rajasthan) by which judgment the learned Sessions Judge had convicted the respondents herein for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC.
2.  The prosecution case briefly stated is that the respondents herein committed the murder of one Fouja Singh on 11.9.1992 at about 5.00 p.m. in front of the shop of Bheron Singh PW-9 in Bhawani Mandi within the jurisdiction of Bhawani Mandi Police Station. The motive suggested is that the deceased had insulted A-1 Deep Chand during the course of an argument.
3.   According to the prosecution the incident in question was witnessed by Pws 3, 4 and 6 to 9. Due to the assault committed by the respondents the deceased had suffered 28 injuries consequent to which he had died. The complaint in regard to this incident was lodged by PW-3 Pritam Singh at about 5.45 p.m. It is based on the evidence of the above said eye-witnesses and the recoveries made from the accused persons, the trial court as stated above convicted the respondents for offence punishable under Section 302/34 IPC which conviction was set aside by the High Court by the impugned judgment.
4.  The High Court in the impugned judgment came to the conclusion that the presence of the so-called eye-witnesses cannot be believed because of the inconsistencies in their statement; that the said witnesses were all interested witnesses and also were chance witnesses; that the ocular evidence by these witnesses was contrary to the medical evidence; that the recoveries made from the respondents cannot be believed because the said weapons were not deposited in the Malkhana; that FSL report which indicates presence of the blood on the weapons so recovered was not exhibited in the court nor was it put to the accused persons when their statements under Section 313 Cr.P.C. were recorded.
5.  Learned counsel for the State contended before us that the discrepancies pointed out in the evidence of the eye-witnesses by the High Court and the doubt expressed by the High Court as to their presence are based on minor inconsistencies. Therefore, the findings of the High Court as to the presence of these eye-witnesses is erroneous.
6.  We have perused the evidence and we have noticed the fact that so far as PW-3 the complainant is concerned, it is his case that on the date of incident he had gone to attend the SDM Court at Pachpahad and while returning from the said court at about 5.00 p.m. he saw the attack on the deceased by these respondents. But in the examination-in-chief before the court itself he has stated that on that date there was no sitting of the court because of holiday hence he returned at about 12.30 p.m. and while so coming back he noticed the incident. But in the cross-examination he states that having returned back to his house from the court he proceeded towards the shop of PW-9 at 4.30 p.m. when he saw the incident. Thus we notice that as per the evidence of this witness he has given three different timings as to the incident. They are (1) 5.00 p.m. in the complaint and (2) 12.30 p.m. in the evidence in Chief Examination and (3) 4.30 p.m. in the cross-examination.  Therefore, we think that the High Court was justified in coming to the conclusion that presence of this witness at the time of the incident in question is doubtful more so and in the background of the fact that he is admittedly a chance witness and also an interested witness. So far as PW-4 is concerned, it is seen in his evidence he has stated that he was going to take tea towards railway station with PW-8 at about 5.00 p.m and the incident in question took place after about one hour thereafter which means that incident has taken place at 6.00 p.m. while PW -8 who had accompanied PW-4 to the Railway Station states he was returning from the railway station with PW-4 at 3.30 p.m. when the incident took place. PW-9 Bheron Singh, shop owner in front of whose shop the incident took place states that the argument between the deceased and the accused started at 11.45 a.m and the incident took place soon after.
Thus even it is seen that there is no consistency in regard to the time of incident amongst the eye-witnesses coupled with the fact that all witnesses except PW-9 are chance witnesses and interested witnesses, therefore, the High Court was justified in doubting their presence at the time of the incident. It is also to be noted that the incident in question has taken place in a market area and admittedly there were more than 100 persons available, but none of these independent witnesses have been examined by the prosecution.
7.  High Court was also justified in coming to the conclusion that the ocular evidence given by these witnesses is opposed to the medical evidence. These witnesses have stated that while Fauza Singh was sitting on the motor cycle, these assailants came from behind and Deep Chand gave sword blows on the back side of head, but the medical evidence does not show any corresponding injury on the back side of the head. High Court was also correct in doubting that the incident in question because according to the ocular evidence, attack took place near the motor cycle for the first time but no blood stains were found at the said place. These are material contradictions which the High Court was justified in taking into consideration while coming to the conclusion that the presence of these witnesses cannot be believed.
8.  High Court further noticed the fact that some of these eye-witnesses had lifted the deceased and put him in a bullock to take him to the hospital then deceased was bleeding profusely even then their clothes did not contain any blood stains. High Court was also justified in rejecting the recoveries of weapons because these recovered articles were not deposited in the Malkhana nor was the FSL Report exhibited in the court.
9.  In this background, we think the High Court was justified in coming to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to establish its case and thus reversed the order of conviction made by the trial court.
The appeal therefore fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
