M/s. P.P. Seniappa Chettiar & Sons, Madurai v Regional Provident Fund Commissioner and another
Supreme Court of India

28 February 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 1025 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
On 4.3.2002, following order was passed by this Court:
"Counsel for the petitioner wants time to place on record material to show that the Legal Advisor to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India was not an authority empowered to take a decision under Section 19 of the Act.
Adjourned. List after four weeks."
The order passed by this Court on 15.4.2002 reads:
"It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Legal Advisor to the Ministry of Labour is not an authority empowered to take the decision under Section 19 of the Act.
Issue notice returnable after four weeks. Dasti service, in addition, is permitted."
1.  The main contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Legal Advisor to the Ministry of Labour is not an authority empowered to take decisions under Section 19 of the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act. In paragraph 16 of the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondent it is stated:
"Section 19A of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 was there, wherein the Central Government through its Legal Advisor of Ministry of Law, determined the question of applicability of the Act for the firm, if applied for by such firm disputing the actions by the department of the Provident Fund Office. The said Section 19A of the Act has been repeated now and the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner himself can determine the issue of the applicability of the Act of any disputed firm. Under Section 19A of the Act, the dispute regarding applicability of the Act its provisions was determined after hearing both the sides of the giving notice. The party aggrieved was allowed to produce documents, if any, in support of the case. So far as the present case is concerned the petitioner itself has taken up the dispute regarding the applicability before the 19A Authority and having got the decision by the Authority concerned according to law, it is now not open for the petitioner to question the jurisdiction of the respondent No.3 in deciding the issue raised before him by the petitioner. The Central Government having delegated powers to determine the issue raised under Section 19A of the Act, so the orders of the Legal Advisor in the present matter was within his jurisdiction."
2.  At the time of hearing of this case, copies of the order dated 23rd February, 1968, and order dated 6th January, 1975, are placed before us. A reading of these orders shows that the Legal Advisor in the Ministry of Labour shall in place of the Officer on Special Duty (Legal) exercise the powers of the Central Government under Section 19A of the Employees' Provident Fund and Family Pension Funds Act, 1952. This being the position and looking to the facts of the case we do not find any merit in this petition. Hence, it is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.
