Duglas Rabindran and Others v A.B.C.(I) International
Supreme Court of India

13 November 2003
C.A. Nos.5598-5599 Of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals arise out of the Judgment and Order dated 24.1.2001 passed by the Madras High Court allowing the second appeals preferred by the respondent. It appears that one Mrs. Dare owned 18.50 acres of land which seems to have been transferred to several persons from time to time, out of which 3.75 acres was sold to one Rajammal on 25.8.1963. It further appears that she had properties described in three schedules. The land in dispute fell in Schedule B of property. She also owned the property in Schedule A. According to the appellants, who are the legal representatives of Mrs. Dare - the original owner, she had a passage out of land in Schedule B for access to her Schedule A property.
2.  In the year 1981, Rajammal executed a sale deed in favour of the respondent in these appeals. The dispute, it appears, arose between the parties thereafter. The respondent filed a suit in the year 1987 against the present appellants for title and injunction. Similarly the present appellants also filed a suit for title and injunction. The respondent in his suit claimed title to the land measuring 3.75 acres whereas the suit filed by the appellants was confined to 0.33 cents, which was used as a passage/approach to Schedule A property. The trial court as well as the First Appellate Court decreed the suit of the present appellants and the first appeals preferred by the respondent were dismissed. The first two courts found that the claim for an area of land measuring 3.75 acres was not made out or proved.
3. It was also found that the area of land purchased by the respondent from Rajammal was 2.90 acres. The case as taken up by the present appellants in respect of the passage over 0.33 cents was accepted and upheld in the First Appeal. It appears that before the First Appellate Court a question about adverse possession was also raised by the respondent which was repelled by the First Appellate Court.
4.  The respondent preferred two second appeals before the High Court. The High Court interfering with the concurrent findings of fact, recorded by the two courts below, allowed the appeals and the suit of the present appellants was dismissed and that of the respondent was decreed. At the outset it may be indicated that the High Court went into the questions of fact and failed to frame any question of law while entertaining or deciding the appeal. The provision as contained in sub-section 4 of Section 100 CPC is clear and it has also been held repeatedly that it is necessary to formulate a question of law if it may arise, on the basis of which alone the second appeal could be entertained, heard and decided. Apart from this lapse we also find that the High Court has cursorily jumped over the conclusions and one of such example is evident from a perusal of the Judgment where the High Court has observed that the appellant, i.e. the respondent in this Court, had pleaded and proved his title over the property both on the basis of the documents as well as by adverse possession.
5. Apart from the bald observation, we do not find any discussion or reference to any evidence to hold that the appellant in the High Court or in any court was able to prove his case of adverse possession.
6.  Learned counsel appearing for the respondent has vehemently urged that as a matter of fact the question of interpretation of documents is involved, which itself is a question of law. On this count also we find no merit in the argument. Learned counsel for the respondent on our request has passed on a copy of the sale deed executed in favour of the respondent by Rajammal. A perusal of the sale deed clearly indicates that the area of property transferred is 2.90 acres. Not that alone, on the second page of the sale deed again we find that two sub-division Nos. of the land are described along with their area one of which is indicated as 1.20 and that of the other is 1.70. The total has been shown as 2.90. The price of both the sub-division plot Nos. have been separately shown and then total is shown as Rs.24,000/-. Such a description indicated in the sale deed hardly leaves any scope for any ground at this stage that there may have been some interpolation in the sale deed. We refuse to accept this kind of argument at this stage.
7. It is then submitted that whatever land was transferred by the appellant to Rajammal the whole of it was transferred to the respondent, i.e. the appellant before the High Court. In that connection the learned counsel has drawn our attention to the description of the property in the two sale deeds. We find they do not tally at least on one side. That being the position, we hardly find any merit in the submission that any question of interpretation of document is involved. The High Court had interfered in concurrent findings of fact recorded by the two courts in a manner which is not permissible under the Act.
In view of the discussion held above, we allow the appeals, set aside the Judgment and order passed by the High Court and restore the decree as passed by the trial court in both suits and affirmed by the First Appellate Court. There would, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
