State of Punjab v Joginder Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
Cr.A. No.781 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Three respondents herein were charged for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 by the Additional Sessions Judge, Amritsar for having caused the death of Balkar Singh by attacking him on 4th September, 1989 in the land of respondents herein. The incident in question according to the prosecution was witnessed by PW.6- Lakha Singh, who was the brother-in-law of the brother of the deceased and PW.8-Shabeg Singh, who was the brother of the deceased.
It is the prosecution case that the deceased who was in a injured condition was first taken to Ajnala Hospital, it is about 7 kms. away from the place of incident by PW.6 where they were advised to go to Civil Hospital at Amritsar and hence he was taken to the said Civil Hospital at Amritsar.
2.  The complaint in question was filed in Amritsar Police Station at 1.05 p.m. on 5th September, 1989 by PW.6 wherein he named the three respondents herein as the assailants. According to the prosecution all the assailants had assaulted the deceased with kirpan, kulhari and datar once each. The trial court relying on the prosecution case convicted and sentenced the accused persons under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
3. The High Court in an appeal filed by the respondents herein has set aside the said conviction and sentence and acquitted the respondents herein. Hence, the State of Punjab is in appeal before us.
4.  We have heard learned counsel and perused the records. We find from the judgment of the High Court that the prosecution has utterly failed to give explanation for the delay of 12 hours in filing FIR. The High Court has noticed the fact that the police station in Ajnala is one furlong away from the Hospital to which victim was first taken. No complaint was lodged in Ajnala.
5. The High Court also noticed that in the house of the deceased there were large number of family members including his wife, children and brothers were present, in spite of the same nobody accompanied the deceased to the hospital apart from PW.6. Nobody even bothered to go to police station to give information about the incident.
6.  The court also noticed the delay in recording the statement of the witnesses by the police. The court also noticed the fact that there were contradictions between the ocular evidence of PWs.6 and 8 on the one hand and medical evidence on the other. It is the case of the prosecution that as stated by the eye-witnesses that each respondent stabbed or assaulted the victim once which would mean there should have been only 3 wounds whereas according to the medical evidence there were 8 injuries suffered by the deceased which has not been explained by the prosecution.
7. In these circumstances the High Court came to the conclusion that it is not safe to rely on the evidence of PWs. 6 and 8 to base a conviction.
8.We are in agreement with the said finding. Hence there is no merit in this appeal.
The appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
