State of Haryana v Dallu Ram
Supreme Court of India

18 November 2003
Cr.A. No.346 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal has been filed by the State of Haryana against the judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh dated 21.5.1993 in Criminal Appeal No.91-DB of 1991 whereunder the High Court while differing from the view taken by the learned Sessions Judge, Sirsa in Sessions Case No.69 of 1990 recorded a finding of acquittal and set aside the order of conviction passed by the trial court for allegedly committing the murder of his wife Lachhmi alias Lachhmi, under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentence of life imprisonment and fine, imposed in addition thereto. The sum and substance of the case of the prosecution was that the deceased was first married to one Narayan Singh through whom she had a son Raju (PW 6) and daughter Santosh (PW 5). When the first husband died, the deceased who was working in the company of the respondent accused under the same railway contractor got married to the accused and through him gave birth to 2/3 daughters and two sons.
2. While PW 6 was earning by plying rickshaw and PW 5 by doing odd jobs like cleaning utensils, the accused who remained unemployed became habituated to drinking and used to beat the deceased often for money. It is on one such occasion when misunderstanding ruled high and victim was about to leave to Rajasthan with the children through first husband the accused was said to have picked up a knife used for cutting vegetables and gave a blow on her chest. The deceased was said to have ran outside the house and despite PW 5 and PW 6 trying to intervene in the matter the accused dealt with further blows as a consequence of which she succumbed to injuries.
3.  The mother of the deceased lodged a report and after investigation and completing the required formalities the accused was charged for the offence punishable under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860. To prove the case of the prosecution, in all, eight witnesses appears to have been examined besides marking documents and exhibits. PW 4 was the mother who lodged the report as to the occurrence and PW 5 is the minor daughter, PW 6 is the son of the deceased through her first husband who were projected as eye witnesses to the occurrence. The learned trial judge on a consideration of the materials on record held the accused guilty of the charge mainly on the evidence of PW 5 and while convicting him of the offence under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 sentenced him to life imprisonment, in addition to the levy of fine of Rs.2,000/- with a default clause, as noticed supra.
4.  Aggrieved, the accused pursued the matter further, on appeal before the High Court and the learned Judges of the Division Bench concurred with the appreciation of evidence of PWs 4 and 6 by the learned trial judge who disbelieved their evidence as to the claim that the were present at the time of occurrence. As for the evidence of PW 5 the minor daughter of the deceased through her first husband who was said to be of 10 years of age at the time of occurrence the Division Bench was not prepared to give due credence to the same both on the ground of the capacity of the witness as also the reliability of the version given by her and ultimately came to the conclusion that the child witness PW 5 was not speaking truth and that she had a grouse against the victim as well and, therefore, could not be believed. Consequently, the verdict of acquittal was recorded, as indicated earlier. Hence, this appeal by the State.
5.  Heard the learned counsel for the appellant-State. Inspite of service of notice the respondent has not chosen to enter appearance to contest the claim in the appeal.
6.  Learned counsel for the appellant-State while placing reliance upon the decision reported in  ) SC entitled Paras Ram vs. State of Himachal Pradesh, invited our attention to the relevant portions of the judgments of the courts below as well as the deposition of PW 5 and strenuously contended that the manner in which PW 5 could withstand a lengthy cross examination was itself sufficient to show the maturity of the child witness PW 5 to understand the case and, therefore, her evidence could not have been doubted or rejected and consequently the reversal of the conviction by the High Court was vitiated and calls for interference at our hands.
7.  We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant. In the light of the materials brought to our notice as well as the decision cited above we find that the High Court has not chosen to reject the evidence of PW 5 child witness merely on the ground that oath was not administered to the child witness for the reason that she could not understand the sanctity of the oath, but even on the appreciation of the version of occurrence as spoken to by her the very case of the prosecution stood self condemned and contradicted, on many vital aspects of the case as meticulously highlighted and indicated by the High Court. The manner of appreciation of the evidence undertaken by the High Court is not found to be perverse or vitiated on account of any patent error of law to warrant our interference, particularly, with an order of acquittal.
Consequentially, the appeal fails and shall stand dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
