ITW Signode India Limited v Collector of Central Excise
Supreme Court of India

20 February 2003
C.A. No. 7868 of 1995
The order of the court was as follows:
1. Earlier this appeal was adjourned awaiting the judgment of this Court in Easland Combines v. CCE 2003 Indlaw SC 9. When this appeal was taken up for hearing today Mr Bajpai, the learned counsel appearing for the Revenue invited our attention to the judgment in Easland Combines 2003 Indlaw SC 9 (supra) and submitted that the point involved in this appeal is covered by the said judgment.
2. In CCE v. Cotspun Ltd. 1999 Indlaw SC 82 a Constitution Bench of this Court laid down as follows:
"The levy of excise duty on the basis of an approved classification list is the correct levy, at least until such time as to the correctness of the approval is questioned by the issuance to the assessee of a show-cause notice. It is only when the correctness of the approval is challenged that an approved classification list ceases to be such.
15. The levy of excise duty on the basis of an approved classification list is not a short-levy. Differential duty cannot be recovered on the ground that it is a short-levy. Rule 10 has then no application."
3. Parliament has amended Section 11-A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 by the Finance Act, 2000 (10 of 2000) with effect from 17-11-1980 with a view to change the basis of the judgment in the aforementioned case.
4. The question whether the amendment has changed the basis of the judgment in Cotspun case 1999 Indlaw SC 82 (supra), is the question that arises in this case. The same question came up for consideration of this Court in Easland Combines 2003 Indlaw SC 9 (supra). A Bench of two learned Judges took the view that the amendment which conferred power to correct the errors or mistakes in approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation of excisable goods cannot be said to be unreasonable. It was further held that with retrospective effect, the legislature has empowered the Central Excise Officer to set at naught the erroneous approval of the classification list or acceptance of price list or assessment order, and, on that premise, it was laid down:
"Hence, it is held that in view of the amendment of Section 11-A(1), the decision rendered by this Court in Cotspun case 1999 Indlaw SC 82 (supra) would not be a good law. Show-cause notice for correcting errors or mistakes in approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation of excisable goods under the provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder could be issued within the prescribed period."
5. Having gone through the judgment carefully and given our anxious consideration to the said judgment in Easland Combines 2003 Indlaw SC 9 (supra) we are unable to agree with the view taken by the Bench of two learned Judges in regard to either the import of the amendment or the effect thereof and, in our view, the amendment does not alter the basis of the judgment in Cotspun case 1999 Indlaw SC 82 (supra).
6. We, therefore, consider it appropriate to refer the appeal to a Bench of three learned Judges.
7. The Registry is directed to obtain the orders of the Hon'ble the Chief Justice for listing the case before a Bench of three learned Judges.
Appeal allowed.
