Cheriathy Joseph (D) By Lrs v State of Kerala and Others
Supreme Court of India

25 November 2003
C.A. No.2659/1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellants in this appeal challenged the right of the State to declare certain areas as reserved forest under the provision of the Tranvancore Forest Regulations, 1068 (Act II of 1068) which was ultimately replaced by the Kerala Forest Act, 1961 (for short 'The Act'). Hence, the matter was dealt with by the Forest Settlement Officer, as provided under Section 9 of the Act.
2.  The appellants claimed title to the property which they allege to have acquired through Koikkal in respect of which they placed reliance on neets of 928, 942, 948 and 972. The forest Settlement Officer upheld the claim and genuineness of neets of 942, 948 but refused the claim of the appellants on the grounds the neet of 928 was not filed before the Settlement Officer(Forest) but it was filed before First Appellate Court but so far neet of 972 is concerned it has not been filed ever. It may also be mentioned that some other judgments and decrees passed in the earlier suits have also been relied upon and on appeal the District Judge considering all facts and circumstances allowed the appeal and the claim of the appellant in respect of the area notified as reserved forest.
3. An appeal as provided under Section 12A if the Kerala Forest Act, 1961, had been preferred by the State, against the judgment and order of the District Judge passed in appeal. The High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the order passed by the District Judge.
4.  The learned counsel for the appellants has taken us through the judgment of the High Court and one of the main contentions as put forth is that the learned Single Judge instead of considering the merits of the case, has more taken into consideration the history and got influenced by other circumstances not on the record and was generally guided by those factors. Some how, it has been observed time and again that all the documents, as relied upon by the appellants are forged and fabricated. The judgment is all pervasive with such observations that documents were forged and fabricated. As an instance, we also find that the Judgment, starts with the remarks.
"The fabrication is self evident from the language and from the contents of that document."
5.  Again it is observed in respect of a document that the fabrication of the document has been a crude operation. There was no such issue or ground before courts and the authorities earlier regarding forgery and fabrication of documents. The High Court considered the whole case with that angle and recorded definite finding to that effect. In our view, it was not the right approach adopted. It would have been only appropriate that the court had confined itself to the facts of the case rather than to be heavily swayed away by several other factors.
6.  Yet another submission made before us is that the scope of powers under Section 12A of the Kerala Forest Act, 1961 is not so wide so as to hold de novo inquiry into the whole matter as has been done by the High Court. In that connection, our attention has been drawn to the Judgment wherein it has been observed that it required a de novo inquiry into the findings. The submission is that the scope of inquiry is limited and is confined to the question of law.
7. In that connection some decisions have also been referred to that the jurisdiction u/s 12A of the Act is akin to Section 100 C.P.C.
8.  We feel that since the matter is fit to be remanded for fresh decision this question as raised may also be better canvased before the High Court for its consideration.In view of the discussion held above, we allow the appeals and set aside the order passed by the High Court and remand the case to the High Court for consideration afresh and for fresh order in accordance with the law.
9. The High Court shall, however, not be influenced by any observations made by us in his judgment and shall be free to arrive at its own conclusion on merits of the case. Costs easy.
Order accordingly.
