Joseph v Jose
Supreme Court of India

1  May  2003
C.A. No. 3343 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Respondent seeking eviction of the tenant-appellant from the suit accommodation, which is non-residential in nature, on the ground of bona fide need of the building for his own occupation, within the meaning of sub-Section (3) of Section 11 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 (hereinafter 'the Act' for short), was directed to be dismissed by the Rent Controller. However, the appeal filed by the landlord-respondent was allowed and upholding the entitlement of the landlord under Section 11(3) of the Act, the tenants was directed to be evicted. The tenant's revision in the High Court has been dismissed. This is an appeal by the tenant by special leave.
2. The learned counsel for the tenant-appellant has forcefully submitted that on the date of filing of the petition, the landlord was in possession of two vacant rooms in a building owned by him which he did not plead, rather concealed, and, therefore, his need cannot be said to be bona fide. We find from the record of proceedings that the evidence in that regard has been admitted without any objection and the witnesses have been cross-examined and the arguments on the issue have been advanced. Both the parties were fully aware of the case set up by one against the other and, therefore, the absence of pleadings cannot be said to have caused any prejudice to the appellant. The present one is a case squarely covered by the ratio of the decision of this Court in the case of Nagubai Ammal and others vs. B. Shama Rao and others 1956 Indlaw SC 18.
3.  The First Appellate Court has found that the requirement of the landlord-respondent was for 650 sq.ft. accommodation for the purpose of starting a cycle shop. The two room accommodation existed in a building which was owned not exclusively by the respondent but by the father and the brothers and sisters including the respondent. The extent of the two room accommodation was only 250 sq.ft. wherein a cycle shop could not be conducted. That apart, the building has been sold away for the purpose of making available capital for the business of the landlord-respondent.
Both the First Appellate Court and the High Court have concluded that the situation was covered by the first proviso to sub-Section (3) of Section 11 of the Act which holds that availability of another building may not be a ground to deny eviction from the tenancy premises if special reasons exist which in a particular case are just and proper to order eviction. In our opinion, no case is made out for interference with the finding of fact arrived at by the First Appellate Court and upheld by the High Court, more so, in exercise of the discretionary jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
The appeal filed by the tenant is dismissed.
4. However, the tenant is allowed six months' time for vacating the suit premises subject to filing the usual undertaking in the trial court within a period of four weeks from today. No order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
