Surinder Pal Singh v Kuldip Singh and Another
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
Cr.A. Nos.1224 Of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The above appeal has been filed by the first respondent in Criminal Writ Petition No.1185 of 2001 on the file of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh, which in turn was filed by the first respondent herein before the said High Court seeking for the issue of a writ to produce the detenues said to be the brothers of the writ petitioner and also direct for roving inquiry into the matter. After hearing learned counsel on either side, the learned Single Judge came to the conclusion taking into account certain serious allegations made by the Warrant Officer appointed and deputed by the court to ascertain certain facts, that the matter needed a thorough probe and a direction came to be issued for placing under suspension the appellant pending investigation and trial, required in the matter. The learned Single Judge also directed an FIR to be registered within a week from the date of his order and further directed the DIG, CBI, Chandigarh to nominate an experienced officer of the rank indicated therein to investigate into the matter and depending upon the result of the investigation submit a final report in the court. Certain incidental directions which are unnecessary to be noticed for the purposes of this appeal, have also been issued in the order.
2.  Aggrieved, the appellant has approached this Court. While issuing notice in the Special Leave Petition on March 4, 2002 interim orders have been granted staying the suspension of the appellant as directed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court. After the respondents entered appearance not only leave was granted the stay of suspension initially ordered was also made absolute till the decision in the appeal and further the hearing of the appeal has been expedited.
3.  Heard learned counsel for the appellant. After careful consideration of the submissions made and also on going through the order of the court below and the material placed on record, we are of the view that there is no justification for this court to interfere with the direction given by the learned Single Judge to register an FIR and conduct an inquiry by the CBI in the matter and proceed according to the law, thereafter. But at the same time we find every justification to continue the Interim orders passed by this Court which subsequently came to be made absolute suspending the direction to suspend the appellant issued by the learned Single Judge. The said direction made pending disposal of the appeal, in our view, should be continued until the report of the CBI is submitted and any further action is initiated against the appellant. If depending upon the outcome of such report any action is to be taken, this order will come to an end and the respective parties including the competent authorities shall be at liberty to proceed further, in the matter as is permissible in law for them.
4. In the light of the above direction, and expressing no view on the contentions on either side, the appeal shall stand finally disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
