Messrs K.C. Mathew and Sons and Another v A. Sulaikha Beevi and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.19141/2001

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.Leave granted.
Heard parties.
2.  This appeal is against an order of the High Court wherein the High Court while remanding the matter back to the trial court has inter alia held that the appellants are not entitled to the benefit of Section 106 of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (in short "the Act"). Section 106 of the Act reads as follows:-
"106. Special provision relating to leases for commercial or industrial purposes:- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in any other law, or in any contract, or in any order or decree of court, where on any land leased for commercial or industrial purpose, the lessee has constructed buildings for such commercial or industrial purpose before the 20th May, 1967, he shall not be liable to be evicted from such land, but shall be liable to pay rent under the contract of tenancy, and such rent shall be liable to be varied every twelve years.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this section,
(a) 'lessee' includes a legal representative or an assignee of the lessee; and
(b) 'building' means a permanent or a temporary building and includes a shed.
(1A) The lessor or the lessee may apply to such authority as may be prescribed for varying the rent referred to in sub-section (1), and thereupon such authority may, after taking into consideration such matters as may be prescribed and after giving the lessor and the lessee an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders on the application as it deems fit.
(2)If, between the 18th December, 1957 and the date of commencement of this Act, any decree or order of court has been executed and any person dispossessed by delivery, such person shall, on application before the Land Tribunal, be entitled to restoration of possession;
Provided that, before restoration, such person shall be liable to pay:
(i) the compensation paid by the landlord for any improvements in the land and subsisting at the time of restoration;
(ii) the compensation for any improvements effected subsequent to the delivery:
Provided further that he shall not be entitled to restoration if the property has passed on to the possession of a bona fide transferee for value.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1), sub-section (1A) and sub-section (2) shall apply to lands owned or held by the Government of Kerala or a local authority".
3.  The admitted facts are that in 1945 this property was leased out to the appellants' predecessors for commercial purposes, namely, to carry on timber trade. It appears that the appellants' predecessors had put up some buildings on the land for the purposes of that trade. In 1956, a new lease deed was executed. In 1962 a third lease deed was executed. The recitals of the subsequent lease deeds show that the earlier relationship was put an end to and a fresh relationship was created by the subsequent document. The lease deeds mention that on the expiry of the earlier lease possession had been handed over and that on a request for further lease a new lease had been granted.
4.  The Land Tribunal, to whom the question was referred, held in favour of the appellants. It held that benefit of Section 106 was available to the appellants. On the basis of the decision of the Land Tribunal, the Civil Court decreed the suit only for arrears of rent and dismissed the suit qua eviction of the appellants. The appeals filed by both parties were dismissed. The High Court has, by the impugned judgment, in a second appeal, considered the question of law as to whether Section 106 of the Act would apply. The High Court has held on facts that lease deed granted in 1962 was a fresh lease. The High Court has, on facts, held that in pursuance of this lease deed there is no construction. The High Court has held that Section 106 therefore has no application.
In our view, the reasoning of the High Court is absolutely correct. The wordings of the lease deed show that this was a fresh lease. It is clear that the earlier lease deed had been surrendered. In this view of the matter, we see no reason to interfere.
5. The appeal stands dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
