Mahmad Iliyas Abdulmiya Shaikh v State of Gujarat
Supreme Court of India

17 April 2003
Cr.A. No. 589 of 2003 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Cr.) No. 665 of 2003)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  A limit notice issued in this appeal is as to the quantum of sentence to be awarded to the appellant. The trial court finding the appellant guilty of offence punishable under Section 326 Indian Penal Code, 1860 awarded him life imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1000/- in default of payment of fine three months rigorous imprisonment was ordered and for an offence under Section 324 Indian Penal Code, 1860 the appellant was directed to undergo imprisonment for a period of three years and a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment of fine one month rigorous imprisonment.  Further for an offence under Section 506 (2) Indian Penal Code, 1860 the appellant was sentenced three months rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs.1,000/- in default of payment of fine to undergo further period of rigorous imprisonment for one month. The court also directed all substantive sentences to run concurrently. The High Court confirmed the said judgment.
2.  The appellant was accused of throwing acid at the complainant and three other family members of her's. The medical evidence shows that the injuries suffered by these persons are simple in nature, therefore,
on the facts and circumstances of this case and taking into consideration the age of the appellant, we think that ends of justice will be met if the appellant is sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years for an offence punishable under Section 326 Indian Penal Code, 1860. We maintain all other sentences including the sentences of fine awarded and the sentences awarded in default of payment of fine. We also direct that the substantive sentences to run concurrently. However, the appellant shall be entitled for remission as provided under Section 428 of Code of Civil Procedure.
3.  If the appellant has served the substantive sentences as awarded hereinabove and if appellant has paid the fine, he shall be released, if he is not wanted in any of other case, otherwise the appellant shall undergo the remainder of his sentence awarded by us. The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
