P.A. Jose v C. Varghese Lenin and others
Supreme Court of India

28 February 2003
C.A. No. 1856 of 2003 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 22820 of 2001)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The learned senior counsel for the appellant urged that the High Court in the impugned order committed an error in dismissing the petition filed by the appellant when the respondents failed to satisfy the requirements of Sections 11(4) and 10 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act. He also submitted that all was not well with the respondent-landlord in that the respondents had filed an eviction petition against the previous tenant on the ground that they required the entire premises for clinic. The said eviction petition was allowed. Even thereafter they did not utilise the building for the purpose of clinic and they continued only in a portion of the building; the same building was let out.
2. In this view, there was no bona fide requirement on the part of the landlord. He further urged that there was no alternative suitable building available on the date when the eviction petition was filed inasmuch as the building was under construction and it was not ready for occupation. According to the learned counsel, there was no cause of action as on the date when the eviction petition was filed. He also urged that the Commissioner's report was available on record before the court of first instance, to which the appellant had filed objections. The Commissioner's report was not considered and ultimately final order was passed although it had been stated that the said report would be considered at the time of final hearing. The ground that the bona fide requirement was not established when the eviction was sought under Section 11(4), was not urged before the District Court or before the High Court by the appellant.
3.  The learned counsel submitted that this being a pure question of law, without requiring any further establishment of facts or in other words, on admitted facts the question could be examined and decided. In opposition, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that as of today, the appellant has constructed a ten-storey building, they have alternative suitable accommodation and as a matter of fact the premises in question is not under use by the appellant. Having regard to these facts it may not be necessary for this Court to examine the question of law raised for the first time by the appellant. Such question of law may be examined in appropriate case, if need be.
4. Having considered the respective submissions made on behalf of the parties and having noticed the facts and circumstances of the case, we think it is just and appropriate to set aside the impugned judgment, particularly when the High Court did not consider the Commissioner's report along with the objections filed to it in proper perspective before disposing of the case.
5.  In this view of the matter, we set aside the impugned order and remit the case of Division Bench of the High Court to consider the Commissioner's report along with objections filed by the appellant to the said report, and examine the case of the parties with regard to whether the appellant has got alternative suitable premises for the purpose and then proceed to pass appropriate orders. It is also open to the High Court to look into whether premises in question is in use of the appellant or not.
6. We make it clear that no other point will be available to be urged before the High Court. We except the High Court to dispose of the case as expeditiously as possible and, if possible, it may be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of receiving copy of this order.
The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above. No costs.
Appeal partly allowed.
