State of Uttar Pradesh v Surender and Another
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
Cr.A. No.113 Of 1997
The Order of the court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The occurrence took place on March 15, 1978 at about 8.00 p.m. The FIR was lodged on the next day at about 9.20 p.m. The prosecution case is that the three accused persons, namely, Anek Pal, who was acquitted by the trial court, Surendra Pal, son of Anek Pal, and Kanchid had committed homicidal death of one Jagdish, hereinafter referred to as 'the deceased'.
2.  The dying declaration was recorded by the Executive Magistrate on May 16, 1978 around 7.30 a.m. Investigation was undertaken after the FIR was registered and on completion thereof, the charge-sheet was filed. The accused were found guilty of offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC. The Trial Court acquitted Anek Pal on the ground of non-availability of material to connect him with the crime. It, however, convicted accused Surender and Kanchid on being found guilty for offence under Section 302/34 IPC and they were sentenced to undergo life imprisonment. In appeal the High Court at Allahabad directed acquittal of both accused person by giving benefit of doubt. Further, it was held that since there was no source of light at the place of occurrence, recognition of the identity of culprits could not have been possible. The non-examination of the doctor who recorded the dying declaration and other persons who admittedly reached the place of occurrence immediately thereafter also were considered to render the prosecution version suspect. In addition thereto, the dying declaration purported to have been recorded by the Executive Magistrate was also held to be not believable on account of the possibility of tutoring by the relatives who were seen with the deceased in the hospital, at the time.
3.  According to the learned counsel, the reasons indicated by the High Court are perverse and, therefore, the judgment of the Trial Court should be restored. In response, learned counsel for the accused persons supported the judgment of acquittal rendered by the High Court.
4.  It is brought to our notice that during the pendency of the appeal, Kanchid, the second respondent herein, has died.
On perusing the evidence on record and the judgments recorded by the courts below we find no infirmity in the judgment of the High Court, which is also a well reasoned and merited one, rendered after careful consideration, by assigning cogent reasons. The appeal fails and is accordingly dismissed.
5.  The bail bonds of the first respondent, Surender, shall stand discharged. In so far as the second respondent is concerned, the appeal stands abated as he died during the pendency of the appeal.
Appeal dismissed.
