Kanubhai Gulabsinh Parmar v State of Gujarat
Supreme Court of India

17 October 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Cr.) No. 1776-1777/2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant is the 4th accused in a Criminal case pending before the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Muli in Gujarat. The appellant filed a petition under Section 482, Cr.P.C. before the High Court alleging that the complaint filed against him did not disclose any offence against him and therefore, the proceedings have to be quashed. The High Court dismissed the application and hence this S.P.
2.  Pursuant to the complaint filed against the appellant and others, a charge was framed under Sections 188 and 430 IPC. The charge is to the following effect:
"Offence under Sections 188, 430 of I.P.C. - in the manner that
notification bearing No. MJS-III-V-10(2)/2000 dated 16.10.2000 was issued by the Collector, Surendranagar for reserving the stock of water for potable use, stored in the small and big lakes/Sim lakes/irrigation schemes etc. under the Panchayat Department of Surendranagar District and under the Irrigation Department of the State Government. That accused Nos. 1 to 3 committed breach of the said notification on 14.12.2000 by preparing small lane (NIK), drew the water of Nayaka Dam through these small drainage to their wells and then used the said water from their well in their fields for agricultural purpose. That accused No. 2 Narendrasinh Kanubha drew water of Nayaka Dam into his well through small lane (NIK) and took the said water through the pipeline in the fields bearing Survey Nos. 608 and 451 in occupation and possession of accused Nos. 4 and 5 and thereby they committed breach of notification issued by the Collector, Surendranagar and by reducing the stock of water they committed an offence. Therefore, this charge-sheet is submitted for doing justice."
3.  In order to constitute an offence punishable under Section 188 IPC., there must be disobedience of an order promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to do the same. The offence punishable under Section 430, I.P.C. 
relates to the commission of mischief by diverting water from some irrigation work causing diminution of the supply of water which is intended to be used for agricultural purposes or for food and drinking purposes of human beings and 
animals.
4.  The District Magistrate, Surendranagar, issued a notification on 14.10.2000 prohibiting the drawing of water from various dams including Nayaka Dam, except for potable purposes. The case sought to be made against the present appellant is that he violated the said notification by drawing water from Nayaka Dam for agricultural purposes. The complaint was lodged with Muli Police Station by a Revenue Circle Officer stating that persons mentioned in the complaint were drawing water from Nayaka Dam for irrigating their agricultural lands. The appellant herein was not originally shown as an accused, but during the course of the investigation, the appellant was implicated as accused No. 4. There is no allegation of any conspiracy being hatched by all the accused. In the complaint, there are no allegations against the present appellant.
5. The counsel for the appellant further submitted that the lands comprised in survey numbers mentioned in the charge-sheet, namely, Survey No. 608 and Survey No. 451 do not stand in the name of the appellant. Neither the complaint nor the charge- sheet makes any allegation regarding the present appellant.
6.  Therefore, the prosecution against the appellant is not sustainable as no offence is made out against him. As there is no allegation that the appellant has committed any act contrary to law, the proceedings against him are liable to be set aside.
7. Hence,we set aside the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court and the criminal proceedings initiated against the appellant herein are quashed.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
Appeals disposed of.
