State of Uttar Pradesh v Bansi Lal
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
Cr.A. No. 456 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The State of U.P. is in appeal against the judgment of the High of Judicature at Allahabad whereby the High Court allowed the appeal filed by the respondent herein against his conviction and sentence awarded to him by the District and Sessions Judge, Kanpur Dehat for the offence punishable under Section 302 
 IPC.
2.  The prosecution case stated briefly is: the respondent herein committed the murder of one Chhota Devi his sister-in-law for not having given him Rs.20/- which he wanted to borrow from her. For the said reason in the night intervening between 13th and 14th April, 1985 the respondent herein entered the house of the deceased when her husband was away in the field for watching the crops and committed murder in the presence of deceased's minor son, Sanjai who was about 9 years old at the time of incident and a minor daughter, Ram Moorti, aged around 12 years at the time of incident. The prosecution also alleges that the incident in question was noticed by PW.3, Lala Ram, a neighbour. The complaint in regard to the incident was lodged at about 4.45 a.m. on 14.4.1985 at Police Station Bhognipur. During the course of investigation, on a statement made by the respondent accused the weapon of assault namely a Banka was recovered. The trial court on consideration of the evidence and relying upon the statement of eye-witnesses PWs. 2 and 4 convicted the respondent herein for the offence punishable under Section 302 
 IPC as stated above. In an appeal the High Court on re-appreciation of the evidence has allowed the same and acquitted the respondent herein.
3.  The learned counsel appearing for the State of U.P. very strenuously contended that the judgment of the High Court which re-appreciated the evidence of the trial court is scanty on particulars and the finding of the court that the two eye-witnesses namely PWs.2 and 4 could not have noticed the incident is contrary to material on record. He also pointed out that the reasons given by the High Court for rejecting the evidence of PW.3 are based on some minor contradictions.
4. Learned counsel also pointed out that the High Court has not referred to the recovery in the course of its judgment. Per contra leaned amicus curiae appearing for the respondent contended that the judgment of the High Court on all material aspects is on a proper consideration of the material on record, therefore, should not be interfered with.
Having considered the material on record and the argument of the learned counsel we are of the opinion that though it is possible to take a different view from that of the High Court, on the facts of this case we are of the opinion that since one of the possible views has already been accepted by the High Court we think it not necessary to interfere with the impugned judgment and also taking into consideration the fact that the incident in question has occurred long back in the year 1995 we decline to interfere with the impugned judgment of the High Court. The appeal is dismissed.
5.  We place on record our appreciation for the services rendered by the learned amicus curiae and direct that a sum of Rs.750/- be paid to him for his valuable assistance.
Appeal dismissed.
