Haryana State Agrl. Marktng. Board and Another v Randhir Singh and Another
Supreme Court of India

25 November 2003
C.A. No. 3052/1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal, the order dated 17th July, 1997 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court is under challenge. The respondent No.1 admittedly belongs to a backward class of Haryana and is resident of Village Bhoji which falls within the notified area of Market Committee, Indri. Vide resolution No.8 dated 1.6.1987 and resolution No.18 dated 23.11.1997, the appellant-Board resolved that the licensees belonging to Scheduled Castes, Ex-servicemen, Backward Classes (Shopkeepers and Producers) be given plots on reserved price in new market committees. The respondent No.1 represented to the appellant-Board for allotment of plot from reserved quota meant for backward classes, but when his efforts failed, he filed a Civil Writ Petition No.7188/96 in the High Court, which came to be disposed on 17.5.96 by directing the appellants to decide the representation of respondent No.1. The appellants rejected the representation on the ground that the Government has not made any declaration regarding reserved category in terms of Rule 2(b) of `The Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board Sale of Shops Plots Rules, 1994 ' (for short, `the Rules'). Hence, the respondent No.1 had to approach the High Court for the second time by filing the Civil Writ Petition No.12674/96. The writ petition was resisted on the ground that the reserved category plots could not be allotted to respondent No.1 and other similarly situated persons because the Government had not issued declaration in terms of Rule 2(b) of the Rules afore-mentioned.
2. During the course of hearing before the High Court, the learned Deputy Advocate General conceded on behalf of the State of Haryana that Annexure P2 produced before the High Court was notified indicating the backward classes of Haryana. The High Court did not find substance in the resistance offered on behalf of the appellants. The High Court found that when the respondent No.1 admittedly belonged to the backward class as per Annexure P2 filed in the writ petition, merely because there is no separate declaration under Rule 2(b) of the said Rules, was not a ground to reject the claim of respondent No.1. In that view, the High Court allowed the writ petition and directed the appellant-Board to hold restricted auction for the shops-plots reserved for the backward classes and also to allot the same in accordance with law within the given time.
3.  Before us, the learned counsel for the appellants strongly contended that in terms of the new policy dated 23rd July, 1997, no such restricted auction can be held; the auction to be held must be open auction. He complained that High Court did not consider this new policy. It was promptly pointed out by the learned counsel for respondent No.1 that the High Court could not consider the new policy obviously because it was not the policy existing on the date when the High Court delivered the judgment. It is plain that the High Court delivered the judgment on 17th July, 1997 and the new policy was notified on 23rd July, 1997.
The learned counsel for the appellants also urged that in the absence of any declaration made under Rule 2(b) of the Rules as to the backward classes in the State of Haryana, the respondent No.1's claim could not have been allowed to be considered. We are not persuaded to agree with this submission as the High Court was right, in our view, going by the substance of the matter, particularly, when the learned Deputy Advocate General on behalf of the State conceded that the respondent No.1 belongs to backward class as per Annexure P2 produced before the High Court.
4. This being the position, we do not find any merit in this appeal. Consequently, it stands dismissed, but, with no order as to costs.
5.  The appellants shall comply with the directions given by the High Court within three months from today.
Appeal dismissed.
