Biranchi Narayan Mishra v Administrator, Shri Jagannath Temple and Others
Supreme Court of India

14 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.8708-8709/2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant made a challenge to a bid held by respondent No.1. In terms of the directions made by the High Court and to satisfy court of his bona fides the appellant deposited an amount of Rs.7.2 lacs with the Competent Authority of respondent No.1. Thereafter, the bids were held afresh and the respondent No.2 was declared to be a successful bidder. The bid of the respondent accepted is for Rs.71.5 lacs while the earlier bid was for Rs.72 lacs.
2. Thus, the respondent No.1 has suffered a loss of Rs.50,000/- on account of the proceedings initiated by the appellant.
3.  Out of the amount deposited by the appellant, an amount of Rs.1 lac has gone to the respondent No.2 as mentioned in the order dated 7.5.1999 passed in M.C.No.5332/1999 (annexure P-3)
4.  Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that the forfeiture of the entire amount of Rs.7.2 lacs as ordered by the High Court shall be too onerous and too penal. The notice was issued in this petition for the purpose of exploring the possibility of confining the quantum of forfeiture to a reasonable and unjust amount so that the interest of respondent No.1 is protected and the appellant is also made to compensate for his misadventure.
5.  Learned counsel for the appellant under instructions states that the appellant is prepared to compensate respondent No.1 for the loss of Rs.50,000/- and also by another amount of Rs.2 lacs out of the amount deposited by him to be released to the respondent No.1 by way of compensation. The offer so made is very fair and reasonable and we are inclined to accept the same.
6.  The appeals are disposed of by directing modification of the order of the High Court that out of the amount deposited by the appellant which is Rs.7.2 lacs and deducting the amount of Rs.1 lac which already stands released to respondent No.2, a total amount of Rs.2.50 lacs shall stand forfeited in favour of the respondent No.1. The balance amount of Rs.3.70 lacs shall be refunded to the appellant within a period of six weeks from today.
Before parting with the order, we make it clear that we have not adjudicated upon the legal issues and we have resolved the controversy only in an equitable manner after hearing the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance. This order does not constitute precedent.
Appeals disposed of.
