Smt.Surinder Kaur Grewal v The Director., Consolidation Of Holdings And Ors.
Supreme Court of India

27 November 2003
CIVIL APPEAL NO.7746 OF 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The consolidation operation (re-partition) in the village in which the land in question is situate, were carried out and finalised in the years 1959-1960. The appellant claims to be in possession of the land in question as exclusive right holder. None, it is admitted, filed any proceedings or raised any objection to the consolidation proceedings. The respondents 2 to 10, however, filed a petition u/s. 42 of the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation & Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948, before Director, Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab, claiming redistribution of land.
The said petition was filed on 22nd January, 1987. The Director exercising power u/s. 42 of the aforesaid Act, in terms of his Order dated 9th June, 1987 held that the request of respondents 2 to 10 cannot be acceded to, but it further held that the land in question was taken over by the Panchayat from the right holders for common purposes. The conclusion thus reached was that the respondents 2 to 10 have no right but considering their alternate request, it was directed that the case be remanded to Consolidation Officer for redefining shares of the right holders in the land. S. 42 of the aforesaid Act reads as under:
"42. Power of [State] Government to call for proceedings, - The [State] Government may at any time for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed, scheme prepared or confirmed or repartition made by any officer under this Act, call for and examine the record of any case pending before or disposed of by such officer and may pass such order in reference thereto as it thinks fit:
Provided that no order or scheme or repartition shall be varied or reversed without giving the parties interested notice to appear and opportunity to be heard except in cases where the State Government is satisfied that the proceedings have been vitiated by unlawful consideration."
2. Challenging the order dated 9th June, 1987, a writ petition was filed by the appellant before the High Court which was dismissed in limine by impugned judgment and order which is under challenge in this appeal. The challenge before the High Court, to the legality of the Order dated 9th June, 1987 was on various grounds, out of which we are concerned with the two grounds, namely, (i) Bar of limitation; (ii) Jurisdiction of the Director of Consolidation.
3. The appeal deserves to be allowed on both the grounds. The question of limitation for initiating proceedings u/s. 42 is covered by a decision of this Court in Gram Panchayat, Kakran Vs. Additional Director of Consolidation & Anr. [1997 (8) SCC 484] 1997 Indlaw SC 1315 this Court has held that when no limitation is prescribed for an application under Section 42, the application should be filed within a reasonable time. In the present case, it is no disputed that the application u/s. 42 was filed nearly after 27 years. It was clearly barred by limitation.
4. Regarding second ground, a bare perusal of the facts of the case show that the respondents were not challenging any order, scheme or re-partition as contemplated by S. 42 and thus the Director of Consolidation had no jurisdiction to examine the petition and make the Order dated 9th June, 1987.
5. For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court as also the aforesaid order dated 9th June, 1987 passed by Director Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab and allow the appeal with costs.
6. After hearing learned counsel for the parties for about 25 minutes, the Court allowed the appeal.
Appeal allowed
