Executive Engineer Gu. Water Supply and Sewage Board v Thakar Galabji Samji Valmiya (D) Through Lrs
Supreme Court of India

16 October 2003
C.A.No.5148/1997, C.A. No.5149/1997, C.A. No.5152/1997, C.A. No.5153/1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals are against the judgment of the High Court dated 15th December, 1995. Briefly stated the facts are as follows. On 28th May 1981, notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act was issued for acquiring land admeasuring approximately 1,25,000 square meters.
2. Section 6 notification was issued on 28th October, 1982 and an award came to be passed on 30th March 1984 fixing the market price at Rs.1.35 per sq. meter in respect of some of the land and for the other land at Rs.2.30 per sq. meter. It seems that the Reference came to be filed in 1987. The Reference Court fixed the market value at Rs.15/- per sq. meter. The appeal as against that judgment has been dismissed by the impugned judgment only on the basis that the High Court found no infirmity in the judgment of the Reference Court.
3.  We have heard parties and perused the material on record. From the award, it is clear that the land owners led no evidence before the Land Acquisition Officer. The State as well as the acquiring body also did not lead any evidence. The Land Acquisition Officer having no material before him chose to obtain sale instances from the Office of the Registrar. He obtained 10 sale instances.
4. He however, found only 4 sale instances to comparable inasmuch as they were in respect of lands which were situated very close to the acquired land and which were of the same nature. Based on the price of those sale instances the award was passed fixing the rate at Rs.1.35 per sq. meter in respect of some land and Rs.2.30 per sq. meter in respect of other land.
5.  The claimants filed a reference. A perusal of the order of the Reference Court shows that the claimants tendered certain indexes obtained from the Office of the Registrar. They also led the evidence of a purchaser of a small piece of 92 per sq. meter. Through him proved the sale deed dated 28th May 1980. The acquiring body led no evidence at all. It appears that the State tendered xerox copies of certain sale instances. The Reference Court rightly held that xerox copies of sale instances could not not be looked at and thus did not take those into consideration. The Reference Court also rightly held that indexes obtained from the Office of the Registrar could not be considered as they would not disclose the nature of the land or the location of the land. The Reference Court, therefore, rightly rejected those also. So far as the sale deed of 28th May 1980 is concerned, the Reference Court held that it was not a comparable instance inasmuch as that land was far away from the acquired land and that it was a non-agricultural land whereas the acquired lands were agricultural lands.  Thus, the Reference Court was faced with the situation where it also had no evidence before it in order to determine the value of the land. The Reference Court then took into consideration the location of the acquired land and arrived at an adhoc figure of Rs.15 per sq. meter. As stated above, the High Court has refused to interfere with this.
6.  In our view, this is no method of fixing the value of the land. We, therefore set aside the order of the Reference Court as well as that of the High Court and remit the matter back to the Reference Court. We grant liberty to the parties to lead whatever evidence they want in order to prove the market value of the land. We clarify that it will be open to the claimants to claim compensation either on basis of market value or on yield basis. It will also be open to the respondents to prove whatever documents they want to in accordance with law.
7.  It must be mentioned that on behalf of the appellants it was urged that the reference was not filed before the expiry of the period of limitation. We find that no such point was raised before the Reference Court or the High Court. We clarify that now it will not be open to urge that the reference was barred by limitation.
8. By an order dated 3rd November, 1997, the appellants were granted stay only on paying one-half of the enhanced compensation. We are told that one-half of the enhanced compensation has been paid. We clarify that the same will now not be recovered till this matter is finally decided by the Reference Court, the High Court and this Court. The adjustments, if any, shall be made only thereafter.
9.  It must also be mentioned that on behalf of the respondents it was urged that the appellants are not entitled to maintain these appeals inasmuch as they are merely the agency which were to carry out work on behalf of the municipality. We, however, find from the award itself that the appellants have been shown as the acquiring body. The respondents had found them as a party in their reference. We are also told that the respondents have taken out execution proceedings against the appellants.
We, therefore, find no substance in this submission.
10.  The appeals stand disposed of. The appellants shall pay to the respondents cost fixed at Rs.2,000/- in each appeal.
Appeals disposed of.
