State of Punjab v Kewal Singh
Supreme Court of India

20 November 2003
Cr.A. No.519 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The above appeal has been filed by the State of Punjab against the Judgment of a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 29.8.1996 in Criminal Appeal No.138/DB/1994 whereunder the High Court on an independent analysis, appreciation and exhaustive consideration of the materials on record returned a finding of acquittal of the respondent who was charged for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 for allegedly committing the murder of one Gurnam Singh as well as Ajaib Singh. The charge under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 came to be made on the assumption that there were other three unknown persons involved in the occurrence along with the respondent.
2. The case of the prosecution, in brief, was that at about 9.00 PM on 12.7.1991 PW 1 (Jagir Singh) and his brothers were sitting in their house when the accused accompanied with three other sikh gentlemen came there and forcibly took away the deceased towards the village Chahal Kalan. The companions of the accused were armed with assault rifles as well. PWs 1 and 2 were said to have followed them but after a certain distance they heard the sound of firing and got frightened they returned back and to their shock they found the next day morning at 7.00 AM their brothers lying dead in the fields. After lodging the report and on completion of the investigation by undergoing all the necessary formalities and getting the reports of post mortem examination of the dead bodies the accused was charged for the offence, as noticed above.
3.  The respondent denied the charge under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and claimed false implication. A trial was held in which oral and documentary evidence was let in and on consideration of materials on record the learned Trial Judge came to the conclusion that it is the respondent who along with the other unknown assailants murdered the two brothers of PWs 1 and 2 and consequently imposed a sentence of life imprisonment, in addition to the payment of fine of Rs.2, 000/- with a default clause therefor on two counts separately for the death of Gurnam Singh as well as Ajaib Singh. Aggrieved, the respondent pursued the matter on appeal before the High Court and as noticed earlier the High Court returned a verdict of acquittal by reversing the conviction made by the learned Trial Judge.
4.  Heard the learned counsel for the appellant-State. Though notice was served on the respondent, he has not chosen to appear to contest the appeal.
5.  Strenuous efforts have been undertaken by the learned counsel for the appellant to invite our attention at length to the relevant portions of the judgments of the courts below as also the evidence of PWs 1 and 2 and DW 1.
In our view, the manner of appreciation undertaken by the High Court is found to be a reasonable one keeping in view the nebulous and contradictory nature of evidence adduced for the prosecution.
6.  The learned trial judge does not seem to have properly weighed and sifted the evidence as it ought to have been done, and therefore there was every justification for the High Court to reassess and reappreciate the same to arrive at the truth.
7.  No exception, in our view, could be taken to the criticism by the High Court that PWs 1 and 2 were merely got up witnesses and the evidence let in by the prosecution was not sufficient to frame the respondent with the guilt for the murder of two persons, though unfortunately, they lost their lives.
Being a question of interfering with the finding of acquittal recorded by the High Court, particularly, when nothing concrete or substantial and any material infirmity either in the manner of appreciation of the evidence or in the ultimate conclusion arrived at by the High Court could be substantiated by the learned counsel for the appellant.
8.  We see absolutely no merit in the appeal which consequently fails and shall stand dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
