Alakunta Lakshmaiah v State of Andhra Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

3 December 2003
Cr.A. Nos.675 Of 2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant questions his conviction for offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short "the IPC"), as done by the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Adilabad and confirmed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The appellant along with another was put on trial for the alleged commission of offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34, 201 and 376 Indian Penal Code. After trial the appellant was held guilty for the offences punishable under Section 302 Indian Penal Code but the co-accused A-2 was acquitted of the charges. The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.50/- in default to suffer simple imprisonment for 10 days.
2.  According to the prosecution, on the suspicion that his wife (hereinafter referred to as the deceased) was not a chaste woman and had illicit relations with several other persons, the appellant committed her murder and A-2 was also responsible for the killing. The prosecution depended on certain circumstances as there was no eye witness to the occurrence. The circumstances were:
(1). Deceased and the accused were last seen together;
(2). Recovery of the dead body was at the instance of the accused-appellant; and
(3). The extra judicial confession before PWs 1 and 2.
3.  These circumstances were believed by the trial court and the High Court, which by the impugned Judgment affirmed the conviction and sentence.
4.  Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the extra judicial confession before PWs 1 and 2 cannot be accepted as credible as there was no reason as to why the appellant would make a confession before a total stranger. Further the medical evidence runs counter to the alleged extra judicial confession and the fact that the accused and the deceased were last seen together or the recovery of the dead body at the instance of the accused-appellant has not been established by any cogent or convincing evidence.
5.  In response, learned counsel for the respondent-State submitted that PWs 1 and 2 are not really strangers to the accused-appellant. In fact, PW 2 is his son-in-law. Additionally, PW 1, who is a co-villager would not falsely implicate the accused and no reason has also been indicated as to why he would depose falsely. The evidence of PWs 3 and 4 who are independent witnesses clearly indicates that the deceased and the appellant were last seen together and thereafter the dead body of the deceased was recovered at the instance of the accused-appellant on his pointing out to the spot where the dead body was placed.
6. These circumstances, according to him are sufficient to bring home the guilt of the accused and, therefore, he has rightly been held guilty.
7.  We have considered the rival submissions:
In our view, the trial court and the High Court have analysed the evidence on record, keeping in view the parameters to be adopted when dealing with a case where the prosecution rests its version on circumstantial evidence. The circumstance detailed by the trial court and the High Court clearly bring home the accusations against the appellant.
8. Therefore, we see no reason to take any other view than the one taken by the trial court and confirmed by the High Court. Hence, the appeal is without any merit and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
