Navneet Lal v Vallabhadas and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal(Civil)...Cc 9794/2003

The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  After over a decade, the eviction in respect of the shop in question attained finality on dismissal of Special Leave Petition (C) No.2631 of 2003 by this Court on 7th March, 2003. That petition had been filed by the brother of the present petitioner whereby the judgment of the High Court dated 19th November, 2002 affirming the order of eviction was challenged. The order dated 7th March, 2003, inter alia, records the submission for grant of six months' time to vacate the premises on the ground that the petitioner in the said case, i.e. the brother of the present petitioner, was running his business from the said shop.
2.  This Court gave liberty to him to move the High Court for grant of time. It may also be noticed that the High Court in its order dated 19th November, 2002 passed on Second Appeal No.64 of 1999, taking into account all the facts and circumstances, granted to the brother of the petitioner three months' time to vacate the suit accommodation from the date of the judgment. The real problem for the decree-holder started after the eviction decree attained finality on dismissal of the special leave petition by this Court.
3.  The objections started pouring in as also substantive suit to somehow or the other cling to the possession. It may further be noticed that the father of the petitioner had died in the year 1990 during the pendency of the eviction proceedings and since 1990, successive proceedings were taken by the brother of the petitioner resisting the eviction. The petitioner claimed that he was doing business from the shop in question though brother, claiming that he was doing the business from the shop, was defending eviction case.
4.  It is not the case of the petitioner that there were any strained relations between the two brothers. It is unimaginable that the petitioner did not know of the eviction proceedings. The petitioner filed the objections to the execution of the decree, claiming that he was doing business from the shop for the first time after this Court had dismissed special leave petition. The objections were dismissed by the Civil Court. That order was confirmed in First Appeal by an Additional District Judge and the Second Appeal was dismissed by the High Court in limine by the impugned order, inter alia, imposing compensatory costs on the petitioner under Section 35-A of the Code of Civil Procedure of Civil Procedure for filing vexatious case.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner at length, we are of the view that the impugned judgment and order of the High Court, including the order imposing compensatory costs, is perfectly just, legal and appropriate. We are further of the view that vexatious litigation of this nature, to a great extent, contributes to delay in the administration of justice resulting in waste of the time of the courts.
5.  Having regard to the vexatious nature of litigation, including this petition, while dismissing the petition at this ex-parte stage, we impose on the petitioner costs in the sum of Rs.25, 000/- (Rupees Twenty five thousand only) payable to the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee. The costs amount is directed to be deposited within four weeks from today, failing which it shall become recoverable as a decree.
Petition dismissed.
