S. Surinder Singh v Smt. Sudesh Rani and Others
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
C.A. No. 12880/1996 - (Along with Appln. For Stay And With Office Report)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The decree-holder has come up in this appeal by way of special leave laying challenge to the judgment of the High Court passed in Civil Revision arising out of an order in execution proceedings.
There is a money decree. Two questions arise for decision:
(i) In a decree upholding entitlement of the plaintiff/ decree-holder to a sum by way of principal, a sum by way of interest and costs, how a partial payment is to be appropriated?;
(ii) When the decretal amount consists of principal and interest for the period upto the date of the filing of the suit what should be treated as 'the principal sum adjudged' within the meaning of Section 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the purpose of determining the entitlement of the decree-holder interest pedente lite and by way of future interest?
2.  On both the points, the High Court has held against the appellant. According to the High Court, the amount paid by the judgment-debtors shall first go towards satisfying the decretal principal amount and then the decretal amount of interest. On the second point, the High Court has held that 'the principal sum adjudged' shall be only the principal sum advanced by the decree-holder to the judgment-debtors and the amount of interest accrued thereon for the pre-suit period shall not be included in the principal sum. On these findings, the High Court has held that the judgment-debtors are entitled to a refund of Rs. 21,215.60p. from out of the total amount paid piecemeal by them to the decree-holder.
3.  During the course of hearing, the learned counsel for the decree-holder proposed that if the judgment-debtors - respondents do not press for the refund of Rs. 21,215.60p. abovesaid, the decree-holder would not press the appeal for decision. The learned counsel for the judgment-debtors have agreed to avail the benefit of the offer made by the learned counsel for the decree-holder.
4.  So far as the question of appropriation is concerned, the matter stands concluded by the judgment of this Court in Industrial Credit and Development Syndicate now called ICTS Limited Vs.(Smt.) S. Smitaben H. Patel and Ors. Therefore, the view taken by the High Court cannot be countenanced and to that extent the judgment of the High Court is set aside. So far as the second question arising for our consideration is concerned, it is not necessary to express any opinion thereon in view of the settlement arrived at between the parties through their learned counsel during the course of hearing. The point of law is left open to the decided in an appropriate case.
5.  The appeal is disposed of by directing that the claim of the decree-holder under the decree dated 31st July, 1982 shall be treated as fully and finally satisfied by the payments already received by the decree-holder. The judgment-debtors shall also not claim any refund out of the amount paid by the judgment-debtors to the decree-holder. No order as to the costs.
C.A. No. 12880/1996.
6.  In view of the judgment passed today in C.A. No. 12879/1996 and in view of the learned counsel for the parties having expressed that the judgment-debtors shall not claim any refund from out of the amount already paid and the decree-holder shall also treat the decree dated 31st July, 1982 fully satisfied by the receipt of payments already made by the judgment-debtors, the appeal be treated as disposed of without any adjudication on merits and in terms of the judgment passed today in CA No. 12880/1996. No order as to the costs.
Appeal disposed of.
