Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmedabad v Srivallabh Glass Works Limited
Supreme Court of India

27 February 2003
C.A. No. 4694 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is against the judgment dated 19.11.1999 passed by the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT). The respondents have been served but have remained absent. This appeal has, therefore, been set down for hearing ex parte as against the Respondents. On seizure of the goods at various places and on the basis of visit by the officers, the show cause notice was issued to the Respondent claiming differential duty on glass cleared by the Respondents as it was found that in the classification list it was shown that the glass cleared and sold by the Respondents was of a particular thickness whereas what was actually cleared and sold was glass of a greater thickness. The thicker glass fell into a different Tariff item and higher duty was payable on it. Therefore, differential duty and penalty was claimed.
The Collector confirmed the duty and penalty.
2.  CEGAT also held on all points in favour of the Department. However, CEGAT felt constrained by the Constitution Bench Judgment of this Court in the case of Collector of Central Excise, Baroda vs. Cotspun Ltd reported in 1999 Indlaw SC 82. In this case, it is held that once there is an approved classification list, it remains effective till the correctness of that list is challenged by a show cause notice. It has been held that any duty levied on the basis of such list, preceding the show cause notice would be the correct duty and can not be considered to be a short-levied one. CEGAT held that in view of this decision unless, till the correctness of the classification list was challenged by a show cause notice the demand for differential duty and penalty could not be justified.
3. It must be mentioned that after this judgment by the Finance Act, 2000, Section 11A has been amended. This amended section effectually negates the principle laid down in Cotspuns case. This Court in the case of M/s. Easland Combines, Coimbatore vs. The Collector of Central Excise, Coimbatore reported in 2003 Indlaw SC 9 has held, on the basis of amended Section 11A that differential duty could be demanded. We are informed, across the Bar, that the correctness of the decision in M/s. Easland Combines case has been doubted by another two Judge Bench of this Court in Civil Appeal No. 7868 of 1995. We are told that the question has been referred to a larger Bench.
4.  In our view, it is not necessary to tag this case with Civil Appeal No. 7868 of 1995 as on facts of this case the judgment in Cotspun Ltd. (supra) has no application. Cotspuns case merely lays down that so long as the classification list is enforced, the duty would have to be levied as per the price disclosed in that list. That case dealt with the duty on NES yarn in respect of which a classification list had been filed. This differential duty and penalty were claimed on NES yarn only. Thus, what Cotspuns case lays down is that so far as classification list subsists the differential duty cannot be claimed on the same product.
5. In the present case, what was being cleared is not the product which has been shown in the classification list. A different product, in respect of which no classification list had been filed, was being cleared and sold. Therefore, the principle laid down in Cotspuns case has no application. As both the Collector and the Tribunal have found on all points in favour of the Department and as no appeal has been filed by the Respondents we hold that the final conclusion of CEGAT based on Cotspuns case is wrong and cannot be sustained. On the findings given by the Tribunal, the demand is justified. We, therefore, set aside the impugned judgment and confirm the order of the Collector.
The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
