State of Karnataka v Hanmareddy Bhimaraddy Giraddi
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
Cr.A. Nos.148 Of 1997
The Order of the court was as follows:
1.  The above appeal has been filed by the State of Karnataka challenging the acquittal of the respondent who stood charged for an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC in Sessions Case No.36 of 1988 on the file of the Principal Sessions Judge, Belgaum for allegedly committing the murder of one Narayan Soma Shetty. The prosecution case pertains to an occurrence that took place on November 28, 1987. During the trial, Pws 1 to 19 were examined and the Exhbs.P1 to P13 were marked in addition to Mos 1 to 15. On the defence side, none was examined.
2.  On consideration of the material on record, the learned trial judge found the prosecution case proved beyond doubt and while convicting the respondent for the offence under Section 302 IPC sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment. The matter was pursued by the accused-respondent in Criminal Appeal No.245 of 1989 and a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court which undertook an analysis of the evidence on record and on re-appreciation of such evidence came to the conclusion that the witnesses claiming to be eye-witnesses do not inspire any confidence to commend acceptance and that there are very serious infirmities both in respect of alleged occurrence, recovery of certain relevant materials said to be connected with the crime, including the weapon said to have been used and consequently arrived at the conclusion that the materials produced on record could not be said to be adequate to bring home the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Consequently, the State is in appeal.
3.  Mr. M. Veerappa, learned counsel appearing for the State vehemently contended by inviting our attention to the portions of the judgment of the learned trial judge as also the relevant piece of evidence of Pws which weighed with the learned trial judge to find guilt established. Further, in support of his stand he contended that the decision arrived at to acquit the accused was unjustified and the High Court committed an error in not appreciating the evidence in their proper perspective. The learned counsel for the respondent while drawing inspiration from and adopting the reasoning of the High Court contended that the reasons assigned by the High Court in support of the order of acquittal are well-merited and do not suffer infirmities of the nature to call for any interference.
After considering the submissions of the counsel on either side, we find, the High Court has given cogent and convincing reason which are found to be well-merited on the materials placed on record by the prosecution itself to substantiate its conclusion to record an acquittal. The view expressed by the High Court about the nebulous and unreliable nature of the evidence let in by the prosecution seems to be well justified for more than one reason and, in our view, the conclusion of the High Court could not be said to suffer from any infirmity to call for our interference.
The appeal, therefore, fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
