Vikramjeet Singh Vikki v State (G.N.C.T. of Delhi)
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
Cr.A. No.1093 Of 2002
The Order of the court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The appellant herein namely Vikramjeet Singh Vikki was found guilty by the trial court that he had committed offence punishable under Section 452 IPC and Section 398 IPC. For the offence punishable under Section 452 IPC he was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years with fine of Rs.5, 000/- and in default of payment of fine to further undergo simple imprisonment for six months and for the offence punishable under section 398 IPC he was sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for seven years with fine of Rs.5, 000/- and in default of payment of fine to further undergo simple imprisonment for six months. The appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court of Delhi and the learned single Judge of the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence. Aggrieved by the same, he has preferred the present appeal.
2.  The allegation against the appellant was that on 25.4.89 at about 11 a.m. he entered the court-yard of the house of PW-1 Surjit Kaur and asked her whether her husband was present in the house. She replied that her husband had gone to his office. PW-1 was about to enter her house and then she found that the accused was still standing there and she asked why the appellant remains there. It is alleged that the accused then suddenly closed her mouth and pushed her towards the room. PW-1 raised an alarm and then accused took out a knife. By the time neighbours collected and raised noise, the accused ran out and some of the neighbours followed him and he was caught with the help of a traffic police constable. According to the prosecution two other accused were also present there and they ran away and could not be apprehended. Based on the statement of PW-1 a case was registered against these three accused and charges were framed against these persons for the offence punishable under Sections 452 and 398 IPC. The other two accused were acquitted by the trial judge.
3.  The decision of the trial court and the High Court are seriously challenged before us.
4.  The counsel for the appellant contended that the prosecution has failed to prove that the accused had committed the offence punishable either under Section 398 or Section 452 IPC. Apart from the evidence of PW-1 there is no evidence to prove the occurrence. It was contended by the appellant's counsel that the ingredients of Section 398 IPC are not made out as there is no evidence to show that the accused made an attempt to commit robbery. From the facts as disclosed by PW-1, it is not proved that the accused came to the house of PW-1 with an intention to commit any theft. It is also not proved that in order to commit theft or carrying away any property the accused used any force; therefore the ingredients of offence punishable under Section 398 IPC are not made out.
5.  The next question is whether the accused had committed the offence punishable under Section 452 IPC, namely, house trespass. As per the evidence of PW-1, the accused had not entered the house of PW-1. The evidence of PW-1 shows that he remained in the court-yard and tried to push PW-1 to the interior of the room and it is not the case that the accused entered her house. From the evidence of PW-1 it would only prove that the accused entered the court-yard and he used force in the sense that he tried to close her mouth with his hands and both of them were in the court-yard. The offence, if any, committed by the accused would come under Section 441 IPC namely criminal trespass.
6.  It is also proved that the accused used force against PW-1 by closing her mouth. This offence would come under Section 351 IPC. Thus the offences committed by the accused come under Section 441 and Section 351 IPC. They are minor offences and the maximum punishment for each of these offences is simple imprisonment for a period of three months and we are told that the accused had been in the custody since 10th of October, 2001.
7. Therefore, we do not propose and impose any sentence on him. The sentence already undergone is more than sufficient for the offences proved to have been committed by this appellant. The appeal is accordingly allowed. The appellant is directed to be released forthwith, if not required in any other case.
Appeal allowed.
