Ropar Improvement Trust v Amrit Lal
Supreme Court of India

24 January 2003
S.L.P. (C)No. 4492 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The District Forum, Ropar by order dated 1st September, 1998, decided the matter in favour of the respondent. That order was challenged by the appellant - Ropar Improvement Trust, by preferring appeal No. 1015 of 1998 before Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Punjab, Chandigarh. The said appeal was dismissed as withdrawn on 28th March, 2001 on the statement made on behalf of the appellant by its counsel that compromise had been effected between the parties and he wanted to withdraw the appeal. Thereafter, an application filed to recall that order was dismissed on 28th November, 2001 observing that the Commission has no power to review its order.
2.  The Revision Petition preferred by the Trust before the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission was dismissed by the impugned order dated 11th January, 2002, inter alia, observing that the appeal before the State Commission had been withdrawn by the counsel and if it was a fault of the counsel who made a statement, the appellant may proceed against him before the appropriate forum. According to the appellant, proceedings have been initiated against the counsel before the appropriate Bar Council. It is, however, not disputed by learned counsel appearing for the respondent that there was no compromise.
3. Be that as it may, without entering into the question whether there was or was not a fault of the counsel who made the statement which resulted in the dismissal of the appeal as withdrawn, we are of the view that ends of justice would be met if appeal No. 1015 of 1998 is heard on merits by State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Punjab, Chandigarh. Under these circumstances, we set aside the orders dated 28th March, 2001, 28th November, 2001 and the impugned order of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission dated 11th January, 2002 and restore the aforesaid appeal to the file of the State Commission. The State Commission is directed to dispose of the appeal within three months.
4.  There is a dispute between the parties whether the possession of alternate Plot No. 713 has been handed over by the appellant to the respondent. The respondent disputes that the possession of that plot has not been handed over to him. The respondent is, however, willing to take the possession of that plot. This dispute as to whether the possession has been delivered or not would also be gone into by the State Commission and appropriate directions passed to ensure that the possession if not already delivered will be delivered to the respondent without any further delay.
5. In case, Commission comes to the conclusion that, in fact, the possession of plot No.713 has not been delivered though so claimed by the Trust, the appeal of the Trust before the Commission would be dismissed on that short ground alone.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
