State Of Rajasthan v Resham Singh & Others
Supreme Court of India

21 January 2003
Cr.A. No.1641 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  State of Rajasthan is in appeal against the judgment of the Court of Judge, Designated Court for Rajasthan made in Sessions Case No.29 of 1990 wherein he acquitted the respondents herein from all charges framed against them under the provisions of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (TADA) and Arms Act, 1959.
2.  The case of the prosecution as against these respondents is that consequent to a prior conspiracy arrived by the accused and some others they tried to cross the Indo-Pak border on 29th August, 1990 with a view to collect illegal weapons for the purpose of being used in terrorist activities within the territory of India. It is stated that PW.3 on getting the said information along with PW.6 and some other police officers laid a trap and arrested theserespondents while they were attempting to cross the border and after investigation these respondents were charged for offences punishable under Section 3, 4, 5 of TADA and Section 25(1-A) of the Arms Act, 1959.
3. Learned Judge of the designated Court after considering the material on record came to the conclusion that in the absence of there being any independent witnesses, the foundation of the prosecution case was based on the alleged confessional statement made by two of the respondents herein. After considering the law laid down by this Court in regard to the acceptance of confessional statement of the accused and applying the same to the facts of this case the trial court came to the conclusion that the said confessional statement cannot be relied upon for basing the conviction because the same was contrary to the provisions of the Act, including the ground that the learned Magistrate who recorded the same did not give sufficient time to the accused persons to reflect on the question of making the confessional statement. Hence he rejected the confessional statement and there being no other evidence to support the prosecution case he dismissed the case against the respondents.
4.  In this appeal on behalf of the State it is argued that the court below was not justified in rejecting the confessional statement of the respondents. We have gone through the confessional statement and the evidence of PW.8, Magistrate who recorded the confessional statement and we are in agreement with the finding of the learned Judge of the designated Court that the confessional statement cannot be relied on for the purpose of basing a conviction and in the absence of any other independent or reliable evidence.
5. Therefore, we find no infirmity in the impugned judgment. For the reasons stated above, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
