Satish Chandra Dass & Co. v Pradeep Phosphate Ltd. and another
Supreme Court of India

12 March 2003
Transfer Petition (Civil) No. 326 of 1990
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
1.  By an order dated 11.09.1990, this Court appointed Mr. Justice A.N. Sen (Retired Judge of this Court) as sole Arbitrator to decide the dispute between the petitioners and respondents. After recording the necessary evidence and hearing counsel for the parties at length, by an award dated 10.03.2001, the Arbitrator rejected the claim of the contractor by holding that claimant had failed to establish any of the claims. The claimants have filed objections against the Award.
2.  Learned counsel appearing for the contractor vehemently submitted that the award passed by Arbitrator is non speaking award because the Arbitrator has not discussed each and every claim raised by the petitioner. He contended that there was a change of alignment of the road on account of which the contractor had to suffer additional cost. In our view it is difficult to arrive at a conclusion that the award passed by the Arbitrator calls for interference under Section 30 of the Arbitration Act, 1940. The Arbitrator has discussed the issue of change of alignment in detail. He has considered the oral evidence led by the contractor and has arrived at the conclusion that because of the change of alignment, the contractor has not suffered any loss.
3. The Arbitrator had arrived at conclusion that there was no evidence on record to establish damages suffered. He relied upon the fact that contractor himself had written various letters to the department for extension of time, for completion of the work. At the time of granting extension respondents never agreed to pay any extra amount. There is no evidence to indicate the quantum of work done and wastage as a result of change in the alignment and there is also no evidence to show the amount of expenses, if any, incurred on labour etc. None of the five witnesses examined by the contractor deposed about the extent of earth work done and wastage, if any, in consequence, of the change in the alignment and the amount of expenses, if any, incurred in consequence thereof. No documentary evidence has been produced in support of the case by the contractor.
4.  Even the books of accounts of the claimant, which might have thrown light on the question of expenses incurred and loss suffered, have not been produced by him. With regard to the other claim, the Arbitrator considered the aspect that even though at the time of accepting the tender, the rate was fixed at Rs. 32/- but, thereafter, the rate in the contract was further reduced to Rs. 23/- at the time of execution of contract and, therefore, it was difficult to accept the contractor's contention that the said deduction was due to any extra labour expenses.
5.  In our view, it cannot be said that the Award contains no reasons. There is no substance in the objection application filed by the contractor. In the result, the objection petition is dismissed. The award is made rule of the Court. There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dimissed.
