P. Sudharani @ Srirangamma v Nazarulla Khan
Supreme Court of India

18 July 2003
CIVIL APPEAL NO.5041 OF 2003 (Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.17250/2002)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Leave granted.
2. Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side.
3. The above appeal has been filed against the judgment of a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka dated 29.07.2002 in HRRP No.310 of 2002 whereunder while allowing the revision petition filed by the respondent herein, the appellant-landlady was directed to put the tenant in possession of the settled premises forthwith and not later than ten days from the date of the order in terms of the compromise entered into between parties and the order of eviction subject to such agreed constitution for reinductment of the respondent, after reconstruction, of the scheduled portion.
4. While ordering notice in the SLP, sufficient indication has been given that even at the SLP stage, the main matter itself will be disposed of. Even at the time of admission, the learned counsel for the appellant, apart from the challenge made to the order, of the High Court, directing reinduction of the tenant with which we were not that satisfied on merits, strongly relied upon the decision reported in 1998 (2) SCC 753 - Abbobaker and Anr. Vs. Mahalakshmi Trading Co., 1998 Indlaw SC 1958 to contend that the rent payable also should have been decided by the court ordering reinstatement as agreed to be paid by the parties instead of leaving the matter to the respondent-landlord to merely work out the remedies.
5. In our view, the High Court committed an error in omitting to determine the rent payable either on its own or atleast after calling for a finding from the Rent Controller in this regard in the very proceedings while ordering reinduction of the respondent-tenant, without leaving the matter in vacuum as to the rate of monthly rent to be paid by the respondent-tenant. In the decision noticed above, this Court in almost similar circumstances held that when the tenant has chosen to execute the compromise decree providing for redelivery of possession to the tenant after reconstruction, he is liable to pay also the rent as agreed to under the compromise decree in respect of the portion in question. It is useful to refer to the term of compromise i.e., cl. (7) which reads that the respondent-tenant has agreed to pay rents in respect of the new shop as per the prevailing market rates at the time of occupying the new shop to be mutually agreed by the petitioner and the respondent.
Therefore, there is a corresponding obligation upon the tenant to pay at the prevailing market rate, as agreed to, subject to which only the right of reinduction has been reserved and granted to the tenant. In the decision noticed supra, this Court has noticed the methods of such determination of the prevailing rate of rent and yet due to cooperation of the counsel on either side fixed the rent but, there is no constructive move or offer in this case from the respondent or his counsel. Hence, it becomes necessary to direct the High Court itself to fix the same.
Consequently, we modify the order of the High Court and direct the High Court to fix the monthly rent also in terms of the clause in the terms of compromise subject to which the rights of parties shall be determined and pass appropriate orders after hearing both the parties in this regard. If need be, the High Court shall be at liberty to call for a finding from the Rent Controller also to enable it to arrive at a decision as the reasonable market rent (not fair rent under the statute) to be paid by the tenant in respect of the portion ordered to be reinstated to him.
6. The appeal is partly allowed with direction, as above to the High Court to restore the proceedings to its file and comply with the direction as indicated in this order. No costs.
Appeal partly allowed
