Tapas Kumar Lahiri v Md. Mojahid Naukhez and others
Supreme Court of India

13 January 2003
C.A. No. ........ of 2003 (Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 1158 of 2002)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Proceedings for eviction of tenant and sub-tenant from the suit premises were initiated by the landlord, appellant herein. The Trial Court directed the tenant to deposit the arrears of rent. For failure to comply with the order to the Court, in exercise of the power conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 15 of Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1982, the Court directed the defence against ejectment of the tenant be struck off. The tenant chose to submit to the order and did not file any revision there against.
2. However, the sub-tenants filed a revision in the High Court. The High Court has set aside the order of the Trial Court striking out the defence of the tenant.
3.  It is submitted by the learned counsel for the landlord-appellant that it was the tenant defence against the eviction, which was struck off by the Trial Court and therefore, person aggrieved by the order of the Trial Court was the tenant, who should have preferred a revision if at all he wished to do so. The sub-tenants claim under the tenant and therefore, they would be bound by the order made against and suffered by the tenant. An order striking out the defence of the tenant could not have been interfered with and set aside by the High Court in a revision preferred by the sub-tenants.
4.  We have asked the learned counsel for the respondents how the impugned order of the High Court is sustainable in law. Nothing has been brought to our notice which may support the order of the High Court, so far as this infirmity in the revision preferred by the sub-tenants is concerned.
5.  For this short reason, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order of the High Court dated 26.9.2000 is set aside.
6.  Vide order dated 26.9.2000, impugned herein, the High Court, while allowing the revision, had directed the Trial Court to dispose of the suit within a period of three months. More than two years have passed and we are told that the matter has not made any substantial or significant progress before the Trial Court and certainly the trial has not yet commenced.
7. The Registrar of the High Court shall look into the matter and if a case of non-compliance with the orders of the High Court by a subordinate court is made out, the same shall be brought to the notice of the Hon'ble the Chief Justice.No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
