Sugana Saraswathi and another v Government of Tamil Nadu and another
Supreme Court of India

22 January 2003
C.As. Nos. 5053-54 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The property belonging to the appellants comprising SFs Nos.213, 215 and 216 totalling 7.50 acres of land in Uppipalayam village of Coimbatore taluk, Coimbatore district was sought to be acquired by the Government for the purpose of a Housing Scheme and a notification under Section 4(1) was published on 26-6-1985. A declaration under Section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act was also notified.
2. The appellants herein filed a representation under Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act on 26-2-1996 praying that the land in question may be excluded from the acquisition. This Court, on 24-2-1997, passed an order directing the respondent State to file an affidavit regarding the factual position in regard to the formation of the Housing Scheme, for which the land in question was sought to be acquired. It was also directed that the Government should indicate how much of the land was sought to be acquired thereunder and what extent of the land would be utilised for the object mentioned in the notification.
3.  The State was also directed to indicate whether it proposes to go ahead with the Housing Scheme having regard to the master plan for the region. In response to this, an affidavit was filed. After the affidavit was filed, the matter was again taken up for hearing on 21-4-2001. The learned counsel who appeared for the State Government submitted that a representation under Section 48 filed by the appellants is pending and the State Government shall be given 3 months' time to decide the representation submitted by the appellant.
4. In spite of this order, we are told that the State Government has not yet considered the said representation. A similar direction was also passed on 27-2-2002. We are told that in spite of these directions, the Government has not taken any decision on their representation.
5.  The counsel for the appellants further contends that the property which belongs to these appellants is in Block 4 of Phase 4, and it is also submitted that the property in question is at the extreme end and other buildings have come up in the nearby area and the Scheme as such is not capable of being implemented, so far as the petitioner's property is concerned. The appellants' counsel also relies on the affidavit filed by the State Government. We do not express anything regarding the contentions advanced by the petitioners.
6.  Having regard to this fact, the State Government is directed to consider the representation made under Section 48 by the appellants which shall be disposed of within a period of three months from this date. The appellants and the sponsoring authority viz. Housing and Urban Development Department be afforded reasonable opportunity of hearing in the matter. If any decision is not taken within the stipulated time, this Court may assume that the lands in question are no longer required for the purposes for which they are sought to be acquired.
Place the matter after three months.
Order accordingly.
