State of Madhya Pradesh v Shankar Singh
Supreme Court of India

27 November 2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The State of Madhya Pradesh has filed this appeal by way of Special Leave challenging the revisional order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. The respondent Shankar Singh was convicted by the Magistrate for the offence under section 304-A IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years. He preferred an appeal before the Sessions Court, Dewas. By judgment dated 8.6.1989 he confirmed the conviction and sentence. The respondent thereafter preferred a revision challenging the conviction and sentence. The learned Single Judge of the High Court held that there was no negligence on the part of the respondent and assumed that the deceased boy must have dashed across the road and the accident must have taken place at the middle of the road and that the fact that the truck had stopped at a distance of 11 steps proved that there was no negligence on the part of the respondent. This order is challenged before us.
2.  We heard the learned counsel for the appellant-State and the counsel for the respondent. The counsel for the appellant points out that the evidence on record clearly establishes that deceased boy, who was aged 4 years at the time of incident, had gone to ease himself by the side of the road and when he got up and standing there the truck hit him and he was run over by the truck and dragged to distance of 5 feet. Four witnesses including the father of the deceased boy gave evidence that the truck was coming at a fairly high speed and hit the boy who was standing on the side of the road. The evidence shows that the left front side of the truck hit the boy and there is nothing on record to show that the deceased boy was running across the road.
Two Courts have given a finding of fact after appreciating the evidence of the eye witnesses. The learned Single Judge should not have reversed those findings merely on the assumption that the incident might have happened in some other manner. The appreciation of the evidence by two courts was neither perverse nor unreasonable. There was no material to disagree with that finding of fact. In that view of the matter, the learned Single Judge erred in coming to the conclusion that there was no negligence on the part of the respondent herein.Therefore, the revisional order is not legally sustainable and is set aside.
3.  We are told that after the confirmation of the conviction and sentence by the Sessions Court, the respondent had undergone imprisonment merely for a period of three months. The incident happened on 11.10.1980 and at this distance of time, we do not think that the respondent shall again be sent for custodial sentence. However, to meet the ends of justice, we direct that the fine for a sum of Rs.10, 000/- shall be paid by the respondent. The fine shall be paid within a period of two months and in default of the payment of fine, he shall undergo imprisonment for a period of three months and if the fine is recovered from the respondent, the same shall be paid to PW-1 Hari Prasad the father of the deceased child. The fine shall be deposited before the trial Court.
The appeal is disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
