Pawan Kumar Dutt And Anr. v Shakuntala Devi And Ors.
Supreme Court of India

13 August 2003
CIVIL APPEAL NO.1784/1997
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The plaintiffs are in appeal before us. They filed a suit for specific performance of an agreement in respect of a land measuring 4 bighas 2 biswas out of Khasra No.608. The Trial Court, in the light of the pleadings of the parties, raised several issues. Issue No. 7(A) dealt with as to whether the agreement, on which suit for specific performance was based, was vague, as is mentioned in paragraph 20 of the amended Written Statement. The Trial Court held that the suit for specific performance could not be decreed for want of certainty as to the description of the suit property. In that view, the suit was dismissed, although the finding on another issues recorded were in favour of the plaintiffs. The First Appeal filed by the plaintiffs was also dismissed affirming the findings of fact recorded by the Trial Court on issue No. 7(A).
2. The matter did not rest at that. The plaintiffs filed Second Appeal before the High Court. The High Court did not find any valid ground or good reason to take a different view on the concurrent findings of fact recorded by both the courts below. Hence this appeal.
3. The learned counsel for the appellants strongly contended that all the courts committed an error in dismissing the suit of the plaintiffs. According to him, from the suit agreement it is clear that the total area of land of in Khasra No. 608 is 12 bighas 1 biswas out of which, the defendants agreed to sell only 4 bighas and 2 biswas. The property in question also included a house built therein. The learned counsel urged that it was possible to grant a decree for specific performance, having regard to the description given in the agreement itself that the remaining area was available with the defendants. All the courts found it difficult to identify the suit property out of the total extent in the absence of boundaries or other specifications. In support of his submission, learned counsel cited few decisions.
4. In Kandamath Cine Enterprises (Pvt.) Ltd. vs. John Philipose [ AIR 1990 KERALA 198 1989 Indlaw KER 331 ] it is stated that throughout the law of contract there is respect for the sanctity of contract and the need to give effect to the reasonable expectation of honest man. It is important that law ought to uphold rather than destroy apparent contracts. Solemn contracts entered into between parties are not to be readily declared invalid for uncertainty or vagueness.
5. Looking to the facts of that case, as is clear from the description made in paragraph 8, the property was identifiable, which was marked as CXJK, on the basis of the material that was placed on record, including the report of the Commissioner. In the same judgment, in paragraph 7 it is stated that the plea that a particular contract is void for uncertainty u/s. 29 of the Contract Act is a question of law and if the terms of the contract are vague and uncertain, the contract itself would be void and unenforceable u/s. 29 of the Contract Act. On the facts found in the present case, the courts have concluded that the identity of the suit property was not established. In that, the terms of the agreement as regards the description of the property are uncertain and vague.
6. In the case of Kartar Singh vs. Harjinder Singh & Ors. [(1990) 3 SCC 517 1990 Indlaw SC 720] it is held that where a joint property is sold by one co-sharer, such an agreement could be enforced to the extent of the share of the person who executed the document. It is ruled that if there is a difficulty in demarcating the share, the decree to the extent of his share can be granted and the property can be carved out by filing a suit for partition. But the position in the present case is different; that a portion out of the total larger extent was agreed to be sold, but, without specification of the area agreed to be sold. It is clear from the suit agreement that no boundaries of the suit property which was sold are specified in the agreement. It is not clear from what point the area is to be measured. It is also not clear that these 4 bighas 2 biswas is a portion of the land situated in the middle of the total land or in one portion or at the extreme end or at a particular place, in other words, there is no clear identity of the property agreed to be sold. The Courts are not expected to pass a decree which is not capable of enforcement in the courts of law. If the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants is to be accepted and if a decree is to be granted for specific performance, without identification of the suit property, it will not be possible to enforce such a decree.
7. This Court, in Nahar Singh vs. Harnak Singh & Ors. [(1996) 6 SCC 699 1996 Indlaw SC 1807 ], in paragraph 5, has also taken a view that if the property itself cannot be identified, the relief of specific performance cannot be granted. In these circumstances, and looking to the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the courts below, we do not find any merit in this appeal. The appeal is dismissed. No costs.
8. Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned counsel for the appellants started his arguments at 10.55 a.m. and concluded at 12.05 p.m. Thereafter, Learned counsel for the respondents made his submissions in reply for few minutes. The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed order. No costs.
Appeal dismissed
