Jugeshwar Singh v Mahender Singh and Others
Supreme Court of India

4 December 2003
Cr.A. No.437 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal has been filed by the informant, PW-5 questioning the correctness of judgment of acquittal rendered by a Division Bench of the Patna High Court. The respondents, 11 in number, faced trial for allegedly committing murder of Singheshwar Singh (hereinafter referred to as `the deceased'). Each of the accused persons stood charged for commission of offences punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 and Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as `the IPC). Seven witnesses were examined to further the prosecution version. PWs. 1, 2, 3 and 5 were stated to be eye-witnesses to the occurrence. PW-6 is the Doctor who conducted the post mortem and PW-7 was the Investigating Officer. Placing reliance on the evidence of PWs. 1, 2, 3 and 5, the Trial Court recorded conviction for offences punishable under Section 302 so far as accused-respondent Mahendra Singh is concerned, while the others were convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 and Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC. Each was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life on each count.
2. In appeal, the High Court reversed the judgment of conviction and held the accused persons to be innocent. Primarily, three factors weighed with the High Court for coming to such conclusion.
(1) The so called eye-witnesses made a departure from the version given in their statements recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short, `the Cr.P.C.);
(2) the Doctor's evidence ruled out the manner of gun shot as was stated by the witnesses at the first instance in their fardbeyan and;
(3) during investigation and they tried to improve the evidence to bring it in line with the medical evidence. It was noted that in the FIR and the statements made during investigation, the specific statement was to the effect that when accused-respondent No.1 Mahendra Singh fired the shot, it hit the deceased on the abdomen and A-3 fired a gun-shot, which hit on the temporal region of the deceased. The Doctor's evidence, on the contrary, shows that the entry point of the gun shot was from the back and the exit point was near the abdomen.
3. Additionally, it was noticed that there was no injury on the head. Further factors like the rigor mortis on the lower part of the body was also considered to be of consequence.
4.  In support of the appeal, Mr. S.B. Sanyal, learned senior counsel submitted that the approach of the High Court is erroneous. It cannot be said that there was any improvement or attempt to bring the ocular evidence in line with the medical evidence. Atleast some of the witnesses had stated from the beginning that the gun shot was on the back and the exit point was near the abdomen.
5.  Learned counsel appearing for the accused-respondent supported the judgment.
6.  We find that the High Court has analysed the evidence and considered the version as held out in the FIR and the statements during investigation and as deposed in Court. It was noticed that there was deliberate attempt by the witnesses to bring the ocular testimony in conformity with the medical evidence. With reference to the statements made before the investigating officer, during investigation it was found that these improvements rendered the prosecution version improbable and the evidence of so called eye-witnesses suspect.
Though ocular version is to have primacy vis-a-vis medical evidence, when the latter totally improbablises the former, adverse inference can be drawn. The view taken by the High Court cannot be said to be perverse warranting interference, more particularly, when the judgment of the High Court is one of acquittal which is assailed in this appeal.
7.  We find no merit in this appeal which is, accordingly, dismissed. The bail bonds of the accused-respondents be discharged. However, if they are in custody in connection with any other offence, our non-interference in the appeal shall not be a factor to entitle them for a release.
Appeal dismissed.
