Collector of Central Excise, Bolpur v Steel Authority of India Limited
Supreme Court of India

24 April 2003
C.A. No. 6615 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Being aggrieved and dissatisfied by the judgment and order dated 4th May 2000 passed by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as "the Tribunal") in Appeal No. E/R-171/99, the Department has preferred this appeal.
2.  The issue involved before the Tribunal was - whether the assessee was entitled to the benefit of the Notification No. 217/86-C.E. for burnt Dolamite used in steel making furnace for fettling banks and bottoms or not?
3. The Tribunal allowed the said appeal by relying upon its previous decisions as well as the decision rendered by the Calcutta High Court in Singh Alloys & Steel Ltd. v. Asstt. Collector of Central Excise reported in 1993 Indlaw CAL 180.
4.  It has been pointed out that manufacturing steel, acidic oxides are formed. This acid is required to be neutralized;  otherwise it affects the banks and bottoms of the furnace. For neutralizing the acid oxides which are formed, burnt Dolamite is used.This burnt Dolamite is used within the factory of production in relation to the manufacture of final product namely, steel.  Therefore, the Tribunal rightly arrived at the conclusion that the respondent is entitled to get the benefit of exemption Notification No. 217/86(C).
5.  It is true that acidic oxide, if not neutralized would affect the banks and bottoms of the furnace, but that would not mean that burnt Dolamite is used only for protecting the damage to the furnace. It is required to be used so as to neutralise the acid oxides formed while manufacturing steel and, therefore, burnt .Dolamite is used in relation to manufacturing process for which the respondent is entitled to have benefit of exemption notification.
6. Hence, the judgment and order passed by the Tribunal cannot be said to be in any way illegal or erroneous.
7.  In the result, the appeal is dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
