Agra Development Authority v Rangji Sahkari Avas Samiti Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

12 November 2003
C.A. No. 14151 Of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The Samiti, respondent No. 1 herein, developed a colony. A demand on account of development fee was raised by the appellant-Agra Development Authority which was disputed by the respondent No. 1 by filing the writ petition before the High Court. It appears that in CMWP NO. 34440/1994 Malti Kaul Smt. and Anr. Vs. Agra Development Authority and Ors., decided on 21st April, 1995 the High Court had taken the view that under the Act governing the Authority, the latter did not have any power to levy and demand development fee and hence the same was violative of Article 265 of the Constitution of India.
2. In rendering the judgment impugned herein, the High Court followed its own earlier judgment in Malti Kaul's case (supra) and directed the demand to be quashed.
3.  It is pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant-Authority that the decision in Malti Kaul's case (supra) followed in the impugned judgment was appealed against to this Court and has been reversed by this Court in the State of U.P. and Ors. VS. Malti Kaul Smt. and Anr. 1996 Indlaw SC 2319 and, therefore, the very foundation of the impugned judgment of the High Court vanishes. We find merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant-Authority.
4.  The opening para of the impugned judgment of the High Court shows that the writ petition was filed in the High Court soon on demand being raised and the demand was quashed on only one plea found in favour of the respondent No. 1 resulting in quashing of the demand. No other plea/contention was raised or considered. Be that as it may, so far as the impugned judgment is concerned, the same cannot be sustained in view of the decision of this Court in the case of Malti Kaul reversing the judgment of the High Court.
5.  The appeal is allowed, the impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside. If there be any dispute other than the one disposed of by the decision in Malti Kaul's case by this Court then the respondent No. 1 shall be at liberty to raise the same before the appellant-Authority and then pursue the remedy as may be available to it under the law.
Appeal allowed.
