State of Rajasthan v Kanhiya Lal and Another
Supreme Court of India

3 December 2003
Cr.A. No.1926/1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The respondents were convicted by the Trial Court under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, `IPC') and each one of them was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.300/- each, in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of three months. Respondent No.2 was also convicted under Section 323 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year.
2. The sentences, however, were directed to run concurrently. On appeal being preferred before the High Court of Rajasthan, the conviction of the respondents under Section 302 read with Section 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 has been set aside. So far respondent No.1, Kanhaiya Lal, is concerned, he has been convicted under Section 325 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and under Section 323 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and respondent No.2, Ganesh Narain, has been convicted under Section 325 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and also under Section 323 Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for the period already undergone and to pay a fine of Rs.2, 500/- each, in default of payment of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of one year.
3.  The prosecution case in short is that the accused persons and members of prosecution party were residents of village Anandrampura and the irrigation on their fields was done from a diesel engine. The diesel engine was installed on a well which was called Nai Kothi. The parties used to irrigate their respective fields turn by turn. The accused persons used to irrigate their fields for four days and then the informer for two days. It was on 31.1.1980 at 8.00 P.M. that the accused Kanhaiya removed the belt (patha) and did not allow the prosecution party to irrigate inspite of the fact that it was their turn to irrigate. When the turn of accused Kanhaiya came and he began to operate the engine, prosecution party asked him not to operate the engine.
4. Upon this, accused Kanhaiya abused them and caused injuries with lathi to Ramnarain. In the meantime his brother Ramgopal also came there and he was also injured. Radha Mohan and Ganesh also took part in the beating. Radheshyam separated them. As the condition of Ramnarain became precarious therefore he was removed from the field to the house and a report was lodged at the Police Station and subsequently Ramnarain died.
5.  The police, after investion, submitted charge-sheet, on receipt whereof, both the respondents were committed to the Court of Sessions. During the course of trial, the prosecution adduced oral and documentary evidence. The accused examined two witnesses. Upon conclusion of trial, the Trial Court convicted the accused-respondents as stated above and the High Court modified their conviction as stated above. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
6.  From a bare perusal of the High Court judgment, it would appear that the it has recorded a finding that the prosecution had succeeded in proving its case beyond reasonable doubt. The only question to be considered by this Court is whether the High Court was justified in converting the conviction of the respondent from Sections 302/34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 to Section 325 Indian Penal Code, 1860.
7. While doing so, the High Court did not take into consideration evidence of the doctor who gave first-aid to the victim and subsequently, held post-mortem examination of dead body of the deceased. Dr. B.B. Goswami, PW 20 stated in his evidence that during post-mortem of, he found following external and internal injuries:
External injuries:
1) Two parellel bruise 12 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. with a gap of 1 c.m. placed obliquely. On the posterior lateral aspect of right thigh in middle one third part.
2) Two parellel bruise placed obliquely on the posterior lateral aspect of right thigh 5 c.m. below injury No.1 size 10 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. with a gap of one c.m.
3) Two parellel bruise 8 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. with a one c.m. gap on the anterior aspect of right thigh at middle one third.
4) Two parellel bruise 4 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. with a one c.m. gap on the anterior aspect of middle of left thigh with deformity of thigh. On dissection there was fracture of left femur bone in middle. There was also haematoma around the fracture.
5) Contusion on the anterior aspect of middle of the left leg.
6) Lacerated wound 1/2 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. muscledeep on the anterior aspect of right leg upper one third part.
7) Swelling 5 c.m. x 3 c.m. over right temporal region.
8) Abrasion 2 c.m. x 1/2 c.m. over left frontal region.
9) There was swelling 5 c.m. x 3 c.m. over posterior aspect of right forearm lower half portion. On dissection there was fracture of right ulna bone in lower one third part with haematoma.
10) Contusion 5 c.m. x 3 c.m. over left thigh joint. On dissection there was fracture of neck of left femur with haemotoma.
11) Defused swelling over the left knee joint. On dissection there was fracture of patella bone with haematoma.
The all above injuries were ante-mortem in nature. Internal Injuries.
Scaple as mentioned with haematoma.
8. Membrances congested. Brain contused over right temporal region. There was fracture of body of the sternum in middle and fracture of third to six ribs and ten to eleven ribs anteriorly on the left side. There was haemothorax on left side. The left side lung was lacerated 3 c.m. x 3 c.m. x 1 c.m. in lower portion laterally. The liver was contused at superior lateral surface 3 c.m. x 3 c.m. The left kidney was contused with haemotoma over the capsule.
9.  In the opinion of the doctor, the cause of death was shock and haemorrhage which was the result of cumulative effect of all the injuries including the head injury. The doctor has categorically stated in his examination-in-chief itself that injuries were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
Thus the medical evidence clearly shows that the injuries were sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature and from the nature of injuries it would appear that the accused persons intended to cause death. This being the position, in our view, a clear case under Section 302 Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with Section 34 was made out and Trial Court was quite justified in convicting the respondents thereunder.
10.  For foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed, the order recorded by the High Court is set aside and the order of conviction under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 passed by the Trial Court is restored. The bail bonds of the respondents are cancelled and they are directed to be taken into custody forthwith for undergoing the remaining period of sentence.
Appeal allowed.
