Bharat Coking Coal Limited v Ram Narain Ojha
Supreme Court of India

23 January 2003
C.A. No. 7428 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent herein claimed that he was appointed as Supervisor in Lodna and Baghdigi Collieries, which was initially owned and managed by the Colliery owners and in lieu thereof he was being paid Sardari Commission. It is not disputed that on 17.10.1971,  Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 came into force and by virtue of the said Act, the management of the aforesaid Collieries were taken over by the Central Government and a custodian as appointed to look after the affairs of the aforesaid Collieries.
2. Subsequently, on 1st May, 1972 Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') came into force by virtue of which the earlier Act was repeated. As a result of enforcement of the Act, the right, title and interest of the owners in relation to the Coal Coking Mines specified in the Schedule, stood transferred to and vested absolutely in the Central Government free from all encumbrances and the aforesaid Collieries after vesting in the Central Government, vested in the Bharat Coking Coal Limited.
3.  After the aforesaid Act came into force, the realisation of the Sardari Commission was stopped, as the appellant Company itself appointed its employees for supervision and control of loading of coals. Subsequently, the respondent herein filed a suit in the Court of the Additional Sub-Judge, Dhanbad being suit No. 169/75 (4/82) for recovery of Rs. 75,000/-, the amount of part-payment with-held from 1.5.72 to December, 1997 and the entire amount for a period from 1.1.75 to 30.5.75. The appellant who was arrayed as defendant, filed a written statement wherein it was denied that appellant worked after coming into force of the Act.
4.  The trial court dismissed the suit. However, the learned Single Judge of the High Court, on appeal by the respondent, allowed the appeal and the suit was decreed. The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High Court. It is against the said judgment; the appellant is in appeal before us.
5.  After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find that the judgment under challenge is not sustainable in law. The respondent in his evidence before the trial court admitted that he never worked as Supervisor in the Collieries after coming into force of the Act. In that view of the matter, he was not entitled to any remuneration or commission as alleged by him.
Further if the respondent claims that he was an employee of the private Coal Mine owners, his services stood terminated when the Notification dated 1.10.72 was issued. If the appellant's claim is that he was entitled to the commission under a contract, the said contract also came to an end after the enforcement of the Act. In none of the cases, the respondent was entitled to any supervisory charges and, therefore, the suit ought not to have decreed. In that view of the matter, we set aside the judgment under challenge and restore the decree of the trial court.
6.  The appeal is allowed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
