State of Andhra Pradesh v H.N. Manjunatha Swamy
Supreme Court of India

13 November 2003
Cr.A. No.262 Of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is an appeal questioning the correctness of judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh. The respondent-accused was charged with committing murder of his wife - Kalpana (hereinafter referred to as the deceased).
2.  The prosecution case in nutshell is that the accused and the deceased, though happily married, did not got the requisite love and affection from their family members who were opposed to their marriage on the ground that both belonged to different castes. On the date of occurrence, it was claimed that they stayed at a lodge belonging to PW-1. Finding conduct of the accused to be suspicious, PWs. 2 and 3, who were working in the lodge, compelled the accused to open the room occupied by him and the deceased. They found that the deceased was lying dead on the cot. Information was given to police. Investigation was undertaken and on completion thereof, charge-sheet was placed alleging commission of offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short `the IPC'). The accused pleaded innocence. Considering the fact that the case rested on circumstantial evidence, the Trial Court highlighted the circumstances which, according to it, constituted the chain of circumstances to fix responsibility on the accused. They were as follows:-
"1. The accused married the deceased at Bangalore about one year prior to the occurrence.
2. The accused and the deceased left Bangalore, reached Mantralayam and visited Mahalakshmi Lodge situate at Mantralayam and run by PW-1 on the morning of 11.10.1988.
3. PW-1 allotted to the accused and the deceased room No.12 in the lodge for their occupation and a sum of Rs.30/- by way of advance was paid and necessary entries were made by the accused in his own hand in Ex.P-1, register of occupants maintained in the lodge.
4. After occupying the room, the accused was often coming out of the room alone after locking the room.
5. At about 11 AM., Pws. 2 and 3 heard cries from room No.12.
6. At about 3 PM., when PW.1 returned to the lodge from his native village, PWs. 2 and 3 reported to him that they had entertained suspicion against the accused's conduct and movements.
7. Shortly thereafter, PW.1 noticed the accused at the stair-case in a disturbed condition and when PW.1 questioned the accused about his conduct reported to him, the accused replied to him in Kannada language. As PW.1 was not satisfied with the reply, he took the accused to room No.12, got the room opened by the accused, entered the room along with PWs.2 and 3 and noticed the deceased Kalpana lying dead on a cot laying in the room."
3.  The accused was found guilty, as noticed, and was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life. He preferred an appeal before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh and pleaded that the evidence does not show his complicity in the offence and the Trial Court has acted on surmises and conjunctures to hold him guilty. The High Court noticed that several aspects were not noticed. Identification of the accused as the occupant of the room where he was allegedly staying with the deceased was not established inasmuch as P.Ws. 1, 2 and 3 did not identify him to be the person who was occupying the room. Additionally, the signature purported to have been put by him on the Register for the purpose of occupying the room was not tested to be in the handwriting of the accused. The victim was also not identified to be Kalpana. The High Court noticed that the dead body was buried before her father, PW-4 could arrive. Even the photograph of the dead body was not brought on record which would have facilitated identification. In view of these serious deficiencies noted, the High Court found that this was not a case where the prosecution has proved the accusations against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
4.  Learned counsel for the appellant-State submitted that the Trial Court had found the circumstances to be sufficient and the High Court should not have disturbed the findings which were well reasoned.
5.  Learned counsel for the respondent-accused supported the order of the High Court.
"As the case rests on circumstantial evidence, it was incumbent upon the prosecution to show by a chain of circumstances that it was none other than the accused who was responsible for the crime. This chain has to be complete without any missing link. In the case at hand, the evidence, as noted by the High Court, was clearly deficient to establish guilt of the accused. We do not find anything infirm in the conclusions arrived at by the High Court to warrant interference."
6.  The appeal fails and is dismissed. The bail bonds of the accused-respondent shall be discharged.
Appeal dismissed.
