U.O.I. v Charan Singh and others
Supreme Court of India

21 January 2003
C.A. No. 16822 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is an appeal preferred by the Union of India. The first respondent herein is Charan Singh and the second respondent is one Amarjit Singh. Land measuring 24 Kanals situated in Village Mayyar of District Hissar comprising under Khasra No. 22/19 (8-0), 20(8-0), 21(8-0) was acquired by the Government for public purpose. So also an extent of 20 kanals situated in the same village and district belonging to Amarjit Singh was acquired under the same Notification. The Land Acquisition Officer fixed the land value at Rs. 30,000/- per acre.
2.  These respondents did not file any application under section 18 seeking reference under section 30 of the Land Acquisition Act for enhancement of compensation. Some of the neighbouring land owners, whose property was acquired under the same Notification, filed reference application and the land value was enhanced by the Additional District Judge, Hissar in respect of category A to Rs.1,00,000/- and for category B to Rs. 50,000/- per acre.
3. Subsequent to this, respondents filed application under section 28(A) of Land Acquisition Act seeking enhancement of compensation based on the enhanced land value given to one Dinesh Kumar, Chandari and Chander Bhan. Similarly, respondent No.2 also filed application under section 28(A) seeking redetermination of compensation based on the awards passed by the Additional District Judge infavour of Dinesh Kumar, Chandari and Chander Bhan. The application filed by these respondents under section 28(A) were allowed and the Land Acquisition Officer redetermined the land value payable to these respondents at Rs. 50,000/- per acre based on the award passed in favour of Dinesh Kumar, Chandari and Chander Bhan.
4.  It seems that though there was redetermination of compensation in favour of these respondents, the amounts payable to them were not paid by the Government and these respondents filed a Writ petition for enforcement of the order passed in their favour and also for releasing payment. The State Government filed objections and ultimately the Division Bench passed the following order:
"Learned counsel for the parties agree that compensation enhanced by the District Judge shall be paid to the petitioner for refund of the same in case appeal is allowed by the Supreme Court against the enhanced compensation. The amount shall be paid within three months from the date of furnishing security. The petition stands disposed of."
5.  We are told that subsequent to the passing of the award by the Additional District Judge, the matter was taken up in appeal by the claimants Dinesh Kumar, Chandari and Chander Bhan and the High Court fixed the land value at Rs. 1,04,849/- in respect of category A land Rs. 52,350/- in respect of category B land.
6.  Aggrieved by the same, Union of India filed appeal by way of Special Leave Petition before this Court and ultimately this Court in Union of India and others vs. Mangatu Ram and others 1997 Indlaw SC 1168, fixed the land value by categorising the entire land acquired into three categories. The land which was within 500 yards from the main bye-pass road was included in category A and land value was fixed at Rs. 1,00,000/- per acre and for the rest of the land in category A, land value was fixed at Rs. 60,000/-, and for the land in category B the land value was fixed at Rs. 30,000/-.
7.  Mr. Mukul Rohtagi, the learned ASG submitted that in view of the fixation of the land value by this Court, the respondents 1 and 2 are entitled to get only the land value based on that fixation and the redetermination made under section 28(A) of the Land Acquisition Act by the Land Acquisition Officer is to be revised accordingly.
8.  The counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contended that the redetermination order passed under section 28(A) of the Land Acquisition Act was never challenged by the Union of India and therefore Union of India is not justified in taking the stand that respondents are not entitled to the amount awarded by such order. But in the impugned order, it is specifically stated by the Division Bench of the High Court that the petitioners therein, who are respondents 1 and 2 herein, would be entitled to get only based on the amount ultimately awarded by the Supreme Court. This order has not been challenged by the respondents 1 and 2 herein.
9.  Therefore, we hold that the respondents 1 and 2 are entitled to get the amount under section 28(A) only to the extent fixed by this Court.
10. In view of the decision of this Court, the Collector, Hissar has to re-examine the whole issue. The Collector has to decide in which category the lands, belonging to these two respondents are to be included and based on the decision of this Court, to what extent these respondents are entitled to compensation under section 28(A) of the Act. For this limited purpose, the matter is remitted to the District Collector, Hissar. The Collector shall take a decision in the matter within two months from the receipt of the order, and on such determination as to the amount payable to these respondents, the Union of India shall pay the same to the respondents within one month thereafter.
The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.
