Krishna Chaubey v State of Uttar Pradesh and another
Supreme Court of India

11 December 2003
C.A. No. 3598 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The order made by the High Court in the writ petition is under challenge in this appeal. The controversy relates to certain lands in order to reckon whether they are irrigated or not for the purpose of determining the ceiling area under the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 ("the Act" for short). The prescribed authority took the view that the lands in question being covered by a canal, they were irrigated. In appeal filed by the present appellant, the Appellate Authority, on a detailed examination of the material placed before it and having due regard to the relevant provisions of the aforementioned Act, could not sustain the order passed by the prescribed authority.
2. In that view, it set aside the order taking note of the factual position that the lands in question being at the tail end, there was acute shortage of water and that it was not shown that two crops were grown in those lands. The State was not happy with the order passed by the Appellate Authority and as such a writ petition was filed by the State challenging the order of the Appellate Authority. The High Court, by the impugned order, allowed the writ petition setting aside the order of the Appellate Authority and restoring the order of the prescribed authority. Hence, this appeal.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant pointing out to the provisions contained under Section 4-A of the Act, submitted that the High Court did not keep in view the mandatory requirements of Section 4-A of the Act before arriving at a conclusion whether the lands should be considered as irrigated or not. The learned counsel also contended that the High Court did not dispel the reasons recorded by the first appellate court.
4.  The learned counsel representing the respondents fairly submitted that the mandatory requirements in determining whether the lands were irrigated or not, were not kept in view in disposing of the writ petition. He further submitted that the writ petition can be remitted to the High Court for fresh consideration. At this stage, the learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that in spite of several opportunities given to the respondents, they failed to produce khasra records for the relevant period and this being the position, there is no need to remand the case to the High Court.
5.  Having considered the respective submissions, we find it difficult to sustain the impugned order. The Appellate Authority has passed a detailed order, looking to both the factual and legal position. Perusal of the impugned order shows that the reasons recorded by the Appellate Authority to reverse the order of the prescribed authority are not shown to be wrong or perverse. Added to this, the controversy was not scrutinised and resolved looking to the requirements of Section 4-A of the Act. The High Court should have certainly kept in view provisions of Section 4-A of the Act in order to arrive at a conclusion whether the lands in question were irrigated or not.
6. Since we are proposing to remand the writ petition to the High Court, we do not think it appropriate to express anything further on the merits of the respective contentions. Leaving all the contentions of the parties to be urged before the High Court, we set aside the impugned order and remit the writ petition to the High Court for fresh disposal on merits in accordance with law.
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
