Vidyawanti v State of Haryana and Others
Supreme Court of India

31 October 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.19026/2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The above appeal by special leave has been filed against the judgment of a learned Single Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court dated 16.5.2002 whereunder the appeal came to be rejected agreeing with the view taken by the courts below that the appellant was not able to substantiate the claim for pensionary benefits under any rules or regulations and that in the absence of any such rules being brought to the notice the claim was rightly rejected, by the courts below.
Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side.
2.  The learned counsel for the appellant represents that there were relevant rules and this came to light when in another litigation involving the same parties in RSA No.1859 of 1998 the question of the rules surfaced to light and therefore the matter has to be considered not only in the light of such rules but also the decisions of the High Court reported in Risal Singh and others vs. State of Haryana and others  and Rati Ram vs. State of Haryana and another .
3.  Learned counsel for the respondents contended that those rules will have no application to the case of the appellant in hand and there had been a repeal. In the context of serious controversies so raised, instead of ourselves undertaking an exercise to adjudicate on such disputed claims as to the existence or otherwise of the rules, the relevance and applicability of those rules and the earlier decisions of the High Court sought to be pressed into service, we consider it appropriate to set aside the order of the High Court and remand the proceedings to the High Court to restore RSA No.2054 of 2001 to its original file and after giving an opportunity to both sides to bring to the notice of the court the relevant rules and case law on the subject, decide afresh the claim of the parties on either side, objectively.
4. We consider this method of disposal to be most appropriate one in the context of the observations contained in the judgment of the High Court that no rules have been brought to its notice and the rules and the very decisions of the High Court now sought to be relied upon, so as to enable a fresh look to be given to the matter in the light of any such rules and their applicability or otherwise to the claim of the appellant. We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the respective contentions of the parties and that the High Court shall be at liberty to deal with the matter and arrive at its own conclusion, as may be warranted in law.
5.  The High Court is requested to ensure the disposal of the appeal as expeditiously as possible, preferably not later than a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. The appeal stands allowed and disposed of on the above terms with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
