Bairagi Moharana v Seetal Automobiles and others
Supreme Court of India

14 February 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 8382 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard both sides.
1.  The appellant herein had filed a Suit against State before the Civil Judge, Senior Division, Bhubaneswar for declaration of his title in respect of area of 0.725 dec. The suit was decreed ex-parte. Respondent No.1 thereafter filed a Writ Petition before the High Court alleging that the appellant herein obtained ex-parte decree and officials of the Government are not taking steps to set aside the ex-parte decree.
2. The Division Bench of the High Court of Orissa heard the parties and directed that the ex-parte decree passed by the Civil Judge, Senior Division, shall stand cancelled and the suit shall be restored to file. It was also directed that the suit be transferred from the Civil Judge, Senior Division, Bhubaneswar to Civil Judge, Senior Division, Cuttack. Aggrieved by the same, the present appeal by special leave has been filed.
3.  The counsel for the appellant submitted that the decree was obtained under proper procedure and the ex-parte decree was not liable to be set aside, whereas the counsel for the respondent submitted that the decree obtained by the appellant is collusive decree and some of the officials of the State did not take any steps to set aside the decree in time. We are told that the officials of the Government has already filed an application under Order 9, Rule -13 of the Code of Civil Procedure for setting aside the ex-parte decree. During the pendency of that petition, the impugned order was passed by the High Court, on a Writ Petition filed by respondent No.1 herein.
4.  Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we set aside the judgment of the Division Bench and direct that the further proceedings in T.S. No. 117/1994 pending before the Civil Judge, Senior Division, Cuttack, be stayed and the learned Civil Judge is directed to consider the C.M.P. No. 197/2001 filed under Order 9, Rule -13 on merits after hearing both the parties in accordance with law.
5. The said petition shall be disposed of on merits untrammeled by the observations made by the High Court. In the event of ex-parte decree being set aside, the suit shall be disposed by the Court expeditiously. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
