Union of India and others v All Gujarat Federation of Tax Consultants and others
Supreme Court of India

19 September 2003
S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 6904-05 of 1998 with No. 6906 of 1998. TPs (C) Nos. 659 and 672-73 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned Attorney General and the counsel for the respondents.
The petitions are disposed of in the following terms:
Residential accommodation
Wherever accommodation of the category to which the member is entitled to or of one category lower is not available, the Government, through the Ministry of Urban Development and if necessary through the State Government, shall make every endeavour to requisition/take on lease a suitable three bedroom accommodation of 1500 sq ft.
Telephone facility at residence
One telephone connection with STD facility, with 650 free calls (bimonthly), as admissible under GOl instructions.
Telephone facility in office
One independent telephone connection with free call facilities, as admissible under GOI instructions.
Furniture at residence
One secretarial table, one rack and two chairs.
Newspapers
Two newspapers and one magazine, subject to a maximum pecuniary limit of Rs 200 per month.
Facility of library
Law books as approved for residence.
Car facility
Same facility to be provided as is available to members of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Chamber facilities
Office accommodation/chamber as per norms, preferably in excess of 125 sq ft per member. The chamber shall be fully furnished consisting of secretarial table, executive chairs, 2 bookshelves, 1 almirah, 1 rack, 5 visiting chairs, 1 easy chair, lunch table and chair, sofa-set with a centre table depending upon the size of the chamber and other essential items required for the day-to-day use of the members.
Books facility (in chambers)
All members shall be provided with one full set of Income Tax Reports & Income Tax Tribunal decisions and other essential books as approved by the Books Committee of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. As far as possible, the books shall be provided to each member but, depending upon the space constraints, may be provided in a common library.
AC facility
One AC per chamber, carpet of the requisite size and requisite number of curtains.
Secretarial assistance
One senior private secretary and one senior peon.
Other miscellaneous facilities
One computer for each member at the office without internet facility.
The above facilities shall be provided to the members within a period of three months from today and compliance thereof be reported to this Hon'ble Court after six months.
1.  It is clarified that this order shall not be treated as a precedent for other cases and has been passed in view of the special facts of these cases.
Petitions disposed of.
