Command Area Poultry Dev. Corpn. Ltd. v Shanker and others
Supreme Court of India

14 February 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 16276 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The applications for substitution and condonation of delay in filing therein are not contested. The delay in filing the application praying for bringing on record the L.Rs. of respondent nos. 2 and 4 is condoned. L.Rs. mentioned in the application are brought on record. They are represented by the learned counsel.
Leave granted.
2.  The Industrial Tribunal (II), U.P., Lucknow, by an award dated 24.5.1986 while setting aside the termination of the workmen, directed their reinstatement with full back wages. Their services had been terminated in July, 1982. They were appointed between 1980 and 1981. The award of the Tribunal was challenged by the appellants/Management in CMWP 949/1987. One of the contentions urged before the High Court was that the respondent workmen were not entitled to back wages.
3. It was submitted that they had not filed any proof of not being gainfully employed during the period after their termination. Dealing with that contention the High Court held that the matter can be gone into in execution of the award in proceedings under U.P. Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The judgment of the High Court is under challenge in this appeal. Notice limited to the question of back wages was issued to the respondents.
4.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The question of back wages cannot be left to be determined in execution proceedings. Learned counsel for the respondents submits that in fact the workmen had filed affidavits in the High Court about their not being gainfully employed. Having regard to fact that the workmen were employed in 1980-81 and their services were terminated in 1982 and more than two decades have elapsed since then, we do not think it would be expedient to remit the matter either to the labour court or to the High Court to consider the extent of back wages to be paid to them.
5. In our view, the ends of justice would be met if the appellants are directed to pay 50% of the back wages to the respondents. To this limited extent, we modify the order of the High Court and the award of the Industrial Tribunal stands modified. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
