Asian Sky Shop v L.K. Pandya
Supreme Court of India

7 March 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 20741 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The appellant carried on the business of advertising goods for teleshopping. The respondent claims that he had, pursuant to the advertisement given an order for various items of jewellery of the total value of Rs. 8,200/- with M/s C.M. Jewellers, the manufacturers of the jewellery in question. The goods were insured for Rs. 1,700/-. The jewellers sent the articles to the respondent. The respondent received the articles but found that there was no jewellery in it, except for some small items. The respondent filed a claim before the District Forum under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 claiming damages under various heads for Rs. 34,700/- together with interest thereon.
2.  The application of the respondent was allowed by the District Forum. The appellant was directed to pay an amount of Rs. 34,300/- alongwith interest at the rate of 18% per annum from 10th November, 1995 till a complete realisation of the amount.
3.  It is the appellant's case that the entire proceedings before the District Forum were completed without any notice to the appellant. The appellant preferred the appeal before the State Forum. By its order dated 24th October, 2000 the appeal was dismissed. The reason given by the State Forum was that the respondent was lured into purchasing the articles and that the appellant had acted for and on behalf of the jeweller in question.
4.  The National Forum dismissed the Revisional Application on 15th July, 2002. When the special leave petition was admitted, notice was issued to the respondent. The respondent has not chosen to appear to contest the case at any stage. The issue whether the advertisement can be said to be on behalf of the jewellers goods advertised or as the agent is the moot question.
5.  We do not wish to decide the question in the absence of the respondent and we leave the issue open. The decision of the National Forum on this ground alone is set aside.
6.  In the course of the proceedings before this Court, we had directed the appellant to make payment of Rs. 10,000/- to the respondent. The appellant has complied with this order. Since the payment has already been made pursuant to the orders of this Court we do not propose to recall the order and the appeal is disposed of without treating the said payment as damages on the basis of any contingency as found by the Forum under Consumer Protection Act.
Appeal disposed of.
