B. Madhava Bhat v Muralidhara Bhat and Others
Supreme Court of India

5 November 2003
C.A. Nos. 865-866 Of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant was the original plaintiff in the suit. He filed the suit for permanent injunction restraining the respondents from trespassing in the properties described in Schedule-A and also from dispossessing him in execution of the decree in O.S. No.38 of 1977 on the file of the Sub Court, Kasaragod. The trial court decreed the suit granting decree of permanent prohibitory injunction restraining the defendants from trespassing into the Schedule-A properties and from dispossessing the plaintiff in execution of the final decree in O.S. No.38 of 1977 until the executing court decides the independent title of the plaintiff over the suit properties. Both the parties were aggrieved by the decree passed by the trial court to the extent the decree hurt them. The First Appellate Court disposed of both the appeals by a common judgment by allowing the appeal filed by the respondents and dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant. Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court, the plaintiff filed the second appeal before the High Court. The High Court dismissed the second appeal finding that no substantial question of law arose for consideration between the parties.
2.  The learned Senior counsel for the appellant, before us, contended that the issue of tenancy arose for consideration, in the light of the pleadings in the suit; all the courts have missed the aspect of law, i.e., if a question arose for consideration as to the tenancy; it was required to be referred for decision to the Land Tribunal under Section 125(3) of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (for short, the `Act'). He also submitted that the trial court as well as the First Appellate Court have found the appellant to be in possession of the suit properties; the appellant cannot be dispossessed from the suit properties except in accordance with law.
3.  In opposition, the learned Senior counsel for the respondents supported the impugned judgment and added that the question of referring the tenancy issue to the Tribunal under Section 125(3) of the aforementioned Act was never raised by the appellant before any court earlier; he cannot be permitted to raise the same issue for the first time; even otherwise, according to the learned counsel, such a question does not arise.
4.  In the trial court, the issue No.1, as framed, was whether the plaintiff is in possession of the Plaint-A Schedule properties and that question was answered in the affirmative. The injunction was granted in favour of the plaintiff, subject to the condition that the plaintiff shall not be dispossessed until his title is independently decided by the executing court. The First Appellate Court in its judgment raised the points for determination that were required to be decided in the appeal. The first point was : whether finding of the learned Subordinate Judge that the plaintiff was in possession of the plaint-A schedule properties on the date of suit is correct. The finding on this point is in favour of the plaintiff.
The First Appellate Court,  has stated thus:
"There is no reason to assume that the execution Court will not be executing the decree except in accordance with the law. Therefore, no decree for injunction whatsoever is to be issued in favour of the plaintiff. The plaintiff's grievance against the impugned judgment and decree that his possession is stated to be unlawful and illegal and that of a trespasser is again without any merit as the plaintiff has not been able to establish that he was lawfully and legally in possession."
5.  The High Court, while dismissing the second appeal holding that no substantial question of law arose for consideration, has observed thus:
"However, the dismissal of these appeals is without prejudice to any of the legal rights of the appellant to pursue any other remedy. However, I make it clear that this will not stand in the way of the suit property being delivered on 8-4-1997 as already ordered."
6.  From what is stated above, it is clear that the appellant is found in possession of the Schedule-A suit properties and the appellant is entitled to avail the remedies that are available in law before the executing court in the execution proceedings arising out of the decree passed in O.S.No.38 of 1977. It is for the appellant to seek appropriate orders in the executing court by availing the remedy as is available in law.
7.  In this view, we do not find any merit in the appeal. Consequently, it is dismissed. No costs.
Appeal dismissed.
