Uday Sathe v State of Maharashtra and Others
Supreme Court of India

24 November 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.19067/2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  By the impugned order dated 8th April, 2002, Writ Petition (Civil) No.2351 of 2002, filed by the appellant in the High Court was dismissed observing that the Government has addressed a communication to the appellant informing that some action is being taken against the named officer. The grievance of the appellant is about his malicious prosecution for offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code of which he has been acquitted. Reliance has been placed by the appellant on the observations made by the trial court in the judgment of acquittal.
2. From the affidavits filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, namely, State of Maharashtra and Director General of Police, Maharashtra, it is evident now that the Government has decided not to initiate any departmental action against the named officer. By Order dated 25th July, 2003 passed by this Court, the named officer, namely, V.S. Jadhav was impleaded as party-respondent.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.  Having regard to the changed circumstances, as noticed before, in our view, it would be necessary that the Writ Petition be heard afresh and decided in accordance with law. We refrain from expressing any opinion on merits lest it may prejudice any of the parties. Mr. Jadhav would be deemed to have been added as party-respondent in the Writ Petition. He may file reply to the Writ Petition within six weeks. It would be open to the High Court to examine the changed stand of the Government and other reliefs claimed by the appellant in accordance with law. We request the High Court to expeditiously dispose of the Writ Petition No.2351 of 2002. The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
4.  Before parting, we place on record our deep appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by Mr. Gaurav Banerji, who was requested to act as amicus curiae in the matter.
Appeal disposed of.
