Jitender Kumar Sahai and others v State of U.P. and others
Supreme Court of India

17 January 2003
Transfer Petition (Cr.) No. 406 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Petitioners seeking transfer of Sessions Trial No. 314/2001: "State of U.P. vs. Jitender Sahai and others" pending in the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh to the District and Sessions Judge, Patiala House, New Delhi.
2.  A perusal of the pleadings shows that it is essentially a matrimonial dispute the genesis whereof is a marriage performed between one of the accused persons and the complainant to which the parents of the bride were not agreeable. This has given rise to the registration of a criminal case against the petitioners. The subsequent development, as stated at the Bar, is that the parties to the marriage have moved a joint petition for dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce by mutual consent under Section 13(B) of the Hindu Marriage, Act, 1955 and therein a final decree is awaited. It is submitted that the parties have also agreed between themselves for dropping of the criminal proceedings. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners has stated that to facilitate settlement in all the court matters and to pave the way for giving a quietus to all the disputes between the parties whatever photographs and letters written by the girl are available with the petitioner no.1 husband or with any of the petitioners they shall all be returned to the respondent no.3. That statement is taken on record.
3.  In the facts and circumstances of the case and as the other judicial proceedings are pending at Delhi, the prayer for transfer is allowed. Sessions Trial No. 314/2001: "State of U.P. vs. Jitender Sahai and others" is directed to be transferred from the Court of Shri Yash Pal Sharma, Additional District and Sessions Judge, Gautam Budh Nagar, Uttar Pradesh to the District and Sessions Judge, Patiala House, New Delhi. The Court at Gautam Budh Nagar shall soon on communication of this order transfer the record of proceedings to the transferee court. The District and Sessions Judge Patiala House, New Delhi may hear and decide the Sessions Trial himself or make over the same for hearing and disposal in accordance with law to any competent court within his jurisdiction. No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.
