State of Karnataka and others v I. S. Nirvane Gowda and others
Supreme Court of India

15 July 2003
C.As. Nos. 7309-10 of 1996
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These two appeals are directed against the common judgment and decree passed by the High Court in RSAs Nos. 242-44 of 1979. I.S. Nirwane Gowda, B. Govindaraj and Appu Shetty filed suits seeking declaration of title and permanent injunction in respect of the suit lands. The trial court dismissed their suits. They filed first appeals challenging the judgment and decree of the trial court. The first appellate court also dismissed the appeals affirming the judgment and decree passed by the trial court. They pursued the matter further by filing the second appeals before the High Court. The High Court allowed their appeals reversing the concurrent findings recorded by the trial court as well as by the first appellate court. The appellants herein filed SLPs but the SLP filed by Appu Shetty was dismissed on account of not bringing his LRs on record, as stated by the learned counsel for the appellants. These two appeals are filed by Nirwane Gowda and Govindaraj.
2.  The respondents herein claiming title to the suit lands on the basis of saguvali chits given by the Tahsildar of the Revenue Department filed suit for declaration of title and permanent injunction. The defcnce of the appellants in the trial court was that the lands in question were forest lands and the Revenue Department had no right to grant saguvali chits to the respondents. Further, the competent authority, even in respect of the revenue land to grant saguvali chits, was the Deputy Commissioner and not the Tahsildar. On the basis of the evidence the trial court accepted the case as pleaded by the appellants and concluded that the lands in question were the forest lands and the Revenue Department had no authority to grant saguvali chits to the respondents.
3. The first appellate court on a detailed consideration as is evident from the judgment, looking to the provisions of the Forest Act and taking note of Ext. D-1, a copy of the Gazette Notification dated 26-6-1937 showing that the lands were included in the State Reserve Forest, Ext. D-2, the statement of lands taken for Indavara State Forest in Hukkund Village and the evidence of forest officer Mr S.N. Hanumanthappa, the Range Forest Officer attached to the DFO, Chickmagalur, dismissed the first appeals. The High Court in the second appeals reversed the concurrent findings, finding fault with the judgments of the courts below in accepting Ext. D-1, gazette notification aforementioned, on the ground that the original gazette was not produced. The High Court also took the view that the evidence of the Range Forest Officer, namely, Hanumanthappa was of not much consequence and that a higher officer of the department like the Divisional Forest Officer should have been examined. The High Court raised a statutory presumption based on the entries made in the revenue records. In this view the High Court allowed the appeals filed by the respondents herein.
4.  The learned counsel for the appellants contended that the High Court committed a serious error in interfering with the concurrent findings recorded by both the courts below when those findings were based on proper consideration and appreciation of evidence brought on record. The learned counsel contended that Ext. D-1, being the true copy of the Gazette Notification dated 26-6-1937, was rightly accepted by the trial court as well as the first appellate court and the High Court was not justified in not accepting the same particularly when it had become a part of the record and no objection had been taken by the respondents at the time of recording the evidence. He also submitted that Ext. D-2, being the statement of lands taken for Indavara State Forest in Hukkund Village, should have been accepted. He further submitted that Hanumanthappa, the Range Forest Officer supported the case of the appellants on the basis of the record. Merely because the higher officer in the department was not examined, his testimony could not be rejected.
5.  The trial court as well as the first appellate court, based on the evidence, recorded findings that the lands in question were the part of reserved forest. We do not find any good ground or a valid reason for rejection of Ext. D-1 by the High Court. When the lands were included in reserve forest, the entries in the revenue records were of no consequence and further, mere saguvali chits did not confer any title on the suit lands. This apart, the Revenue Authorities were not competent to deal with the property which was the part of the reserved forest. The first appellate court was right in affirming the judgment and decree of the trial court.
6. We find it difficult to sustain the impugned judgment and decree as far as these respondents - I.S. Nirwane Gowda and B. Govindaraj in these two appeals are concerned. In this view these appeals are entitled to succeed. Accordingly, they are allowed. The impugned judgment and decree passed by the High Court, so far as these respondents, namely, I.S. Nirwane Gowda and B. Govindaraj are concerned, are set aside and the judgment and decree passed by the first appellate court affirming the judgment and decree of the trial court dismissing the suits are restored. No costs.
Appeals allowed.
