Mani v State
Supreme Court of India

14 October 2003
Cr.A. No.94/2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is against the judgment of the division bench of the Madras High Court. The appellant Mani and deceased Nadodi Palaniswamy were kalasi workers. There was a quarrel between the appellant and the deceased in the early hours of 3rd March, 1993, near the tea shop of P.W-1. PW-1 and PW-2 heard noise and when they came to the place of occurrence the deceased was lying down and the appellant was sitting on his chest and hitting the deceased with M.O.-1 granite stone. Pws.1 and 2 asked why he was doing this? The appellant then threw the stone and ran away from the place of occurrence. Pws.1 and 2 tried to chase the appellant but they could not find him.
2. PW-1 later went to the police station at 05.00 hours in the morning and lodged the FIR. On receiving FIR, PW-10 went to the place of occurrence and started investigation and prepared inquest report on the dead body and later the body was sent for post mortem. The deceased Nadodi Palaniswamy had sustained many injuries and most of injuries were lacerated wounds in the region of head. The left half of the face and nose had abrasions and contusion and left half of the forehead and left maxilla were depressed inside. The skull and the occipital bones also sustained serious fractures.
3.  On behalf of the prosecution ten witnesses were examined. The sessions court found the appellant guilty of the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment. The High Court by the impugned judgment, confirmed the conviction and sentence and the same is challenged before us.
4.  We have heard Mr. Mahendra Anand, learned senior counsel for the appellant and Mr. A.M. Rangaramanujam, learned senior counsel for the State.
5.  Learned counsel for the appellant strenuously contended before us that the offence committed by the appellant does not come within the purview of Section 302 IPC. He has pointed out that there was quarrel between the appellant and the deceased and all of a sudden the assault took place and the deceased was hit by a stone which was easily available at the place of occurrence. He also submitted that the appellant was not armed with any weapon at the time of quarrel ensued and this clearly indicates that there was no intention of the appellant to commit the murder.
6. Learned counsel also submitted that the prosecution has not adduced any evidence as to how the quarrel took place and how the actual attack had begun. The only evidence adduced was to the effect that Pws 1 and 2 came at the place of occurrence and saw that the deceased was over powered by the accused/appellant and then hit the victim with the stone.
7.  Having regard to these facts and circumstances of the case, we are inclined to accept the plea of the appellant that the offence committed by the appellant falls within Section 304 Part I of IPC.
8. Therefore we alter the conviction and in substitution of the offence punishable under Section 302 IPC we find him guilty of offence punishable under Section 304 Part I and sentence him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
