B. Radhakrishna Menon v K. Sethunathan and others
Supreme Court of India

28 February 2003
Special Leave to Appeal (Cr.) No. 1770 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard both sides.
1.  The first respondent herein filed a complaint against the appellant herein alleging that the appellant had obtained only 43.3% marks in the qualifying examination for admission to five years LLB. and he forged his marks list and got admission in the Vaikunda Balika Law College, Udupi, and according to the first respondent the minimum marks prescribed for admission is 45% in the qualifying examination and the appellant committed forgery and corrected his marks sheet to make it appear that he has secured more than 45% marks in the Pre-degree Examination. Pursuant to the complaint, investigation was conducted, and the police filed a final report before the C.J.M. stating that case was registered on mistake of fact.
2. The first respondent was given notice of such report and he did take any further action before the learned Magistrate. Thereafter, the first respondent filed Crl. M.C. before the High Court praying that there shall be further investigation in the matter and by the impugned judgment, the learned Single Judge has directed further investigations in the matter.
3.  It is to be noted that the respondent did not file any application before the Magistrate praying that there shall be further enquiry under section 173(8) of the Cr.P.C. The first respondent had also not filed any revision before the High Court seeking to quash the order passed by the Magistrate in accepting the final report submitted by the Police under section 173, Cr.P.C. He also did not file any complaint before the Magistrate.
4. Without resorting to any of these remedies the first respondent filed the Writ Petition praying that the final report filed by the police be quashed. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, we do not find that the further enquiry in the matter by the police would be necessary. The belated attempt of the respondent seems to be an attempt to cause harassment to the appellant. The impugned judgment is set aside and the appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
