Union of India and others v Dev Singh
Supreme Court of India

23 April 2003
C.A. No. 5978 of 1997
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The respondent, who was serving in the Indian army as Naib Subedar, was charged for offence of attempting to molest a lady and on that basis, under the provisions of the Army Act and Rules, the authorities held court-martial proceedings and, having found the respondent guilty punished him by way of dismissal from service. The said order of dismissal made by the appellant was challenged before the High Court by the respondent. Primary contention of the respondent in that petition was that there has been no compliance with the mandatory requirement of the provisions of Rules 22 and 23 of the Army Rules at the stage of preliminary inquiry, hence, court-martial proceedings could not have been initiated. The High Court, relying on the judgment of this Court in Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi v. Union of India 1982 Indlaw SC 193 came to the conclusion that as Rule 22 of the Army Rules being mandatory, non-compliance with the same has vitiated further proceedings which culminate in the dismissal of the respondent, hence allowed the writ petition, quashing the order of dismissal.
2. It, however, granted liberty to the appellant to proceed afresh after complying with the mandatory provisions of Rule 22. It is against this judgment of the High Court that the appellants are now before us.
3.  Learned counsel appearing for the appellants contended that if subsequent to the proceedings under Rule 22 of the Army Rules, a regular Court Martial is held, during which proceedings the officer concerned is given full opportunity to cross-examine the witness who deposed against him, then the defect of non-compliance with Rule 22 would not vitiate the court-martial proceedings, therefore, the respondent could not complain of any violation of the statutory rules. In support of this argument the learned counsel relied on the judgment of this Court in Major G.S. Sodhi v. Union of India 1990 Indlaw SC 598. We do not think that the judgment of this Court in the said case is similar to the facts of the case in hand because that is a case which is applicable to commissioned officers in the Indian army and not to non-commissioned officers like the respondent. At the relevant point of time the said Rule 22 was applicable only to non-commissioned officers and not to officers in the higher category and it is based on this fact, the delinquent commissioned officer being excluded under Rule 22 of the Rules, the judgment in Major G.S. Sodhi, 1990 Indlaw SC 598 was delivered.  Therefore, the principle laid down in that case will not apply to the facts of the present case.
4.  Learned counsel then argued that the respondent having suffered court-martial proceedings in regard to which he has no grievance, it is not open to him to contend that there has been violation of mandatory rules at the preliminary stage. For this purpose, he relied on the judgment of this Court in Union of India v. Major A. Hussain 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 as also on Rule 149 of the Army Rules. We do not think that the law laid down by this Court in Hussain case 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 (supra) applies to the facts of the present case. In Hussain case 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 (supra) no objection was taken as to the violation of the mandatory Rule 22 at the time when the court-martial proceedings were initiated. The officer concerned went through the court- martial proceedings and cross-examined the witnesses at that stage, therefore, this Court relying upon Rule 149 came to the conclusion that whatever irregularity was there before the stage of initiation of Court Martial, the same did not vitiate the court-martial proceedings because the said proceeding! were in accordance with law and the officer in that case had cross-examinee the witnesses.  Therefore, relying on Rule 149 this Court held that the irregularity, if any, in the preliminary proceedings would not prejudice the delinquent officer.
5.  In the instant case, it is to be noticed that on the initiation of court-martial proceedings itself, the respondent had raised the contention that the preliminary proceedings which directed the initiation of the Court Martial was being in violation of Rule 22 of the Rules, the Court Martial cannot be held against him. Therefore, the objection in this case as to the initiation of Court Martial has been taken by the respondent at the very beginning of the court-martial proceedings and if the objections were then to be considered by the Military Court then as per the law laid down by this Court in Prithi Pal Singh Bedi 1982 Indlaw SC 193 (supra) the proceedings had to be dropped. The fact that the Court Martial failed to consider the preliminary objection of the respondent cannot be taken advantage of by the appellant herein to contend that in subsequent proceedings the lacuna, if any, in the preliminary proceedings having been rectified, the principles laid down by this Court in Hussain case 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 (supra) would apply. We do not think so.
6. If as in Hussain case 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 (supra) the respondent had not taken any objection at the initial stage of the court-martial proceedings in this case then the said argument of the appellant might have been accepted by us based on the principles laid down in Hussain case 1997 Indlaw SC 1439 (supra). But since the objection as to the correctness of preliminary proceedings was taken by the appellant at the very initial stage and the said objection was in regard to the non-compliance with mandatory provisions of law, we think that the case of the respondent is covered by Prithi Pal Singh Bedi case 1982 Indlaw SC 193 (supra).
7.  For the reasons stated above, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
