Kunnath Textiles v State of Kerala and others
Supreme Court of India

15 January 2003
C.A. No. 5696 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant is a partnership firm engaged in the manufacture of hosiery goods like banians, briefs, panties at its factory in Thrissur, Kerala. On 17.12.1980 the Government of Kerala proposed to fix the minimum wages for the workers engaged in hosiery work. For certain skilled workers like Label stitching, Number Label Stitching, Escort Label Stitching etc. the Government proposed to fix the wages on the basis of piece rates under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (Central Act No.11 of 1948). After consultation with the Minimum Wages Advisory Board, constituted under Section 7 of the Act minimum rates of wages payable to the classes of employees employed in the Hosiery Manufacture work were fixed vide G.O. No. 278/85/LBR dated 21st February, 1985. This was done after consulting with the representatives of the employer as well as that of the employees. As per that Government Order piece rate wages payable to the employees were fixed on per day basis. It was made clear in that order that where wages are paid on piece rate basis in certain categories the workers shall be given minimum wages not less than the basic rates of wages fixed for the respective categories to which the worker belongs. Besides the dearness allowance shall be calculated on the basis of cost of living index number at each district headquarters.
2. The appellant, herein is of the view that for the skilled workers wages should have been fixed on the basis of piece rate and any change in the mode of payment of wages will affect them adversely. The appellant has challenged the Ext. P-2 Notification issued by the Government of Kerala on 21st February, 1985. The learned Single Judge dismissed the original petition. Aggrieved by the same the appellant filed writ appeal before the Division Bench of the High Court. The writ appeal was also dismissed. The judgment of the Division Bench is under challenge before us.
3.  We have heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant as well as counsel for the respondent-State. The counsel for the appellant submitted that in view of the nature of work done by the workers it is convenient and proper for the employer to pay the workers on the basis of piece rate. He also submitted that each item of work is given to the worker and on the basis of performance the wages are being worked out. He further submitted that if any change is made in the mode of payment to workers the same will cause hardship to the appellant. It is also contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that at the initial stage it was proposed that the wages would be fixed on the basis of piece rate but when the official Notification was issued that has been given go by and the rates were fixed on per day basis.
4. The counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, submitted that the minimum wages have been fixed as per the Minimum Wages Act and in the notification it is mentioned that even where the workers are paid on piece rate wages, they shall be ensured of getting the minimum wages and there is no change in the mode of payment of wages as such. The appellant has not furnished any material to show that any undue hardship would be caused to them. We have also noticed that the minimum wages had been fixed as early as in 1985 and it is quite possible that there may be revision of wages within a short period. Moreover, the appellant also would be consulted at the time before the wage revision is notified. If the appellant has any grievance, the same may be brought to the notice of the Advisory Committee.
5.  Therefore, we do not find any justifiable reason to interfere with the impugned judgment. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
