K. Kunhu Auto Kunho v State of Kerala
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2003
Cr.A. No. 1367/2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This is an appeal filed by the accused from jail challenging his conviction and sentence under section 17 and 20(b)(i) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act. The case against the appellant is that on 4.5.1995 the appellant was found engaged in the sale of opium and ganja near old bridge at Kallai in Kozhikode. PW-1 Sub-Inspector attached to D.C.R.B., Kozhikode got information and went to that place and found that the accused was in possession of plastic packet. PW-1 asked the appellant that his body is to be searched and whether the presence of Gazetted Officer or Magistrate was required. The appellant answered in the negative. Thereafter the plastic packet was opened and it contained 19 small packets and 20 paper rolls and sum of Rs.310/-. These 19 small packets were found to contain opium weighing about 25 grams and the paper rolls contained 75 grams of ganja. A mahazar was prepared in the presence of witnesses and PW-1 seized the articles and under Exh. P-2 statement he submitted the recovered objects to the Sub-Inspector of Police on the next morning.
2.  On the side of the prosecution, PW-1 to PW-9 were examined. The independent witnesses, who were allegedly present at the time of recovery of the opium and ganja from the accused, turned hostile. However, both the witnesses admitted having signed the mahazar. The Special Judge after elaborately considering the evidence on record held that the accused committed the offence charged against him and then it was affirmed by the High Court.
3.  The conviction and sentence of the appellant is challenged before us. We heard the learned counsel for the appellant. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the recovery of opium and ganja from the accused is not satisfactorily proved by the prosecution. She submitted that the independent witnesses did not support the prosecution and in that circumstances, the Court should have held the recovery was not proved. We are not inclined to accept this contention. The recovery of the opium and ganja from the accused is proved by the PW-1, who effected such recovery. The two witnesses alleged to have been present there admitted that they signed the mahazar but that they would say that were not aware of writing in the Mahazar and they signed the same at the request of the PW-1. The fact that these two witnesses were present at the time is proved by their signatures in the Mahazar. The articles were later produced before the Sub-Inspector and samples collected therefrom were sent for chemical examination it was found that the articles seized from the accused were opium and ganja.
4. Under the said circumstances, the Sessions Judge as well as the High Court were justified in holding that these articles were recovered from the accused.
5.  The next contention urged by the learned counsel for the appellant that section 50 of the NDPS Act was not complied with. It was argued that the search of appellant's body was not done in the presence of Gazetted Officer or Magistrate. This argument is not correct. There is evidence to show that the accused was told in advance whether his search was required to be in the presence of Gazetted Officer or Magistrate and this substantiated by the statement contained in Exh. P-2 report prepared by the PW-1. He submitted the same to the superior officer and PW-1 specifically stated that he asked the accused whether his body search was required to be done in the presence of Gazetted Officer or Magistrate. The appellant declined to exercise that right and this is proved by the statement Exh.P-2.
6. Therefore, there is compliance of section 50 of the NDPS Act. We do not find any reason to interfere with the conviction and sentence of the appellant. The appeal is therefore dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.
