Nainital Bank Limited and Anr v Anil Mehta
Supreme Court of India

6 October 2003
Petition(s) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No.12812/2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The above appeal has been filed against the order dated May 6, 2003 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Uttaranchal at Nainital in W.P.No.225(S/B) of 2003 granting stay of the order of transfer for a limited purpose and directing the writ petition to be posted for final hearing.
2.  The appellant-bank though initially sought for adjournment for filing rejoinder, since the counsel on either side were agreeable for hearing the matter this day itself finally, the matter was taken up for disposal.
3.  Heard learned counsel appearing on either side. The learned counsel for the respondent contended that on humanitarian grounds the High Court was justified in passing the impugned order and it does not call for any interference.
4.  In our view, on the facts and circumstances of the case it is shown that to avoid transfer the respondent herein gave one or the other excuse and despite the explanation offered before the High Court to justify and necessitate the order of transfer it is not for the High Court to interfere with the orders of the transfer passed by the management-bank concerned in the interest and exigencies of service. It is by now well-settled that in matters of this nature the administration concerned must have the utmost latitude to arrange its own affairs by deployment of its personnel and we find no extraordinary ground substantiated for the court to interfere with the orders passed by the Bank. Personal inconveniences have to yield to the requirements of service and needs of the Bank.
5. Consequently, we are of the view that the order passed by the High Court cannot be sustained. Hence, the same is set aside and the appeal shall stand allowed. The fact that we set aside the order would not stand in the way of the High Court to deal with the writ petition and disposing it finally as indicated by the High Court. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
