M/S. Mujeeb Modern Rice Mills v M/S. P. Doraisamy Gounder (Dead) Thr. L.Rs.
Supreme Court of India

11 July 2003
CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4586-88 OF 2003 (Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) Nos.22641-22643/2002)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
Heard Mr. L.N. Rao, learned senior counsel for the appellant from 11.50 a.m. to 12.05 p.m. and Mr. A.T.M. Ranga Ramanujam, learned senior counsel for the respondent, from 12.05 p.m. to 12.20 p.m.
Permission granted
1. Leave granted.
2. The appeals have been preferred from the order of the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in proceedings initiated under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 [hereinafter referred to as 'the Act']. Both the appellant and the respondent claimed that they have been carrying on the business of selling rice under a mark depicting 'Maharaja' (borrowed from Air India) as well as the word 'Maharaja'. As far as the appellant is concerned, it is claimed that it started such business in the year 1980 and that it was an extensive business. An application for registration of the trade mark was made in July, 1992 and provisional registration was granted on 4th August, 1992. It is not in dispute that the respondent applied for registration of its trade mark on 15th September, 1992. The respondent also claimed to have been carrying on the business of selling rice under the identical trade mark since 1980. According to the respondent, the turn over of such business was considerable.
3. On 21st March, 2001, the appellant filed a suit before the District Court at Erode, inter alia, claiming an injunction against the respondent from using the 'Maharaja' brand. That suit has since been transferred to the High Court of Madras at Chennai. The respondent's suit was filed thereafter on 11th April, 2001 in the High Court directly for the same reliefs against the appellant. On an application filed by the respondent for interim relief, the learned Single Judge opined that there was no clinching material to show that the respondent had been using the trade mark prior to that of the appellant. It was also noted that the appellant had filed material to show that it has been carrying on the business by utilising the same trade mark since 1980. The application for interim injunction was, accordingly, refused but it was made clear that the discussion and conclusion arrived at in the order was confined to the application for interim relief and would not prejudice either party's contention in the suits.
4. This judgement was impugned in appeal by the respondent. The court stated that there was no documentary evidence and that the issue would have to be determined on the basis of the affidavits filed. At the outset, we may note that it would be inappropriate to decide the issue on the basis of the affidavits alone in a case which relates to the utilisation of a trade mark. It has to be, atleast prima facie, established in the application for interim relief that the applicant has been utilising the trade mark as claimed by it. However, on the basis of the affidavits, the Division Bench said, "we are of the view that appellants (respondent before us) have established that they are using the trade mark MAHARAJA from earlier point of time than the respondents (appellant before us) and as such they made out a prima facie case for grant of interim order". It also appears that the Division Bench has wrongly cast the onus on the appellant before us for establishing its claim without considering the question as to whether the respondent had led any evidence whatsoever to establish its claim on the basis of which the interim relief was granted.
5. In these circumstances, when applications for registration were admittedly pending, no documentary evidence was produced and the court was to decide the issue on the basis of the affidavits alone, no interim injunction should have been granted as prayed by the respondent.
Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court and uphold the decision of the learned Single Judge. The High Court is requested to dispose of the pending suits as expeditiously as possible.
6. We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case and any observation made herein will not prejudice the contentions of either side.
7. No costs.
Appeal allowed
