Pantha Chatterjee and others v Amit Khan Deb and others
Supreme Court of India

11 October 2004
Contempt Petitions (C) Nos. 399-402 of 2003 in C.As. Nos. 4420-23 of 1999, IAs Nos. 24-35
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  More than a year ago i.e. on 7-7-2003, this Court, while deciding CAs Nos. 4420-23 of 1999 made specific directions to the following effect:
"79.(1) The State Government shall carry out the order passed by the High Court and clear all the consequential monetary benefits to the respondent writ petitioners within a period of 3 months from today with statement of account to be forwarded to the Central Government for reimbursement.
(2) The Central Government within two months of the receipt of the said reimbursement statement shall reimburse the amount to the State of West Bengal.
(3) In case there is any dispute or confusion in regard to the actual amount payable on account of reimbursement or otherwise, the same shall be sorted out between the State of West Bengal and the Central Government at the earliest but that would not be the cause of delay in payment as indicated above.
(4) That there shall be no delay in payment to be made as scheduled above by the State of West Bengal to the petitioners nor by the Central Government to the State of West Bengal on account of reimbursement which may be subject to final settlement; in case of any dispute or doubt about the same, to be sorted out sooner or later between them."
2.  Three months' time fixed as aforesaid was extended from time to time. As of now more than one year has passed and going by the time fixed in the original judgment, directions should have been complied with in last October. Clearly the directions in the judgment dated 7-7-2003 have not been fully complied with. Instead, a letter has been circulated seeking adjournment for four weeks and an application has also been filed for issue of directions to the Central Government to release a sum of Rs 38 crores so as to enable the applicant State of West Bengal to pay the arrears of the Border Wing Home Guards. To say the least, the application is misguided and misplaced. This Court is not concerned with the matters between the State Government and the Central Government as also the interdepartment problem, if any, of the State Government. We see no justification for non-compliance with the order.
3. The Finance Secretary of the State Government is present in person. Instead of passing any stringent orders on the contempt petitions today, we direct the State Government to fully comply with the directions of this Court as contained in the aforesaid judgment within a period of three weeks and report compliance or else the Finance Secretary, Secretary, Civil Defence of the State and the Chief Secretary shall remain present in court on the next date of hearing to receive orders on the contempt petitions.
Call the matters on 1-11-2004.
Order accordingly.
