Neelam Bhatia v Satbir Singh Bhatia
Supreme Court of India

30 August 2004
Transfer Petition (C) No. 357 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  This petition is by the wife seeking transfer of Hindu Marriage Petition No. 6-A of 2001 titled as Satbir Singh Bhatia v. Neelam Bhatia from the Court of Additional District Judge, Korba, Chhattisgarh to the Family Court at Kolkata on the grounds that the petitioner has no means and is having no source of income; she has a minor daughter of 5 years; having regard to the long distance to travel, it would be convenient if the petition to transfer the case aforementioned is allowed.
2.  Learned counsel for the respondent husband resisted this petition stating that the proceedings were initiated in the year 2001; the case has reached the stage of evidence; pleadings having been completed; at this stage, it will not be appropriate to allow the transfer petition. He also added that the petitioner has filed some cases at Kolkata after the respondent filed the Hindu marriage petition aforementioned.
3. The learned counsel, however, assured that the respondent shall cooperate with the proceedings to go on without dragging the proceedings.
4.  Having regard to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, we think it just and appropriate to dispose of the transfer petition with the following directions:
The respondent husband shall bear the to-and-fro travelling expenses of the petitioner and one person accompanying her by train whenever she actually appears before the court. In case, the father of the petitioner alone travels to attend to the case, the expenses shall be paid to the father also for his travel to attend the court proceedings. On every date of appearance in the court at Korba, the incidental expenses of Rs.500/- shall be paid in addition to the actual train fare by second class on each such occasion.
The respondent shall cooperate in expeditious disposal of the petition.
5.  The respondent shall also pay the arrears of maintenance, as ordered by the trial court, if not already paid and unless there is a stay of the said order to pay maintenance. Subject to what is stated above, we decline to transfer the case of the petitioner. The transfer petition stands disposed of. No costs.
Petition disposed of.
