Corporation of City of Bangalore v Syed Iqbal Hussain
Supreme Court of India

21 July 2004
C.A. No. 6589 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal arises out of a judgment and order dated 8-10-1998 passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in RSA No. 498 of 1998 allowing the appeal and setting aside the judgment and decree passed by the XVth Additional City Civil Judge, Bangalore who in turn allowed the appeal from a judgment of the Principal Civil Judge, Civil Station, Bangalore, in OS No. 31 of 1974 dated 24-10-1979.
2.  The plaintiff-respondent filed the aforementioned suit, inter alia, for a declaration of his title over the suit property as also for a permanent injunction restraining the defendant Corporation from interfering with the plaintiff's possession thereover as also for a mandatory injunction directing the defendant to effect the change of khatha in favour of the plaintiff and for the issuance of licence for putting up constructions on the suit property.
3.  The cause of action for the suit arose in the month of February 1974 when the defendant Corporation attempted to interfere with the plaintiff's peaceful possession and enjoyment of the suit schedule property held by him and on subsequent dates although he was the owner of the suit schedule property.
4.  The plaintiff filed the said suit, inter alia, alleging that he had been in peaceful possession of the suit property and perfected his title by adverse possession. The said suit was decreed. The first appellate court on appeal, however, reversed the said judgment and decree which in turn has been reversed by the impugned judgment by the High Court.
5.  Mr S.S. Javali, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submits that the High Court has failed to formulate a substantial question of law as is mandatorily required u/s. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure and in that view of the matter the impugned judgment cannot be sustained. The learned counsel has pointed out that the High Court in its judgment proceeded to formulate two points which were purported to have arisen in the said appeal, namely:
(1) Whether the first appellate court is justified in holding that alternative plea of adverse possession cannot be set up when once ownership is asserted?
(2) Whether the first appellate court is justified in rejecting the plea of adverse possession on the ground that there is no specific and sufficient pleading and evidence?
6.  The contention of Mr Javali is that in view of S. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure substantial question(s) of law was required to be formulated at the time of admission of the appeal and the respondent could be called upon to respond only in relation thereto. In support of the said contention, strong reliance has been placed on Roop Singh v. Ram Singh  2000 Indlaw SC 231.
7.  Mr Ganapathi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, would submit that substantial questions of law did arise for consideration before the High Court.
8.  It is no longer res integra that a second appeal can be admitted for hearing; only in the event the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law, whereupon it shall formulate such a question in terms of sub-s. (4) of S. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Sub-s. (5) of S. 100 mandates that the appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall at the hearing of the appeal be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such a question.
9. In view of the provisions contained in sub-ss. (4) and (5) of S. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that a substantial question of law is required to be formulated at the time of the admission of the second appeal and the respondent can be called upon to respond only thereto. Even the respondent is entitled to show that the question so formulated by the High Court does not involve such a question. The hearing of the second appeal, thus, must be confined to the substantial question of law so formulated subject to the exceptions contained in the proviso appended to sub-s. (5) of S. 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
10.  In Roop Singh 2000 Indlaw SC 231  this Court laid down the law in the following terms:
"It is to be reiterated that u/s. 100 CPC jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain a second appeal is confined only to such appeals which involve a substantial question of law and it does not confer any jurisdiction on the High Court to interfere with pure questions of fact while exercising its jurisdiction u/s. 100 CPC."
11.  It is not in dispute that the High Court at the time of admission of the second appeal did not formulate any substantial question of law. Without doing so it proceeded to hear the learned advocates for the parties and upon noticing the respective pleadings and contentions of the parties purported to have formulated two points which according to it arose for its determination.
12. Having regard to the well-settled principles of law, as noticed hereinbefore, the High Court being statutorily obligated to formulate a substantial question of law at the time of admission of the second appeal, it was legally impermissible for it to formulate such purported questions while determining the issue in the judgment itself in relation whereto the respondent might not have any adequate notice. Furthermore, such points formulated by the High Court which according to it arose for its determination do not appear to be substantial questions of law.
13.  For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained. It is set aside accordingly. The appeal is allowed and the matter is remitted back to the High Court to proceed with the matter afresh upon formulating a substantial question(s) of law, if any. In the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
