Mahabir (Dead) By Lrs. and Others v Mahabir Parshad and Others
Supreme Court of India

25 August 2004
C.A. No. 7542 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The principal attack on the impugned judgment by the learned counsel for the appellants is that the second appeal was disposed of by the High Court without formulating substantial question or questions of law. Hence, according to him, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained on this short ground alone. He also added that in view of the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Shyam Sunder v. Ram Kumar 2001 Indlaw SC 20065 the view taken by the High Court in the impugned judgment following the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Atam Prakash v. State of Haryana 1986 Indlaw SC 276 cannot be sustained.
2. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents did not contest the legal position that, to dispose of the second appeal, the High Court ought to have formulated the substantial question or questions of law in the first instance. He submitted that since the High Court has rightly followed the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Atam Prakash 1986 Indlaw SC 276 and disposed of the second appeal, it is not a fit case for interference by this Court u/art. 136 of the Constitution.
3. The High Court has disposed of the second appeal following the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Atam Prakash 1986 Indlaw SC 276 which is directly on the point on admitted facts having regard to the various dates which have bearing in regard to the filing, disposal of the suit and pendency of the appeal before the first appellate court. When the decision in Atam Prakash 2001 Indlaw SC 20065, a subsequent Constitution Bench judgment of this Court, it is not possible for us to accept the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants that in view of the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Shyam Sunder
4. This being the position, we decline to interfere with the impugned judgment. In the result, the civil appeal stands dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.
