Ram Chander Goyal v Chet Ram Vashisht
Supreme Court of India

12 August 2004
C.A. No. 2111 of 2000
The order of the case was as follows:
1.  Arguments in this case were concluded on the 5th of August, 2004 and the judgment was reserved.
2.  The case is fixed today for pronouncement of judgment. But before the judgment could be pronounced, counsel for the parties present in the Court stated that an out of court settlement has been arrived at between the parties. They have moved a joint application to record the settlement. The terms of the settlement arrived at between the parties have been set out in the application which has been duly signed by the respective counsel appearing for the appellants as well as the respondents. Appellant No.1 and Respondent No.1(e) have filed their affidavits in support of the joint application. Appellant No.1 and Respondent No.1(e) are present in Court and their statements are being recorded separately.
3.  The dispute in this appeal is regarding specific performance of an Agreement of Sale entered into between the parties on 21st of December, 1960 in respect of the vacant plot No.10, Jiwni Block, "Ganga Ram Vatika", Nazafgarh Road, New Delhi, measuring 353 sq. ys. By the said agreement Amin Chand agreed to sell the aforesaid plot for a total sale consideration of Rs.7,066/-. The payment was to be made in four installments. After the payment of 4th installment the proposed vendee could get the sale effected either in his own name or in the name of his nominee. Appellant No.2 nominated Appellant No.1 for execution of the Sale Deed in favour of Appellant No.1. Amin Chand died during the pendency of the proceedings in the courts below and is represented through the respondents being his legal representatives.
4.  The fourth and final installment due towards the total consideration of Rs.7,066/- was paid on 6th of February, 1966. The suit for specific performance was filed on 24th of July, 1978. The trial Court decreed the suit for specific performance which decree was affirmed by the first Appellate Court.
5.  On an appeal filed by the defendants-respondents, the High Court reversed the judgment and decree of the Courts below and dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff-appellants. Instead, the amount paid by the plaintiffs-appellants was ordered to be refunded with 12 per cent interest per annum from the date of the payment till its repayment to them. The High Court directed that the possession be returned to the plaintiff-appellants, as according to the plaintiff-appellants the possession was handed over to them soon after the payment of 4th and final installment in the year 1966.
6. The High Court reversed the decree of the Courts below firstly on the ground that the suit was filed beyond the period of limitation and secondly; that the appellants are not entitled to the equitable relief of specific performance as the suit had been filed after a delay of 12 years.
7.  The parties have resolved their dispute in the following terms and conditions:
"a) That the respondents shall pay an amount of Rs.10 lakhs in full and final settlement of all the disputes, in lieu of specific performance of the aforesaid agreement of sale and the cost of the boundary wall built upon the plot.
b) That the aforesaid amount of Rs.10 lakhs shall be paid by the respondents to appellant No.1 within 6 weeks from today by means of a demand draft in the name of appellant No.1. The delivery of the keys to the gate installed on the boundary wall of the disputed plot and the possession of the plot shall be delivered by appellant no.1 to the respondents immediately against the receipt of the Bank draft for Rs.10 lakhs (Rupees ten lakhs only). On payment of Rs. 10 lakhs (Rupees ten lakhs only) in this manner the present appeal and the suit for specific performance filed by the appellants shall stand dismissed. In case the Bank draft is not delivered to appellant no.1 as above, the impugned judgment and decree of the High Court will be set aside and the appeal in this Hon'ble Court will stand allowed and decree passed by the Trial Court shall stand confirmed. It is understood by all concerned in this appeal including the respondents that the appellant No.1 has been accepted as the nominee/assignee of the Appellant No.2, the Appellant No.2 has no interest in the subject matter of this appeal and the Appellant No.1 is entitled to give full discharge as to the obligations under the contract in question.
c) The demand draft for Rs. 10 lakhs (Rupees ten lakhs only) as above may be delivered to appellant no.1 through his counsel Sh. H.K. Puri, Advocate, Lawyers Chamber No.41, Supreme Court, New Delhi.
d) Till the aforesaid amount of Rs. 10 lakhs is not paid by the respondents to appellant No.1, the same would constitute a charge of the property.
e) The respondents shall be entitled to get the property mutated in their names in the Municipal records, if necessary, and the appellants shall not raise any objection thereto.
f) The disputed property shall vest in the respondents with full ownership rights and power of disposal thereto and the appellants shall have no right, title or interest therein in any manner whatsoever.
g) The aforesaid Civil Appeal may be disposed of in terms of this settlement leaving the parties to bear their own costs."
8.  The appeal is disposed of in terms of the settlement arrived at between the parties which have been reproduced in the preceding paragraph. The defendant-respondents shall pay to Appellant No.1 a sum of Rs.10 lakhs (Rupees ten lakhs) by means of a bank draft payable at Delhi in favour of Appellant No.1 within six weeks from today. The bank draft shall be delivered to Appellant No.1 either directly or through his counsel Shri H.K. Puri, Advocate, Lawyers Chamber 41, Supreme Court, New Delhi. Shri H.K. Puri on receipt of the bank draft shall handover the same to Appellant No.1. On receipt of the bank draft Appellant No.1 shall deliver the keys of the lock put on the gate and handover vacant possession of the plot to the respondents or their nominee(s). In case, the bank draft is not delivered to Shri H.K. Puri, Advocate or Appellant No.1 within the aforesaid period, the impugned judgment and decree of the High Court shall stand set aside and the decree passed by the trial Court restored.
9.  It is agreed between the parties that in case the bank draft is handed over to Appellant No.1 or Shri H.K. Puri, Advocate within the stipulated period, the appeal shall stand dismissed and the defendants-respondents shall be entitled to take possession of the disputed property and thereafter the same shall vest in the respondents with full ownership rights along with power to dispose it of and the appellants shall have no right, title or interest therein. The respondents shall be entitled to get the property mutated in their names in the municipal record.
10.  The appeal is disposed of in the above terms. The parties shall bear their own costs through out.
Appeal disposed of.
