I. C. I. C. I. Limited v Ahmedabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing Company Limited and Another
Supreme Court of India

15 April 2004
C.A. No. 4410 of 1997 (Arising as an appeal by Special Leave From the Judgment and Order Dt. 27 October 28, 1993, of the High Court of Gujarat At Ahmedabad In O.J. Appeal No. 2 of 1993)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The appellant had advanced loans to the respondent-company between February 23, 1976, till July 10, 1986. On July 10, 1986, an application for winding up was filed against the respondent by an unsecured creditor. Subsequent to this on October 1, 1986, and January 19, 1988, the appellant sanctioned two further loans to the company. In 1990 the company as well as the appellant made an application under section 536(2) of the Companies Act, 1956, for allowing the disposition of the company's properties "which may have to take place" as a consequence of the loans advanced by the appellant to the company from 1976.
2. The learned single judge allowed the application in part by granting leave to dispositions by the company of its assets under section 536(2) in respect of those loans which were made subsequent to the commencement of the winding up of the respondent-company, namely July 10, 1986, but refusing such leave in respect of the prior transactions.
3.  The appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed by the Division Bench by holding that leave under section 536(2) should normally be granted if the dispossession were necessary for the purpose of obtaining funds for the company or otherwise in the interest of the company which was being wound up. It was also held that permitting the company to dispose of all its assets to a particular creditor would affect the claims of all creditors of the company and that before any such order is passed publicity should be given to the application so that all creditors could file their objections to the application under section 536(2), if they wanted to do. It was also found that the application under section 536(2), was moved only on November 30, 1990. It was noted that no details have been given regarding those transactions which had taken place prior to July 10, 1986. This was sought to be rectified only subsequently by giving details of the earlier loans.
4. The High Court held that what the appellant was in fact seeking to do was to convert itself from an unsecured into a secured creditor in respect of transactions which had taken place "15 to 17 years ago". The court therefore refused to interfere with the order of the learned single judge. However, the court went further and set aside the decision of the learned single judge in so far as it pertained to the post July 10, 1986 loans, although no appeal had been preferred therefrom.
5.  It is not in dispute that during the pendency of the proceedings the company was referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act. The efforts to revive the company were unsuccessful both before the BIFR as well as the AAIFR. The company was accordingly ultimately wound up. Its assets have been sold by the official liquidator and the sale proceeds are at present held by the official liquidator. These subsequent developments have been noted by this court by orders passed in this appeal from time to time.
6.  The appellant's prayer under section 536(2) was to allow the company to execute documents creating a first charge over the company's properties in favour of the appellants. The company's properties as of today are not properties belonging to the company. Apart from it being a practical impossibility to allow the appellant's prayer at this stage, we are of the view that the Division Bench did not err in rejecting the application of the appellant at least in so far as it pertained to the loan transactions prior to July 10, 1986. There is no explanation forthcoming from the appellant as to how these advances were made for over a period of ten years without obtaining any security. The appellant ultimately sought to create securities in respect of these transactions only in 1990. The Division Bench was also correct that the grant of leave under section 536(2) would not be appropriate after this delay. Leave under section 536(2) may be granted for the benefit of the company in liquidation or the creditors of the company in general. It cannot be said that the securing of old debts due to one creditor of the appellant by creating of a mortgage ex post facto would in any way either enure towards the preservation of the company's assets or its business or enure to the benefit of its other creditors.
7.  However, we are of the view that the High Court erred in setting aside the learned single judge's order even in respect of the post July 10, 1986, loans on the simple ground that this was beyond the scope of the appellant's appeal. The appellant could not be in a worse position by having preferred the appeal from the order of the learned single judge.
8. The appeal is accordingly partially allowed to the extent stated without any order as to costs. This order may be communicated to the official liquidator for such consequential action as may be necessary.
Appeal partly allowed.
