Syed Beary (Dead) By Lrs. v Dennis Lewis (Dead) By Lrs. and others
Supreme Court of India

4 August 2004
C.A. No. 7399 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The tenant applied for amendment of Form 7 under Section 48-A(3) of the Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 for correction of Survey No. 129/7. The Tribunal, having regard to the records, survey report and the statement of the landlord, concluded that there was a mistake in giving survey number originally in Form 7 and allowed the amendment. The landlord filed appeal challenging the order of the Tribunal allowing the amendment. The appellate authority, on consideration of the contentions advanced on behalf of the parties, having regard to the nature of amendment sought for and looking to the records made available, upheld the amendment ordered by the Tribunal. While doing so, the appellate authority also took note of the fact that the landlord himself had admitted that the tenant was in possession of the lands in respect of which amendment was sought in Form 7.
2. The landlord filed a civil revision before the High Court questioning the validity and correctness of the order made by the appellate authority, affirming the order made by the Tribunal allowing the amendment of Form 7, as sought for by the tenant. The High Court, by the impugned order, allowed the revision petition and set aside the order of the appellate authority, taking a view that the amendment application should not be entertained after 30-6-1979 which was the last date for filing Form 7. Hence this appeal by the tenant.
3.  Learned counsel for the tenant urged that the High Court committed an error in upsetting the concurrent findings recorded by the Tribunal and the appellate authority; all that was done by the Tribunal was that it had allowed the obvious mistake committed in mentioning survey number in Form 7. Learned counsel submitted that Survey No. 129/7 did not even exist in Village Kodi at all; the tenant was in possession of two survey numbers i.e. Nos. 96 and 124/4B; the fact that the tenant was in possession of the lands was admitted by the landlord. According to the learned counsel, it was not a case of making a new claim for grant of occupation rights for two survey numbers altogether; under Section 48-A(3), it was permissible to amend Form 7. In support of the submission, the learned counsel relied on the order of this Court dated 28-9-2000.
4.  On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent landlord made submissions supporting the impugned order.
5.  Having perused the order of the Tribunal as well as the appellate authority, we are satisfied that the amendment application was rightly allowed. The High Court was not right and justified in interfering with the order made by the appellate authority, affirming the order made by the Tribunal, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, the records and the statement made by the landlord.
6.  In this view, the appeal is entitled to succeed. Accordingly, it is allowed. The impugned order made by the High Court is set aside. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
