1. Criminal Appeal No. 1043 of 1999 has been preferred by the State of Kerala while Criminal Appeal No. 1044 of 1999 has been preferred by Yesu Das @ Tommy, who was Accused 1 in the trial. Both the judgments are directed against the common judgment and order of the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam dated 22-7-1998 whereby the High Court disposed of several appeals preferred by different accused including appeal filed by Yesu Das @ Tommy, the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 1044 of 1999. It appears that during the pendency of the appeal before this Court, appellant Yesu Das @ Tommy was released on parole but he committed suicide. The appeal preferred by him, therefore, abates. The appeal preferred by the State of Kerala was originally preferred against A-2, A-3, A-5 and A-7. This Court granted special leave only against A-2 and dismissed the special leave petition as against A-3, A-5 and A-7. We may only notice at this stage that 13 accused had been put up for trial before the Court of Session, Alappuzha in Sessions Case No. 39 of 1996. The trial court by its judgment and order dated 11-12-1997 convicted A-1 of the offence u/s. 302 IPC and sentenced him to death. A-2, A-3, A-5 and A-7 were convicted of the offence punishable u/s. 302 read with S. 149 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for life. They were also found guilty of some other minor offences. On appeal, the High Court declined the death reference but finding A-1 Yesu Das @ Tommy guilty of the offence punishable u/s. 302 IPC sentenced him to imprisonment for life. So far as A-2, A-3, A-5 and A-7 are concerned, it found that there was no evidence to prove that there was an unlawful assembly, and, therefore, acquitted them of all the charges levelled against them. As noticed above, the appeal preferred by Yesu Das @ Tommy has abated and the appeal of the State of Kerala is confined only against A-2 Nazar.
2. We have gone through the judgments of the courts below. The learned counsel for the parties have brought to our notice the relevant evidence on record. We are satisfied that the High Court has correctly recorded the finding, that S. 149 has no application in this case. The facts clearly disclose that the accused did not act pursuant to a common unlawful object, because there was in fact, no unlawful assembly. Each one of the accused was acting on his own and, therefore, could be held guilty only for his individual act.
3. So far as the allegations against A-2 are concerned, he is alleged to have injured PWs 1 and 2. PW 2 has turned hostile and did not support the case of the prosecution.
4. So far as PW 1 is concerned, there was a simple injury on his back of a very insignificant nature. PW 1 is also the first informant, but while lodging the first information report, he had stated that he had suffered a scratch on his back at the hands of some unknown persons. In his deposition, he admitted that he knew A-2 from before. It was found that he had not named A-2 as his assailant nor had he named him at all in the first information report. The High Court taking all these facts and circumstances came to the conclusion that the prosecution had not made out a case against A-2 and the other accused persons, who were appellants before the High Court. We find that the conclusion reached by the High Court is based on the evidence on record and we find no error in the appreciation of the evidence by the High Court. The High Court has taken a view which could reasonably be taken on the basis of the evidence on record. The conclusion reached by the High Court appears to be reasonable. In such circumstances, it would not be proper for this Court to interfere with the order of acquittal recorded by the High Court. Even if another view may be possible the order of acquittal must be sustained, if the finding of the High Court is a finding based on the evidence on record and is a possible reasonable view of the evidence.
5. We, therefore, dismiss Criminal Appeal No. 1044 of 1999 as having abated and Criminal Appeal No. 1043 of 1999 preferred by the State of Kerala as devoid of merit.
Order Accordingly.
