State of Andhra Pradesh and Others v Twin City Jewellers Association and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 November 2004
C.As. Nos. 1670-1672 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals are against the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court dated September 2, 1998.
2.  Briefly stated the facts are as follows:  Under the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, sales tax was leviable on jewellery at the rate of four per cent, by virtue of item 21 of the First Schedule. On May 19, 1995, G. O. Ms. No. 252 was issued. The relevant portion of which reads as follows :
"(b) that the tax leviable under the said Act shall in respect of sale of jewellery, including those set with precious stones be at the reduced rate of two per cent.
(c) that the tax leviable under the said Act shall in respect of sale of precious stones loose, other than pearls, be at the reduced rate of two per cent."
3. Thus, by virtue of this G. O., the rate of tax on jewellery was reduced to two per cent.
4.  On April 15, 1997, G. O. Ms. No. 303 was issued which referred to G. O. Ms. No. 252 and the relevant portion provided as follows :
"(a) Clause (b) of the said notification shall be rescinded.
(b) The tax leviable under the said Act shall in respect of sale of precious stones loose, other than pearls, be at the reduced rate of 3 per cent."
5.  It is clear that by virtue of this G. O., tax on precious stones, other than pearls was to be levied at the rate of three per cent. But clause (b) of the earlier G. O. Ms. No. 252 stood rescinded. The effect of this was that on jewellery tax again became leviable at the rate of four per cent. It appears that some jewellers and even some assessing officers were unaware of this G. O. Therefore, some returns were filed indicating tax levied at the rate of two per cent. Some of these returns have been accepted by some of the assessing officers.
6.  Thereafter, on May 4, 1998, an errata was issued which reads as follows :
"ERRATA.-
In the notification appended to G. O. Ms. No. 303, Revenue (CT. II) Department, dated April 15, 1997 for clause (a) read as follows :
'(a) The tax leviable under the said Act in respect of sales of articles of jewellery made of bullion or specie or both, including precious stones shall be at the reduced rate of three per cent."
7. This errata clarifies that even on jewellery the tax would be leviable at the reduced rate of three per cent.
8.  After issuance of this errata, writ petitions were filed by some of the jewellers claiming that the errata could operate prospectively only. It was claimed that for the period between April 23, 1997 and May 3, 1998, the tax was to be levied at the rate of two per cent as per G.O. No. 252. By the impugned judgment the High Court has accepted this contention. The High Court has proceeded on an entirely wrong assumption that the errata increased the rate of tax when in fact it had reduced the rate of tax.
9.  The High Court has been persuaded to accept an argument that G. O. Ms. No. 303 dated April 15, 1997 never saw the light of the day. It was brought to the attention of the High Court that G. O. Ms. No. 303 had in fact been brought to the notice of the Andhra Pradesh Federation of Chambers of Commerce. But surprisingly the High Court held that even this notice would not by itself prompt assessing authority to assess at the enhanced rate.
10.  It could not be denied that G. O. Ms. No. 303 dated April 15, 1997 was published in the Official Gazette on April 23, 1997. It is settled law that once publication, in the Official Gazette, takes place it is deemed to be knowledge to all. Ignorance of law can be no excuse. Once the G. O. was published, from the date it was published, it became effective. As it became effective from that date, the tax was leviable at the rate of four per cent. If some assessing officers, due to their own ignorance or laxity accepted returns at the rate of two per cent it did not permit the High Court to ignore the law and continue such laxity to prevail. It must be remembered that the assessing officer, who had assessed wrongly, could always reopen the assessment.
11. All that the errata, issued on May 4, 1998, does is reduce the rate of tax from four per cent to three per cent. The High Court has therefore, also erred in concluding that the rate of tax has been increased. The whole judgment proceeds on the basis that the rate of tax has been increased when in fact it has been reduced.
12.  We are unable to accept the submission that as the G. O. Ms, No. 304 is an errata it necessarily means that G. O. Ms. No. 303 had never come into existence. The word errata, in our view, implies that there was something in existence which is being corrected. The fact that this was an errata itself showed that there was something in existence which was being corrected. This aspect has also been overlooked by the High Court.
13.  It was also submitted that since there was a lot of confusion and that number of parties including assessing officers were not clear as to what was the rate of tax this court should not interfere with the judgment of the High Court which has been passed on equitable basis. We see no substance in this submission. If the law is clear then it must be given effect to. Merely, because the parties were unaware of the law does not mean that courts can ignore the law and provide to the contrary.
14.  Under the circumstances the impugned judgment stands set aside. The appeals are allowed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.
