National Insurance Company Limited v Maruti Udyog Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

27 February 2004
C.A. No. 12591 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  An appeal was filed in a proceeding arising under the Consumer Protection Act before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission in the State of Gujarat. The complaint was filed alleging that a defective car had been supplied to respondent No. 2 and he claimed damages in respect of the same from respondent No. 1. The Insurance Company was also impleaded as a party.
2. The State Commission examined the matter and after a detailed inquiry came to the conclusion that the defects noticed were attributable to respondent No. 1 and, therefore, it was liable to pay damages in a sum of Rs.1,48,046/- with interest at the rate of 15 per cent subject to certain terms. It was also stated that the Insurance Company will give valid discharge to respondent No. 1 in respect of the loss and damages. The order also debarred the filing of any civil suit by the Insurance Company in respect of the said subject matter against opposite party-respondent No. 1. It was stated that the complainant will be answerable and accountable to the Insurance Company for the money which is recovered in the suit which the Insurance Company had paid to the complainant and on those terms disposed of the matter.
3.  Respondent No. 1-Maruti Udyog which was opposite party No. 1 before the State Commission filed an appeal and that appeal came to be disposed of by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission without examining all the relevant facts, particularly the fact that the defects were found in the car which were attributable to respondent No. 1 herein. That aspect was lost sight of and the National Commission proceeded on the basis that the complainant before the State Commission was getting double benefit that once having recovered the sum from the Insurance Company, the complainant was liable to pay back the amount received from Maruti Udyog Ltd in pursuance of the order of the State Commission.
4.  In the facts and circumstances of the case, the order niade by the National Commission is set aside and the matter is remanded to it for hearing and disposal afresh in accordance with law. The appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Appeal disposed of.
