State of Rajasthan v Messrs Mittal Distributors and Another
Supreme Court of India

16 December 2004
Cr.A. No. 1277 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The State of Rajasthan has filed this appeal challenging the order passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Rajasthan at Jodhpur. The Drug Inspector, Bikaner conducted a raid in the shop by name M/s. Mittal Distributors and seized the medicine Vasimox kid tablet bearing Batch No. R-253 with manufacturing date 9/94 and date of expiry as 6/96 manufactured by M/s. Gujraj Medicraft Pvt. (L). The label displayed that it was a medicine of Doxaeillin tablets of 125 mg and on chemical analysis it was found that the tablet was having the contents of 73.65 mg.
2.  The Drug Inspector filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate Bikaner. In the complaint it was alleged that the accused had committed the offence under Sections 18(A)(1), 18(A)(VI) read with Section 16(1)(A), 17, 17A, 17B punishable under Section 27 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (for short 'the Act') and also under Section 18A punishable under Section 28 of the Act.
3.  The learned Magistrate before whom the matter came up for consideration noticed that the offence was punishable under Section 27(a) of the Act. It may be noticed that the offence punishable under Section 27(a) is punishable for imprisonment for a term not less than 5 years, which may extend to a term of life and with fine which shall not be less than Rs. 10,000/-. Without noticing Section 36 of the Act which empowers the Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the 1st Class to pass any sentence authorised by the Act notwithstanding the provisions contained in the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973; the Magistrate committed the case to the Sessions Court for being tried by him and the Sessions Judge by his order dated 2.7.2001 held that the Chief Judicial Magistrate himself was competent to try the case in view of Section 36 of the Act and sent back the file to the Chief Judicial Magistrate for taking appropriate action.
4. Even though there was no revision or any challenge from the side of the accused, the Sessions Judge incidentally went into the question and held that no offence was made under Section 27(a) of the Act. He discharged the accused and held that for other Sections namely, 18(A)(1), 18(A)(VI) read with Section 16(1)(A), 17, 17A, 17B the accused may be tried. Aggrieved by the same, the State preferred a revision before the High Court. But the learned single Judge without properly noticing the infirmity in the impugned order passed by the Sessions Court rejected the revision.
5.  We have heard the counsel for the appellant and the counsel for the respondent. In our opinion, the Sessions Judge was right in holding that the Chief Judicial Magistrate could try the case as he was empowered to try the case and impose appropriate punishment in view of Section 36 of the Act. But the Sessions Judge was not justified in passing the order of discharge of the accused for the offence under Section 27(a) of the Act. It is true that the accused were entitled to plead for discharge in case a charge was framed against them. However, the Sessions Judge could not have discharged the accused when he himself was holding that the order of transfer/committal was not justified.
6.  In the result, we set aside the order of the learned single Judge and also the order passed by the Sessions Judge and direct that the case be sent back to the Chief Judicial Magistrate Bikaner and the Magistrate shall dispose of the matter in accordance with law.
Needless to add that the accused shall be at liberty to raise all contentions that are available to them and the accused would also be at liberty to raise the plea that no offence was made out under Section 27(a) of the Act in view of the averments made in the complaint and the evidence adduced by the complainant. The appeal is disposed of accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
