Basappan. Guraddi v Moulasab
Supreme Court of India

1 April 2004
C.A.No. 1539 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is by the defendant No.5 questioning the validity and correctness of the impugned judgment passed by the High Court in a second appeal. The plaintiff filed suit for declaration that the 5th defendant had not acquired any title or interest over the suit property by virtue of sale deed dated 10.5.1982, executed by defendant No.1 to 4 for and consequential injunction restraining the 5th defendant from interfering with his possession.
2. The trial court dismissed the suit. The first appellate court, concurring with the finding recorded by the trial court, dismissed the first appeal. The High Court, in the second appeal, by the impugned judgment interfered with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by both the courts below and decreed the suit.
3.  The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the impugned judgment suffers from infirmity both on facts and law. The learned counsel further submitted that the High Court was not right and justified in allowing the second appeal without formulating any substantial question or questions of law, if arose for consideration between the parties, as mandatorily required under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure ('CPC' for short). The learned counsel also made few more submissions in support of her argument on merits.
4.  Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent argued in support of the impugned judgment. The learned counsel was not in a position to say that the High Court formulated any substantial question or questions of law.
5.  This court has repeatedly ruled that the High Court has to essentially formulate substantial question or questions of law before disposing of a second appeal, if such substantial question or questions of law arise for consideration between the parties, as required under Section 100 of CPC. This having not been done, the High Court committed a serious error in upsetting the concurrent findings of fact recorded by both the courts below. Since we are proposing to set aside the impugned judgment and remit the second appeal to the High Court for disposal in accordance with law, we do not wish to express one way or the other on the merits of the contentions urged on behalf of the parties.
6. In the result, the impugned judgment is set aside, the second appeal is remitted to the High Court for formulating substantial question or questions of law, if arise for consideration between the parties, and to dispose of the second appeal. All the contentions of the parties are left open to be urged before the High Court.
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
