A. P. Aboobaker Musaliar v Distt. Registrar (G), Kozhikode and Others
Supreme Court of India

18 August 2004
C.A. No. 4962 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The controversy relates to accepting a list of the governing body members of the Society filed by one E. K. Aboobaker Musaliar for the year 1990-91. The appellant also filed a list of governing body members for the same year. The District Registrar passed an order dated 22-3-1990 accepting the list given by E. K. Aboobaker Musaliar. The appellant was aggrieved by the said order of the District Registrar. He approached the High Court by filing a writ petition. A learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and quashed the order of the District Registrar taking a view that the District Registrar had no such power of deciding a dispute between the parties u/s. 4 of the Societies Registration Act, 1860 as the scope of S. 4 was limited for accepting the list of governing body members filed by a party. The correctness of the order of the learned Single Judge was called in question in writ appeal. The Division Bench of the High Court did not agree with the order of the learned Single Judge and held that the order passed by the District Registrar accepting the list of the governing body members given by E. K. Aboobaker Musaliar was correct. In so doing, the Division Bench has taken a view that in case where more than one list was filed of the members of the governing body, prima facie, the District Registrar could accept one list without adjudicating upon the dispute between the parties with regard to who was competent or which governing body was a validly constituted governing body and the final decision as to which is the validly constituted governing body could be left to the appropriate or competent authority to decide. The Division Bench of the High Court has also referred to Ss. 5 and 6 and other provisions of the Societies Registration Act to indicate that incidental power could be exercised. It has also observed that E. K. Aboobaker has been filing lists up to the preceding year and, prima facie, the Registrar accepted the lists filed by E. K. Aboobaker for the year in question and, if the appellant had any claim on the basis that he was competent to file the list of the governing body members, as the order of the Registrar had not become final, it was open to the parties to take that issue before the competent court. Aggrieved by the order of the Division Bench, the appellant is before us.
2. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contended that u/s. 4 of the Societies Registration Act, 1860, the District Registrar was not competent to adjudicate the dispute. According to him, the Division Bench of the High Court was not right in holding that the District Registrar has acted correctly in passing the order. Per contra, the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents made submissions in support of the impugned order.
3. In the order passed by the District Registrar, he has indicated reasons for accepting the list of members of the governing body filed by E. K. Aboobaker stating that he was filing the lists for the earlier years and, if the appellant was claiming on the basis that he was competent to file, he has to establish the same. Learned Single Judge has taken the view that under Section 4, the District Registrar has no power to adjudicate the controversy. The Division Bench of the High Court, in the impugned judgment, has observed thus :
"Thus, in the case of a dispute when more than one return is filed, the Registrar has got the power to find out as to which one he should accept. There may not be an elaborate enquiry. Prima facie he has to satisfy as to which return is to be accepted. In this case, we find that the list given by the appellant was accepted, because it had the support of court orders and also it was being followed for a large number of years. No doubt, such an enquiry made by the Registrar and the decision taken from it does not become final. The party can take up the matter before a competent court as to who are the members of the governing body."
4. It is clear from what is stated above by the Division Bench that the enquiry made by the Registrar and the decision taken did not become final and the party could take up the matter before a competent court as to who were the members of the governing body. When there were two lists, the District Registrar, prima facie, on being satisfied, accepted the list filed by E. K. Aboobaker as he was filing the lists for the previous years also. The District Registrar has only taken into consideration the Limited question of accepting the list of members of the governing body. The Division Bench of the High Court was right in taking the view that the list accepted by the District Registrar did not become final; if the appellant was aggrieved, it was open to him to establish his claim in a competent court/forum. To us, it appears even the District Registrar did not adjudicate any dispute as such. It was only a question of accepting, prima facie, the list of members of the governing body. If the appellant's claim was right and justified, merely because the District Registrar accepted the list of the governing body of members given by E. R. Aboobaker, it did not prevent him from establishing his claim in a competent court. Be that as it may, the controversy relates to accepting the list of the governing body members for the year 1990-91, thereafter, every year such list must have been submitted to the Registrar as required under the provisions of the Societies Registration Act. To us, it appears that the controversy raised in this appeal has become academic as of today. Thus, we find no merit in the appeal.
The civil appeal is dismissed. No costs.
