State of Karnataka v C. K. Pattamashetty and Another
Supreme Court of India

29 April 2004
C.As. No. 357 of 2000 With No. 358 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These two appeals involving common questions of law and facts were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common order.
The basic fact of this matter is not in dispute.
2.  Respondent 1 herein was appointed as an Assistant Librarian in Bangalore University. He was promoted as Deputy Librarian in May 1980. He was appointed as a Librarian in the University against a vacant post on 2-3-1994.
3.  The respondent filed a writ petition before the Karnataka High Court, inter alia, for issuance of a writ of or in the nature of mandamus directing the University to treat him as a Lecturer contending, inter alia, that he had been appointed as an Honorary Visiting Professor to participate in the teaching work of the Department of Library Science without any financial commitment by an office order dated 20-9-1986 and as such he would be deemed to be a "teacher of the University" within the meaning of the provisions of Section 2(8) of the Karnataka State Universities Act, 1976 (for short "the Act").
It was further contended that in terms of the said appointment as Honorary Visiting Professor he has been participating in the teaching work.
4.  The learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court dismissed the said writ petition stating:
"'Persons appointed' means they must have been appointed in accordance with the provisions of Section 49 of the Act. There is no provision under the Act providing for appointment of a visiting Professor. At the best it may be an arrangement made by the department concerned or Vice-Chancellor to meet the exigencies of the situation. As the visiting Professor or guest Lecturer is not appointed under the provisions of the Act, even though they satisfy the condition of imparting instruction cannot be said that they are teachers of the University for the purpose of conferring the benefit allowed to the teachers of the University."
5.  On an appeal preferred therefrom by the respondent herein, the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court, however, held that as the appellant had been performing teaching job, he would be treated to be a teacher for all practical purposes within the meaning of Sections 2(7) and 2(8) of the Act and would, thus, be entitled to all consequential benefits. The writ appeal was, accordingly, allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court with a direction to the appellant University to treat the post of Librarian held by the respondent as teacher and extend him the benefit of age of superannuation, which is fixed for the teachers.  However, as the respondent had retired in the meantime, he was held to be entitled to the monetary benefits, treating him as a "teacher".
6.  The learned counsel appearing for the appellant would submit that keeping in view the definition of "teacher" as contained in Sections 2(7) and 2(8) of the Act read with Sections 9, 19 and 49 thereof, the High Court must be held to have erred in issuing the impugned direction.
7.  Learned counsel appearing for the respondent, on the other hand, would draw our attention to the definition of "teacher" as contained in the statutes framed by the University, to show that thereunder not only salaried employees of the University appointed as Professor, Reader or Lecturer or other teachers of the University, but also the Professors, Readers or Lecturers or teachers of the University appointed by the University to work on honorary basis would come within the purview thereof.
8.  The fact that the respondent was appointed as a visiting Professor without any monetary benefit in the year 1986 is not in dispute. We, however, cannot lose sight of the fact that despite the same, he was appointed as a Librarian only in the year 1994. The respondent accepted the said post without any demur whatsoever. It is not disputed that in the University, there are two categories of posts; one being for "teaching" and the other being "non-teaching". The age of superannuation of teaching staff is prescribed as 60 years, whereas that of non-teaching staff is 58 years.
9.  The definition of "teachers of the University" as contained in Section 2(8) of the Act would clearly show that it would mean that the persons appointed for the purpose of imparting instruction in the University or in any college maintained by the University.
10. It is not disputed that the post of Librarian is also covered under Chapter III of the Act, as contained in Section 9(g) thereof. Section 19 of the Act provides for appointment of Librarian in terms whereof the Librarian would be a wholetime officer of the University and is appointed by a syndicate of the Board of Appointment referred to under Section 49 of the Act. Chapter VIII of the Act provides for appointment of teachers and other employees of the University.
11.  Chapter VIII provides for appointment of teachers and other employees of the University. Section 49 of the Act, which occurs in Chapter VIII provides for appointment of teachers as also the other officers of the University. Whereas clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 49 of the Act provides for constitution of a Board for selection to the posts of Professors, Readers and of the Librarian; clause (b) of sub-section (2) thereof provides for constitution of the Board for the purpose of selection to the posts of Lecturers.
12.  The bodies competent for the selection of Librarian and Lecturers are, therefore, distinct and different. Section 50 of the Act provides for appointment of non-teaching and ministerial staff.
13.  The "statute" framed by the University in exercise of its powers under Section 35 of the Act also defines "appointed teachers" to mean:
"'Appointed teachers of the University' shall be either:
(a) Salaried employees of the University appointed as Professors, Readers or Lecturers or other teachers of the University, or
(b) Professors, Readers or Lecturers or teachers of the University appointed by the University to work on honorary basis."
14.  A bare perusal of the aforementioned definition would, thus, clearly show that the appointed teachers with the University have been categorised in two categories; one who are salaried employees and the others who work on honorary basis. Those who were appointed to work on honorary basis, therefore, cannot be placed in the same class as that of the salaried employees.
15. In that view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the respondent herein, who was appointed to work as visiting Professor on honorary basis, could not claim the financial benefits of the salaried employee of the University as a Lecturer or other teachers of the University.
16.  Furthermore, if the respondent herein was not appointed as a member of the teaching staff by the University, the High Court, in our opinion, committed a manifest error in directing the University to treat the post held by him to be a teaching post. Such a direction by the High Court was unwarranted.
17. If the respondent had undertaken the teaching work voluntarily knowing fully well that he would not be entitled to have any financial gain thereby, he cannot be granted the same benefits only because he undertook teaching job pursuant thereto. He, thus, could not be given any financial benefit of a teacher, including the benefit of age of superannuation.
18.  For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained, which is set aside accordingly.
These appeals are allowed. No costs.
Appeals allowed.
