Mukund Swarup Mishra v Union of India and others
Supreme Court of India

19 July 2005
Transferred Case (Civil) No. 100 of 2002 With Transferred Case No.101 - 108 of 2002, I. A. No.3 in S.L.P. (C) No. 11556 of 2002, I. A. No.3 in S.L.P. (C) No.11568 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. We accept the Report, insofar as it concerns with the aforesaid 178 cases. The learned counsel for the parties are at liberty to obtain a copy of the synopsis from Dr. S. Muralidhar, learned counsel. On the within a period points in issue, objectors are permitted to file brief synopsis of four weeks. The learned Amicus Curiae may file written synopsis dealing with the points in issue within two weeks thereafter.
2. List these matters for hearing on the points in issue after six weeks on a non-miscellaneous day.
3. The tabular statement also mentions eleven interlocutory applications which relate to the cases recommended to be approved by the Committee. Before hearing the learned counsel on the twenty three points, above-noted, we would like to hear the submissions of the applicants in respect of these applications on the next date of hearing.
4. The interim orders, if any, in relation to afore-stated 178 cases stand vacated. In respect of these cases, the oil companies would proceed on the basis of the recommendation of the Committee. Ordered accordingly. I.A. No.363: Mr. Ajay K. Agrawal, learned counsel, seeks leave to dismissed as withdraw the interlocutory application. It is, accordingly, withdrawn.
5. Pursuant to orders dated 18th January, 2005 and 20th April, 2005, Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, learned Amicus Curiae, assisted by Dr. S. Muralidhar, learned counsel, has filed in court detailed synopsis setting out twenty three points which arise for consideration on the basis of various applications filed by the parties after submission of the Report by the Committee constituted by this Court. Along with the synopsis, a tabular statement of cases has also been filed. Out of 414 cases referred to the Committee, 108 allotments were approved and 301 were recommended not to be approved. Five cases for allotment were not considered. In all, as per the said statement, total number of interlocutory applications that have been filed appear to be 269. Further, it seems that in 178 cases, no objections have been filed against the Report of the Committee, details whereof have been furnished in synopsis.
6. We accept the Report, insofar as it concerns with the aforesaid 178 cases.
7. The learned counsel for the parties are at liberty to obtain a copy of the synopsis from Dr. S. Muralidhar, learned counsel. On the points in issue, objectors are permitted to file brief synopsis within a period of four weeks. The learned Amicus Curiae may file written synopsis dealing with the points in issue within two weeks thereafter.
8. List these matters for hearing on the points in issue after six weeks on a non-miscellaneous day.
9. The tabular statement also mentions eleven interlocutory applications which relate to the cases recommended to be approved by the Committee. Before hearing the learned counsel on the twenty three points, above-noted, we would like to hear the submissions of the applicants in respect of these applications on the next date of hearing.
10. The interim orders, if any, in relation to afore- stated 178 cases stand vacated. In respect of these cases, the oil companies would proceed on the basis of the recommendation of the Committee.
Ordered accordingly. I.A. No.363:
Mr. Ajay K. Agrawal, learned counsel, seeks leave to withdraw the interlocutory application. It is, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn.
Application dismissed
