State of Uttar Pradesh and others v Maya Srivastava
Supreme Court of India

10 January 2005
C.A. No. 248 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 16099 of 2004)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Leave granted.
1.  The grievance of the appellant State is that by an interim order, the ultimate relief claimed was granted by the Division Bench while admitting the appeal preferred against the judgment of learned Single Judge. It appears that the learned Single Judge had directed by order dated 26-9-2003, that the respondent was to be considered for appointment to a suitable post under the Dying in Harness Rules on compassionate ground by ignoring the government orders dated 13-11-2000 and 27-12-2000.
2. The Division Bench has refused the prayer for interim relief made by the appellant State on the ground that the order of learned Single Judge which was to be complied with within a particular time, was not complied with.
3.  From a perusal of the learned Single Judge's order, we find that the direction was for consideration of her case subject to eligibility of the respondent under the Dying in Harness Rules on compassionate ground. But the Division Bench, by the impugned order, has directed appointment.
4.  We are of the view that the direction given by the Division Bench was not in order. There could not have been any direction for appointment when learned Single Judge's order which was impugned before the Division Bench by the appellant State, only directed consideration. In view of the above, we set aside the interim order passed by the High Court directing appointment of the respondent. At the same time, considering the nature of the dispute, we request the High Court to dispose of the pending matter within three months from the date of receipt of copy of the order. We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the appeal which is pending before the High Court.
5.  In the meantime, nothing will stand in the way of the State Government considering the directions of the learned Single Judge by which the State Government was directed to consider the case of the respondent under the Dying in Harness Scheme on compassionate ground, if she was found otherwise eligible.
The appeal is accordingly, disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
