Commissioner of Central Excise, Meerut v Rama Vision Limited
Supreme Court of India

1 March 2005
C.A. No, 616 0/2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Respondent absent even though served.
1.  This Appeal is against the judgment dated 4th May, 1999. The question was whether the Respondent was entitled to Modvat credit of duty paid on HSD oil used as fuel for generation of electricity in the Respondent's factory. The Tribunal by the impugned judgment has held that they are so entitled.
2.  Section 112 of the Finance Act 2000 provides as follows:
"Validation of the denial of credit of duty paid on high speed diesel oil.
1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any rule of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, no credit of any duty paid on high speed diesel oil al any time during the period commencing on and from the 16lh day of March, 1995 and ending with the day the Finance Act, 2000 receives the assent of the President, shall be deemed to be admissible.
(2) Any action taken or anything done or purported to have been taken or done at any time during the said period under the Centra! Excise Act or any rules made there under to deny the credit of any duty in respect of high speed diesel oil, and also to disallow such credit to be utilised for payment of any kind of duty on any excisable goods shall be deemed to be, and to always have been, for all purposes, as validly and effectively taken or done, as if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force at all material times and, accordingly, notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority.
(a) no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any court, tribunal or other authority for allowing the credit of the duty paid on high speed diesel oil and no enforcement shall be made by any court, tribunal or other authority of any decree or order allowing such credit of duty as if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force at all material times;
(b) recovery shall be made of all the credit of duty, which have been taken or utilised but which would not have been allowed to be taken or utilised, if the provisions of sub-section (1) had been in force at all material times, within a period of thirty days from the date on which the Finance Act, 2000 receives the assent of the President and in the event of non-payment of such credit of duty within this period/ in addition to the amount of credit of such duty recoverable, interest at the rate of twenty four per cent per annum shall be payable, from the date immediately after the expiry of the said period of thirty days till the date of payment.
Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no act or omission on the part of any person shall be punishable as an offence which would not have been so punishable if this section had not come into force."
Thus, by this provision no credit is admissible on any duty paid on high speed diesel oil for the period commencing from 16th March, 1995 and ending with the day the Finance Act, 2000 received the assent of the President. We are told that the President gave his assent on 1st April, 2000. In view of validation Act, the Judgment of the Tribunal to this extent cannot be sustained and is accordingly set aside.
3.  However, as provided by this Court in the case of Commissioner of Central Excise, Hyderabad, v. Associated Cement Companies Ltd. reported in 2004 Indlaw SC 1684. We also take note of the fact that the impugned judgment is dated 4th May, 1999. The Validation Act came into force on 1st April, 2000. We are applying it today. The Respondent is absent. He will have to be given time to make payment.
4. We, therefore, direct that the time to make payment, as provided in sub clause 2(b) of Section 112, will only commence from the date intimation of this order is given to the Respondent by the Appellant. We are also of the view that on these facts penalty cannot be imposed. Thus the imposition of penalty is set aside.
5.  The Appeal stands disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.
The Appellant to intimate the party forthwith.
Appeal disposed of.
