Sandeep Kumar Tekriwal and another v Kamla Devi (Dead) Through Lrs.
Supreme Court of India

28 February 2005
C.A. No. 2252 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In this case leave was granted on 18-3-2002. At that time it was brought to the notice of the Court that the sole respondent had died and no steps were required to be taken to bring on record her legal representatives as they had already been brought on record before the High Court.
2.  Office requested the counsel for the appellants to file certified copy of the orders of the High Court by which legal representatives of the deceased-respondent were brought on record.
3. Counsel for the appellant submitted a letter dated 18-12-2002 stating therein that Smt Kamla Devi died on 20-5-1996 and this fact was brought to the notice of the High Court where the matter was pending at that time and legal representatives had already been brought on record. The factum of bringing on record the legal representatives of the deceased has not been indicated in the order passed by the High Court.
4.  In spite of the requests made by the office, counsel for the appellants did not file the certified copy of the order of the High Court by which legal representatives of the deceased-respondents were brought on record. The Registry had addressed a communication to the counsel for the appellants on 9-1-2003 to file the certified copy of the order of the High Court followed by reminders dated 4-10-2004 and a default notice dated 5-11-2004.
5. In spite of repeated reminders counsel for the appellants has failed to put on record the certified copy of the order by which the legal representatives of the deceased-respondents were brought on record. Counsel for the appellants seeks one more opportunity to do the needful which is declined.
6.  Enough number of opportunities have been granted to the counsel to do the needful. No ground is made out for the grant of another opportunity to do the needful. Appeal is dismissed for non-prosecution.
Appeal dismissed.
