Rajasthan SRTC and another v Ugma Ram Choudhry
Supreme Court of India

26 October 2005
C.As. No. 999 of 2004 with Nos. 1000, 1002 and 1003 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Delay condoned.
1.  One of the questions raised in these appeals is whether the civil court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit filed by the respondent for setting aside an order of termination and for consequential declarations. This question is no longer res integra. This Court in Rajasthan SRTC v. Krishna Kant 1995 Indlaw SC 936 and in Rajasthan SRTC v. Zakir Hussain 2005 Indlaw SC 472 and in an unreported order of this Court dated 6-10-2005 in Rajasthan SRTC v. Khadarmal 2005 Indlaw SC 1283 has held that a civil court has no jurisdiction.
2. In view of these decisions, it has to be held that the civil court has no jurisdiction to grant a relief of reinstatement and the consequential reliefs. Thus, the orders passed are without jurisdiction and are hereby set aside.
3.  Reliance was placed upon the judgment in Krishna Kant case 1995 Indlaw SC 936 (supra) which reads as follows:
"It is directed that the principles enunciated in this judgment shall apply to all pending matters except where decrees have been passed by the trial court and the matters are pending in appeal or second appeal, as the case may be. All suits pending in the trial court shall be governed by the principles enunciated herein - as also the suits and proceedings to be instituted hereinafter." It was submitted that even in this case the suit was filed much before this judgment was delivered. It was submitted that the decree had also been passed before this judgment was delivered. It was submitted that this Court should also hold that the decree is not affected by the judgment of this Court.
4.  Krishna Kant's case 1995 Indlaw SC 936 (supra) has been considered by this Court in Zakir Hussain's case 2005 Indlaw SC 472 (supra). It has been held that once it is held that the civil court has no jurisdiction, the consequences must follow. This view has been reiterated by this Court in the unreported judgment in Khadarmal case 2005 Indlaw SC 1283 (supra). Therefore, it is not possible to accept this submission.
5.  It is next submitted that some time be given to the respondent to obtain appropriate orders from the Industrial Court or the Labour Court to which a reference may be made by the State Goverment.
6.  In our view, considering the fact that the respondents have been working in most cases since 1990 or prior thereto, it would be appropriate that we direct the State Government to make a reference under Section 10, to the appropriate court, within a period of three months from today. A copy of this order to be sent to the State Government forthwith. The respondent will be at liberty to apply for interim relief before that court. Such application, if made, will undoubtedly be decided on its own merits and in accordance with law. The appellants are directed to maintain status quo for a period of four months from today.
7.  We clarify that if any back wages have been paid, they shall not be recovered. If, however, they have not been paid there will now be no question of paying the same.
8.  It must also be clarified that Mr Jain has based his submission on the basis that, according to the appellants, they are an industry. The appellants will therefore not contend nor be allowed to contend before the appropriate court that they are not an industry.
9.  The appeals stand disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeals disposed of.
