Action Comm. for Imp. of Srikrishna R. and others v U. O. I. and others
Supreme Court of India

16 November 2005
W.P. (Civil) No(s). 527 of 1998 with W.P(C) No. 164 of 1999 S.L.P.(C) No. 1771 of 1999, W.P(C) No. 182 of 2001 W.P(C) No. 40 of 1999 and with W.P(C) No. 542 of 1998
The Order of the Court was as follows :
SLP(C) No.1771 of 1999 be delinked.
1. Counsel for the State of Maharashtra submits that pursuant to the Report of Justice Srikrishna, various actions had been taken by the State of Maharashtra and the details of such action taken have been filed in the form of affidavits in six volumes and Shri A.K.Raghuvanshi, the then Addl. Commissioner of Police has filed the supporting affidavit. Counsel for the various petitioners submit that still the government have not done the needful and it is alleged that many of the police officers who should have been prosecuted have not been prosecuted and even departmental actions have not been taken against them. It is alleged that many prosecutions were not initiated though the Commission had recommended such action. It is further alleged that many of the deserving victims have not been compensated by the State Government though it was declared that the compensation would be paid to all these victims and persons who were really deserving to get compensation were not paid though appropriate evidence was furnished to the offence regarding the death of the victims in this regard.
2. Under the above circumstances, the four petitioners may go through the six volumes of affidavit and verify the action taken by the state government. In case if there is any serious lapse on the part of the government, the petitioners may point out the serious lapse made on the part of the Government by filing a proper affidavit in a tabular form containing the details of the action taken by the State Government and the failure if any, on the part of the State Government and a reference may also be made to the Commission's Report. All these facts are to be filed in this Court within a period of eight weeks.
3. Post these matters for final disposal on Tuesday, the 24th January, 2006.
Order accordingly
