Radhika Gupta v Darshan Gupta
Supreme Court of India

4 April 2005
C.As. Nos. 2418-19 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (C) Nos. 6074-75 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  These appeals filed by the wife arise out of common impugned judgment of the High Court passed in matrimonial proceedings for divorce instituted by the husband on the ground of alleged mental illness of the wife. The High Court, in the operative part of its order, has made the following directions:
"That the wife shall give her chief-examination on affidavit by 12-3-2005, and shall appear before the trial court on 19-3-2005, and be cross-examined, preferably in camera. After her statement is recorded, she shall be referred for medical examination by the experts. The revision petitions are accordingly disposed of. No costs."
2.  Learned counsel appearing for the wife submits that the wife should be first allowed to produce medical evidence of her mental fitness and it is only thereafter she should be given an option to enter into the witness box to oppose the case and evidence led by the husband.
3.  We have also heard learned counsel appearing for the husband who has made some efforts to support the impugned directions contained in the order of the High Court.
4.  In our opinion, in law the wife has an option to decide in what manner she would oppose the ground of mental illness alleged against her. The High Court erred in directing that she would first give evidence on affidavit as her examination-in-chief and thereafter appear for cross-examination. The proper course which ought to have been adopted by the High Court was to allow her to undergo medical examination, if she so desired, and thereafter give her oral evidence, if she so liked to do. The rigid procedure for recording evidence as directed by the High Court is unwarranted in law and particularly in matrimonial proceedings of the nature where the wife has to face charge of her mental unfitness.
5.  For the reasons aforesaid, we set aside the impugned part of the direction contained in the order of the High Court quoted above. The matrimonial court shall allow the wife to produce her medical evidence and thereafter she will have an option to give her oral evidence.
6. Learned counsel for the appellant has pointed out that during the pendency of these appeals, the Family Court has closed the evidence of the wife. In such circumstances, it is open to the wife to file a proper application before the Family Court with a request to reopen her case for enabling her to lead her evidence.
The appeals are allowed accordingly.
Appeals allowed.
