Kabbur Ginning and Trading Company and others v Union of India and others
Supreme Court of India

10 February 2005
C.As. Nos. 4905-06 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  These appeals by grant of special leave are directed against the judgment of the Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore dated 3-9-1997, in RSA No. 750 of 1988 and RSA No. 749 of 1989, disposed of by passing a common judgment.
2. The High Court by the impugned judgment has set aside the judgment and decrees passed by the courts below decreeing the suits of the plaintiff appellants holding that they had a right of easement over the goods-shed road constructed by the Railway next to Ranebennur Station for carrying of goods to the goods-shed.
3.  The case of the respondents was that the appellants were operating and using the road under a licence given to them and they have no right over the goods-shed road as per the conditions of the licence. The relevant conditions read:
"6. The licensees shall maintain the gate themselves to the satisfaction of the Divisional Superintendent of this Government at Hubli.
7. The licensees shall claim no right of property or other kind of ownership on account of having paid the cost of the work and the licensees shall agree to the gates becoming the exclusive property of the Government.
8. The licensees shall not be entitled to or claim a right of way notwithstanding the fact that the gate was provided for and is maintained by them."
4.  Since the Railway wanted to expand and extend the railway operations, a communication terminating the licence was addressed to the appellants by giving three months notice as required under the licence.
5.  Although, we are not happy with the reasoning given by the High Court for setting aside the judgments and decrees of the courts below but we agree with the conclusion arrived at by the High Court that the appellants being the licensees could not claim a right of easement over a road constructed by the Railway for its private use for carrying of goods to the goods-shed especially in view of the conditions contained in the licence, referred to above.
The civil appeals are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.
