B. L. Chakraborty Alias Binode Lal Chakraborty v State of West Bengal and others
Supreme Court of India

3 July 2005
C.A. No. 1575 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 3294 of 2004)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The dispute between the parties relates to fixation of rent and consequently the quantum of arrears. Whether the arrears are liable to be paid with interest, is also a question which incidentally arises.
When the dispute came up before the learned Single Judge hearing the same in exercise of the writ jurisdiction of the High Court, the learned Single Judge formed an opinion that the dispute arose out of a contract and also required evidence for settling the disputed questions of fact and, therefore, refused to allow any relief to the appellant.
2. The order of the learned Single Judge has been upheld by the Division Bench. Feeling aggrieved, the appellant has filed this appeal by special leave.
3.  Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are satisfied that the ends of justice demand the matter be remitted to the learned Single Judge of the High Court for hearing and decision on merits. It is not disputed that Respondent 2 National Textile Corporation is "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
Without going into the technicality whether a dispute originating from a contract can be heard and decided in exercise of writ jurisdiction, primarily with a view to put an end to a long-pending dispute we deem it proper that the matter is heard and determined finally by the High Court.
4. If the learned Judge of the High Court feels that any evidence is required to be adduced, then the High Court may have the same recorded by appointing either a Commissioner or by directing any of the courts or authorities subordinate to the High Court to record the evidence along with its finding and certify the same to the High Court which will take the decision.
5.  The learned counsel for the appellant submits that huge arrears have accumulated and some payment ought to be made to the appellant by way of interim payment. We allow the appellant liberty of making that prayer before the High Court. In the meantime, it is directed that the amount of Rs. 1,67,754.72p. as per calculation contained in the chart submitted by the appellant in this Court titled as "Summary of the payment and arrears of rent unpaid up to 30-6-2004" shall be paid by Respondent 2 to the appellant within a period of six weeks from today.
This payment shall be treated as an interim payment, without prejudice to the rights and contentions of either party, and shall be available for adjustment and appropriation consistently with the final order made by the High Court.
6.  The judgment dated 27-9-2001 passed by the learned Single Judge and the impugned judgment dated 29-8-2003 of the Division Bench are both set aside.
The appeal stands allowed in the terms above stated.
7.  The parties through their respective counsel are directed to appear in the High Court on 4-4-2005.
Appeal allowed.
