Brij Mohan Lal v Union of India and others
Supreme Court of India

29 July 2005
Transfer Case (Civil) No(s). 22 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The affidavit filed on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh is wholly unsatisfactory.
2. The State of Uttar Pradesh as also the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, is directed to file appropriate affidavits within three weeks as regard the continuity of service or otherwise of those judicial officers including those who had been reverted to the post of Civil Judge (Senior Division).
IA 12
Let notice be issued to the Union of India and also to the High Court of Judicature at Calcutta returnable within four weeks. Counter Affidavits be filed within three weeks.
IA 11
IA Nos. 11 and 12 will be heard together.
IA 13
Issue notice returnable within four weeks.
3. Ms. D. Bharati Reddy and Mr. T.V. Ratnam, learned counsel accept notice on behalf of the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Union of India respectively.
4. Affidavits be filed within three weeks. IA 14 Issue notice to the State of Madhya Pradesh and also the High Court of Madhya Pradesh returnable within four weeks. Mr. C.D. Singh, and Mr.T.V. Ratnam, learned counsel accept notice on behalf of the State of M.P. and the Union of India respectively.
Counter Affidavits be filed within three weeks.
5. It appears that despite this Court's order dated 29th April, 2005 some of the States/High Courts have not filed their respective affidavits. The Registry shall inform the standing counsel appearing on behalf of the States/High Courts that the affidavits to be filed within three weeks.
6. Mr. Tara Chand Sharma, learned counsel accepts notice on behalf of the State of Jammu & Kashmir and the J & K High Court.
7. Mr. P.H. Parekh, appearing on behalf of the Patna High Court states that he files an affidavit. Let it be kept on record. Registry is directed to number the affidavit as an I.A.
8. Issue notice. Mr. B.B. Singh learned counsel accepts notice on behalf of the State of Bihar.
List the matters after four weeks.
Order accordingly
