Aeon's Construction Products Limited v Commissioner of Central Excise, Chennai
Supreme Court of India

20 April 2005
C.A. No. 1055 of 2005
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This appeal is against the judgment of the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, Southern Regional Bench, Chennai dated 23-9-2004. The appellants manufacture paving blocks. They claim benefit of certain notifications. Therefore, show-cause notice dated 11-10-1999 was issued to them alleging that they were not entitled to the benefit of the notification for the period 1994-95 to 1997 and that after that period they were classifiable under Tariff Item 6807.90 instead of 6807.20 as classified by them. Subsequently, the show-cause notices dated 4-11-1999 and 20-11 -2000 were also issued to them.
2.  After adjudication the matter went to the Tribunal. The Tribunal has held in favour of the appellants that the extended period of limitation was not available. The Department has not come in appeal against that finding. Therefore, the dispute regarding show-cause notice dated 11-10-1999 no longer survives.
3.  The question still remains in respect of the two show-cause notices dated 4-11-1999 and 20-11-2000. The question is whether the product is classifiable under Tariff Item 6807.20 or 6807.90. The two tariff items read as follows:
4.  The Commissioner as well as the Tribunal have both held that no evidence has been led by the party to show that blocks manufactured by them or that the kind of blocks manufactured by them are used in a prefabricated building. Nothing could be shown to us that these findings are incorrect. Reference was made by Mr A.K. Ganguli, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants, upon a lot of material which deals with what is a prefabricated building and what are prefabricated blocks. But nothing could be shown to us to indicate that blocks of the kind manufactured by the appellants are used in prefabricated building. As there is no material on record it is clear that the blocks manufactured by the appellants cannot fall under Tariff Item 6807.20. They must necessarily fall under Tariff Item 6807.90.
5.  It was next contended that the notices had been issued by the Superintendent of Central Excise. Reliance was placed upon certain circulars issued by the Board wherein it has been set out that if there are any allegations of fraud, collusion, wilful misstatement or suppression of fact, etc. then show-cause notices should be issued and adjudicated by a Commissioner without limitation and by an Additional Commissioner up to a limit of Rs 10 lakhs. It was submitted that the show-cause notices issued by the Superintendent are without jurisdiction. In this behalf reliance was placed upon the judgments of this Court in the case of CCE v. Alcobex Metals 2003 Indlaw SC 278 and CCE v. Frick India Ltd. 2000 Indlaw SC 2328
6. It must be noted that both these judgments deal with a situation prior to 14-5-1992 when Section 11-A was amended. Prior to 14-5-1992 in cases where there were allegations of fraud, collusion, wilful misstatement or suppression of fact, the Act itself provided that it was the Collector of Central Excise who had to issue the notice. However, with effect from 14-5-1992 Section 11-A has been amended. Under the amended section any Central Excise Officer can issue a show-cause notice. This change has been taken note of by this Court in the case of Pahwa Chemicals (P) Ltd. v. CCE 2005 Indlaw SC 122. In this case after taking note of the change in the Act it has been held as follows:
"In order to consider the powers of the Board, one needs to see certain provisions of the Act. S. 2(b) defines 'Central Excise Officer' and it is mentioned therein that any officer of the Central Excise Department or any person who has been invested by the Board with any of the powers of the Central Excise Officer would be a Central Excise Officer. Thus, the Board has power to invest any Central Excise Officer or any other officer with powers of Central Excise Officer. By virtue of Section 37-B the Board can issue orders, instructions or directions to the Central Excise Officers and such officers must follow such orders, instructions or directions of the Board. However, these directions can only be for the purpose of uniformity in the classification of excisable goods or with respect to levy of duties of excise on such goods. It is thus clear that the Board has no power to issue instructions or orders contrary to the provisions of the Act or in derogation of the provisions of the Act. The Board can only issue such direction as is necessary for the purpose of and in furtherance of the provisions of the Act. The instructions issued by the Board have to be within the four corners of the Act. If, therefore, the Act vests in the Central Excise Officers jurisdiction to issue show- cause notices and to adjudicate, the Board has no power to cut down that jurisdiction. However, for the purposes of better administration of levy and collection of duty and for purpose of classification of goods the Board may issue directions allocating certain types of works to certain officers or classes of officers. The circulars relied upon are, therefore, nothing more than administrative directions allocating various types of works to various classes of officers. These administrative directions cannot take away jurisdiction vested in a Central Excise Officer under the Act. At the highest all that can be said is that Central Excise Officers, as a matter of propriety, must follow the directions and only deal with the work which has been allotted to them by virtue of these circulars. But if an officer still issues a notice or adjudicates contrary to the circulars it would not be a ground for holding that he had no jurisdiction to issue the show-cause notice or to set aside the adjudication.
14. The Tribunal has in its order dated 25-6-2003, inter alia, held as follows:
Further, at the relevant time as per the provisions of Section 11-A(1) proper officer which includes Superintendent is competent to issue the show-cause notice. The Board's circular is only the administrative direction which does not cause any prejudice to the appellants....'
In our view this is absolutely correct. We, therefore, see no infirmity in the judgment dated 25-6-2003. We hold that the Superintendent had jurisdiction to issue show-cause notice and the Deputy Commissioner had jurisdiction to adjudicate."
7.  It was, however, submitted that this judgment requires reconsideration as the provisions of S. 33 and S. 37(2)(b) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 have not been noted. S. 33 merely deals with power of adjudication in cases of confiscations and penalties. It provides that where anything is liable to confiscation or any person is liable to a penalty, such confiscation or penalty may be adjudged without limit by a Commissioner and in case of confiscation not exceeding Rs 500 and imposition of penalty not exceeding Rs 250 by an Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise. The proviso provides that the Central Board of Excise and Customs may, in the case of any officer performing the duties of an Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner reduce the limits indicated in cl. (b) of this section and may confer on any other officer the powers indicated in cls. (a) or (b).
8. In our view, S. 33 makes no difference to the position of law as enumerated in Pahwa Chemicals case 2005 Indlaw SC 122 (supra). To the extent S. 33 permits the Board to reduce limits or confer power on other officers the Board may do so. But this is in respect of adjudication. Significantly in respect of issuance of show-cause notices, no such power has been given to the Board. This itself indicates that where the legislature so intended it specifically so provided. Thus where the legislature has purposely omitted to so provide, it clearly indicates that the Board was not authorised to limit powers under the Act. S. 37 merely gives rule-making power to the Central Government. No rule could be shown to us under which the Board could whittle down the jurisdiction of a Central Excise Officer as given to that officer under the Act.
9.  We, therefore, see no reason to take a different view and we reaffirm the decision given in Pahwa Chemicals case 2005 Indlaw SC 122 (supra).
10.  In this view of the matter, we see no infirmity in the order of the Tribunal. The appeal stands dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
