Manish Ujwal and others v Maharishi Dayanand Saraswati University and others
Supreme Court of India

16 August 2005
C.As. No. 5077 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 15467 of 2005) with No. 5079 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 16796 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
Leave granted.
1.  Challenge, before us, is to the correctness of the impugned judgment of the High Court whereby the decision of the learned Single Judge was affirmed by the Division Bench on coming to the conclusion that it cannot be said with certainty that the answers to the six questions given in the answer keys were erroneous and incorrect.
2.  Briefly, the facts are that the student community filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging their ranking in the entrance tests, which were conducted by Respondent 1 Maharishi Dayanand Saraswati University (for short "the University") on 9-5-2005, 10-5-2005 and 11-5-2005, for admission to medical and dental courses in various colleges in the State of Rajasthan. The grievance of the students was that various key answers on the basis whereof the answer-sheets were evaluated were wrong and, consequently, wrong and erroneous ranking was prepared.
3.  On the aforesaid three dates, examinations were held for Physics, Chemistry and Biology subjects respectively. The results were declared on 22-5-2005 on internet and published in the newspapers on 23-5-2005. The total marks allotted to each subject were 300 i.e. 900 in total. Each paper had 100 questions of three marks each. The marking system provided for reducing one mark for each wrong answer, which means that negative- marking system was adopted. The answers were objective, giving multiple choices to the students i.e. A/B/C/D. The controversy before the High Court and again agitated before this Court by the students after being unsuccessful before the High Court is the wrong key answers pertaining to various answers in all the three subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology. The learned Single Judge sought for the expert opinion of Jodhpur University and Udaipur University.
4. For the present purpose, we are not noticing and considering those key answers in respect whereof there is a difference of opinion. We are considering only those key answers on which there is unanimity. Admittedly, six key answers; one in relation to Physics; two in relation to Chemistry; and three in relation to Biology were incorrect and erroneous. The opinion of the experts of both Jodhpur and Udaipur Universities as regards the said questions was same, according to which the key answers, as provided by the respondent University, were erroneous. The question as to whether in respect of these questions, the key answers provided by the University were erroneous and wrong has not presented any difficulty to this Court in view of a fair stand taken by the learned counsel for the University before us. The learned counsel has admitted that the key answers were wrong. The said six questions and the key answers, as provided, and the correct answers are as under:
5.  We are not referring to the answers given by the experts from Jodhpur and Udaipur Universities in respect of other questions in view of the difference of opinion and are proceeding only on the basis of the erroneous key answers in relation to the aforesaid six questions. As to the impact of evaluating answers by feeding incorrect keys, at present, it may not be exactly possible to comment, also keeping in view the adoption of negative- marking system and a very tough cut-throat competition amongst the students.
6.  We may, however, note as to what the appellants have been tentatively projected. It is as under:
7. The aforesaid is only an illustration to show if the figures given above are found to be correct on re-evaluation with correct answers, it can make a considerable difference when rank is dependent even on a fraction of a mark.
8.  It seems that nearly thirty thousand students appeared in the examination held between 9-5-2005 and 11-5-2005. It was an entrance examination for admissions in the government medical and dental colleges as also for fifty per cent State quota in the said disciplines in private colleges and not for the remaining management quota. On the basis of the results declared and ranking given, the first counselling for admission to the aforesaid courses in government colleges and fifty per cent State quota in private colleges has already taken place. It is possible that fresh evaluation by feeding correct key answers to the six questions may have adverse impact also on those who may have already secured admission on the basis of the results declared and ranking given by feeding incorrect keys in relation to these questions. Though we are of the view that the appellants in particular and the student community in general, whether one has approached the court or not, should not suffer on account of demonstrably incorrect key answers but, at the same time, if the admissions already granted as a result of first counselling are disturbed, it is possible that the very commencement of the course may be delayed and the admission process for the courses may go beyond 30-9-2005, which is the cut-off date, according to the time-schedule in the Regulations and as per the law laid down by this Court in Mridul Dhar (Minor) v. Union of India 2005 Indlaw SC 40.
9. In this view, we make it clear that fresh evaluation of the papers by feeding correct key answers would not affect the students who have secured admissions as a result of the first counselling on the basis of ranking given with reference to the results already declared.
10.  In Kanpur University v. Samir Gupta 1983 Indlaw SC 143 considering a similar problem, this Court held that there is an assumption about the key answers being correct and in case of doubt, the Court would unquestionably prefer the key answers. It is for this reason that we have not referred to those key answers in respect whereof there is a doubt as a result of difference of opinion between the experts. Regarding the key answers in respect whereof the matter is beyond the realm of doubt, this Court has held that it would be unfair to penalise the students for not giving an answer which accords with the key answer, that is to say, with an answer which is demonstrated to be wrong. There is no dispute about the aforesaid six key answers being demonstrably wrong and this fact has rightly not been questioned by the learned counsel for the University. In this view, students cannot be made to suffer for the fault and negligence of the University.
11.  The High Court has committed a serious illegality in coming to the conclusion that "it cannot be said with certainty that answers to the six questions given in the key answers were erroneous and incorrect". As already noticed, the key answers are palpably and demonstrably erroneous. In that view of the matter, the student community, whether the appellants or intervenors or even those who did not approach the High Court or this Court, cannot be made to suffer on account of errors committed by the University. For the present, we say no more because there is nothing on record as to how this error crept up in giving the erroneous key answers and who was negligent.
12. At the same time, however, it is necessary to note that the University and those who prepare the key answers have to be very careful and abundant caution is necessary in these matters for more than one reason. We mention few of those; first and paramount reason being the welfare of the student as a wrong key answer can result in the merit being made a casualty. One can well understand the predicament of a young student at the threshold of his or her career if despite giving correct answer, the student suffers as a result of wrong and demonstrably erroneous key answers; the second reason is that the courts are slow in interfering in educational matters which, in turn, casts a higher responsibility on the University while preparing the key answers; and thirdly, in cases of doubt, the benefit goes in favour of the University and not in favour of the students. If this attitude of casual approach in providing key answers is adopted by the persons concerned, directions may have to be issued for taking appropriate action, including disciplinary action, against those responsible for wrong and demonstrably erroneous key answers, but we refrain from issuing such directions in the present case.
13.  The second counselling for the admission abovementioned, we are informed, is fixed from 25-8-2005, onwards. We direct re-evaluation of all the questions by feeding correct answers, as abovenoticed, and on that basis correct number of marks obtained by all the students should be assigned and their ranking prepared. This exercise shall be completed within a period of three days from today. List so prepared shall be put on internet soon thereafter as also be published in the newspapers wherein it was earlier published. The second counselling and admissions hereinafter in the medical and dental courses in the State of Rajasthan in government colleges as also in the private colleges insofar as the State quota is concerned would be made on the basis of ranking as per the list which will now be prepared by the University pursuant to the directions of this Court. The merit list shall be prepared for the same number of students as it was prepared earlier while declaring the results on 22-5-2005 and 23-5-2005.
14.  For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court, allow the appeals and impose on Respondent 1 University cost amounting to rupees one lakh, which amount shall be kept by the University in a separate account to be utilised only for the welfare of the student community.
15.  The interlocutory application for intervention stands disposed of in the above terms.
Appeals allowed.
