Bhagwat Math v Madhav Memorial Pathagar and others
Supreme Court of India

18 July 2005
C.A. No. 3743 of 2004 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 27373 of 2004)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave to file appeal is granted.
1.  Despite service of notice and the case being called for the third time today, nobody appears to represent the respondents.
2.  In the course of proceedings in the suit, a Commissioner, namely, Jayanta Kumar Das, Advocate was appointed under Order 26 Rule 9 CPC by the trial court for spot inspection. The appellant objected to the appointment of the Commissioner on the ground that he had earlier been engaged as an advocate by the appellant. By the impugned order the High Court agreed with the order of appointment of the abovenamed advocate as Commissioner for spot inspection.
3. Under these circumstances, in this appeal, the appellant prays for appointment of some independent Commissioner for local inspection.
4.  Without expressing any doubt on the independence and integrity of the Commissioner already appointed, as prayed by the appellant, in our opinion, the trial court should have allowed the objection raised by the appellant and appointed any other neutral and independent person not connected, in any manner, with either of the parties and possessing knowledge of survey as Commissioner for spot inspection.
5.  For the reasons mentioned above, we allow this appeal, set aside the orders of the trial court and the High Court, passed under Order 26 Rule 9 CPC only to the extent of choosing the abovenamed Commissioner for spot inspection. We remit the matter to the trial court to rehear the parties and appoint another suitable Commissioner for spot inspection.
6.  The inspection report submitted by the Commissioner earlier appointed shall not be taken into consideration in the decision of the suit. Let the necessary orders for appointment of new Commissioner be made expeditiously to avoid delay in disposal of the suit.
The appeal is allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
