Workwell Engineering Company v Commissioner of Central Excise, Vadodara
Supreme Court of India

20 April 2005
C.A. No. 96 of 2000 With C.A. No. 7598 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
In CA No. 96/2000
1.  The issue in this appeal relates to the classification of an electric flour mill under the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. According to the appellant the machine is classifiable under Tariff Heading 84.37 and according to the Revenue it is classifiable under 85.09.
2.  The Revenue after issuing a show cause notice had affirmed the demand against the appellant for Rupees one lakh nine hundred and eighty four. Penalty of Rupees two thousand and six hundred was also imposed under Rules 9(2) 52-A and 173-Q of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
3.  The Tribunal rejected the appellant's appeal solely on the ground that in an earlier year when the classification was in dispute, the Tribunal had in the assessee's own case by a judgment reported in 1994 Indlaw CEGAT 622 held that the flour mill was classifiable under Tariff Heading 85.09. The Tribunal also noted that the appeal preferred by the appellant from the decision of the Tribunal was dismissed by this Court. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has stated that the order of dismissal simply recorded that the appeal was dismissed without any reason in support thereof.
4.  The grievance of the appellant is that the Tribunal erred in relying upon its earlier decision in view of the fact that the earlier decision had been rendered prior to the issuance of a circular by the Central Board of Excise and Customs on 5.12.1994  in which it had been clarified that:
"The Board has examined the matter in depth. As per HSN explanatory Note to heading 84.37 various kinds of machinery used in the milling industry for the working of cereal of dried leguminous vegetables have been specified. In group III at Sr. No. 5 grinding machines for milling cereals are specified. In view of specific description of grinding machines for milling cereals in HSN, the Board is of the view that domestic flour mill is appropriately classifiable under heading 84.37 of the Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985."
5.  It is stated by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant that it was not open to the respondent authorities to take a stand contrary to this circular.
6. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent has on the other hand, submitted that in view of the fact that the earlier decision had been affirmed by this Court, the Circular did not have any relevance.
7.  In our opinion this appeal must be allowed as contended by the learned counsel for the appellant. In the earlier decision the Tribunal had noted that the Gujarat High Court had held in the appellant's own case that the goods manufactured by the appellant were not classifiable under Tariff Entry 33-C of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, as it stood prior to its amendment 1985, which related to domestic appliances and was classifiable under the residuary Tariff Entry 68. It also noted that Tariff Entry 33-C was substantially the same as Tariff Heading 85.09.
8. In these circumstances, logically the Tribunal should have followed the decision of the Gujarat High Court and affirmed that the appellant's goods were not classifiable under Tariff Heading 85.09. However, the Tribunal relied upon the decision of this Court in Nat Steel Equipment Pvt. Ltd. v. Collector of Central Excise reported in 1988 Indlaw SC 196 and held that the machines were properly classifiable as a domestic appliance under Tariff Heading 85.09. It is not for us to question the correctness of the earlier decision of the Tribunal since the appeal therefrom has already been dismissed by this Court. Nevertheless, we can certainly hold, as we do, that the advent of the Circular in 5.12.1994 , after the earlier decision was rendered, was a relevant factor which should have been considered by the Tribunal untrammeled by the earlier decision rendered by the Tribunal.
9.  Furthermore, it may be noted that the Revenue ought to have considered the issue of classification on the basis of relevant material adduced by the parties. It does not appear from the records as produced before us that any such evidence was adduced.
10.  For the reasons stated, we allow the appeal and set aside the decision of the Tribunal. The matter is remanded back to the appropriate Assistant Commissioner, Central Excise, Anand to decide the question of the classification of the appellant's goods in the light of the observations contained in this order. It is made clear that this Court is not expressing any view on the merits of the case.
In CA No. 7598/99.
11.  In view of the order passed in Civil Appeal No. 96/2000 this appeal is also allowed and disposed of in the same terms.
Appeal allowed.
