Anindita Das v Srijit Das
Supreme Court of India

29 August 2005
Transfer Petition (C) No. 191 of 2005
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This transfer petition has been filed by the wife on the ground that the petitioner has a small child of six years. She has further claimed that she has no source of income and it is difficult for her to attend the court at Delhi. She has further claimed that she is not keeping good health.
2.  In support of this petition, a large number of authorities have been cited, namely, Reena Bahri v. Ajay Bahri 1999 Indlaw SC 2032, Leena Mukherjee v. Rabi Shankar Mukherjee2002 Indlaw SC 2114, Ram Gulam Pandit v. Umesh J. Prasad 2000 Indlaw SC 3829 and Rajwinder Kaur v. Balwinder Singh .
3. These authorities are all based on the facts of their respective cases. They do not lay down any particular law which operates as a precedent.
4.  Even otherwise, it must be seen that at one stage this Court was showing leniency to ladies. But since then it has been found that a large number of transfer petitions are filed by women taking advantage of the leniency shown by this Court. On an average at least 10 to 15 transfer petitions are on board of each court on each admission day. It is, therefore, clear that leniency of this Court is being misused by the women.
5.  This Court is now required to consider each petition on its merit. In this case the ground taken by the wife is that she has a small child and that there is nobody to keep her child. The child, in this case, is six years old and there are grandparents available to look after the child. The respondent is willing to pay all expenses for travel and stay of the petitioner and her companion for every visit when the petitioner is required to attend the court at Delhi. Thus, the ground that the petitioner has no source of income is adequately met.
6.  Except for stating that her health is not good, no particulars are given. On the ground that she is not able to come to Delhi to attend the court on a particular date, she can always apply for exemption and her application will undoubtedly be considered on its merit. Hence, no ground for transfer has been made out.
7.  Accordingly, we dismiss the transfer petition. We, however, direct that the respondent shall pay all travel and stay expenses of the petitioner and her companion for each and every occasion when she is required to attend the court at Delhi.
8.  The respondent shall send in advance to the petitioner, money for a 2nd class AC train ticket for herself and a companion. The respondent shall also pay stay expenses of the petitioner and her companion in a 3-star hotel. The trial court shall ensure that the petitioner has been paid the travel expenses in advance and that the hotel expenses are paid to her on each and every occasion when she is required to attend the court at Delhi.
Petition dismissed.
