State of Himachal Pradesh and another v Pawan Kumar Rajput and others
Supreme Court of India

7 January 2005
S.L.P. (C) No. 23355 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The subject-matter of the dispute in this special leave petition is an interim order passed by the High Court by which it has, inter alia, stayed the operation of the rules framed by the State Government regarding recruitment of lecturers. According to the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner State, the High Court should not have entertained the petition because of the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India 1997 Indlaw SC 2816 and in particular. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has stated that the litigation was really in the nature of public interest although the petitioners were interested themselves in the outcome of the litigation. They have relied upon the decision in Duryodhan Sahu (Dr.) v. Jitendra Kumar Mishra 1998 Indlaw SC 235 in this context.
2.  It appears to us from the nature of the dispute that the litigation could not be said to be a public interest litigation as the writ petitioners were prosecuting the litigation in their own interest. It would, therefore, be proper for the High Court to have directed the petitioners to approach the State Administrative Tribunal, in view of the categoric directive of this Court in L. Chandra Kumar case 1997 Indlaw SC 2816.
3. In the circumstances, we dispose of the special leave petition by directing the interim order granted by the High Court to continue for a period of 8 weeks. Civil Writ Petition No. 1619 of 2004, Pawan Kumar Rajput v. State of H.P. is transferred to the State Administrative Tribunal.
4.  The continuation of the interim order passed by us today will be subject to any order that will be passed by the State Administrative Tribunal which will exercise its discretion uninhibited by any observations made by the High Court in the impugned order. We make it clear that this Court has not expressed any opinion on the merits of the challenge in the writ petition.
5.  The respondents will be at liberty to pray for continuation of the interim order before the Tribunal.
The special leave petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.
