Himachal Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission v Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
Supreme Court of India

5 December 2005
C.A. No. 7229 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 19571 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Himachal Pradesh Regulatory Commission (for short "the appellant") has filed the present appeal against the interim order passed by the High Court in CWP No. 250 of 2005 dated 20-7-2005.
2.  By the impugned order, the High Court rejected the objection of the appellant to the effect that the respondent Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board (for short "the Board") should be directed to avail of the alternative efficacious remedy of approaching the Appellate Tribunal in terms of Section 111 of the Electricity Act (for short "the Act"). The High Court has observed that at the time when the writ petition was filed by the respondent, the Tribunal had not been constituted and in any case it was not functional.
3.  We are told that the Appellate Tribunal has now been constituted and is functional. Since the Appellate Tribunal has been constituted and is functional, we allow this appeal and direct the respondent to approach the Appellate Tribunal within a period of six weeks from today.
4. In case the respondent files an appeal within six weeks, the Appellate Tribunal shall treat the same as filed within the period of limitation. Counsel for the appellant has assured that he would not raise any objection of limitation as well as the maintainability of the appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
5.  The stay granted by the High Court shall continue to be in operation till the filing of the appeal. Thereafter it would be open for the Appellate Tribunal to decide to continue with the stay or not. The order under appeal is set aside in the above terms and the writ petition in the High Court stands dismissed to enable the respondent to avail of the statutory remedy of filing the appeal.
6.  Nothing stated hereinabove shall be taken as an expression of opinion on the merits of the case. The Appellate Tribunal shall decide the appeal in accordance with law without being influenced by any observations made in this order or in the order of the High Court.
The appeal stands allowed accordingly.
Appeal allowed.
