Mamta Alias Anju v Ashok Jagannath Bharuka
Supreme Court of India

20 January 2005
C.A. No. 637 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 19863 of 2003)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The question is whether the custody of the two daughters should be given to the appellant who is the mother or to the respondent who is the father. The parties were divorced by a decree of mutual divorce on 2-3-1998. At that time the ages of the daughters were eight-and-a-half years and five-and-a-half years respectively. Prior to the divorce decree being passed, the respondent had filed an application for being appointed as guardian of his two minor daughters. The application was allowed on 12-6-1998. The appellant was directed to hand over the custody of the two children to their father. The appellant's appeal before the High Court was rejected.
2.  The sole ground on which the appeal was rejected was the satisfaction of the Court that the appellant had disqualified herself from getting the custody of the children because she was residing with a stranger "without any relation known to law".
3.  The respondent himself has since married. The appellant has also married. The ground on which the High Court rejected the appellant's appeal is thus no longer available.
4.  We are of the view that before deciding the issue as to whether the custody should be given to the mother or the father or partially to one and partially to the other, the High Court must,
(a) take into account the wishes of the child concerned, and
(b) assess the psychological impact, if any, on the change in custody after obtaining the opinion of a child psychiatrist or a child welfare worker.
5.  All this must be done in addition to ascertaining the comparative material welfare that the child/children may enjoy with either parent.
6.  The decision of the High Court is in the circumstances set aside. The matter is remanded back to the High Court for disposal in terms of this order. However, we are told that the eldest child Shivani who is 15 years old, is now taking her Class 10th examination. Any investigation of the Court may be undertaken after her examination.
7. We make it clear that during the pendency of the matter before the High Court, the father will have the visitation rights as he is enjoying at present.
8.  The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
