Dr. Sudesh Jale v State of Haryana and others
Supreme Court of India

3 March 2005
W.P. (Cr.) No. 233 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  A letter written by the petitioner herein to Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India was treated as a writ petition and posted before us for its consideration.
2.  Having perused the petition, we had directed the respondent parents of the petitioner to produce her, namely, Dr. Sudesh Jale before us on 16-11-2004, pursuant to which Dr.Sudesh Jale was produced before this Court. On 1-2-2005, having heard the parties, we consider it in the interest of Dr.Sudesh Jale that she be counselled under the supervision of Ms. Sreerupa Mitra Chaudhury.
3.  After counseling on 2-3-2005 (yesterday), Dr.Sudesh Jale met us in the chamber and gave a letter which was also signed in our presence wherein she has expressed her desire to live with her husband. She has also expressed certain apprehension in regard to her as well as her husband's safety. More so in the background of the fact that her husband is working in a Government Hospital at Rohtak as a doctor.
4.  Having considered the facts of this case and having heard Dr.Sudesh Jale, we accept her desire and permit her to go with her husband. We also noticed the apprehension expressed by her.  Therefore, we direct the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak to give special attention to their safety. Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of this case, we also recommend to the Government of Haryana that in the event of Dr.Rajesh Jale working in Rohtak seeking a transfer either to Gurgaon or Faridabad which request may be considered sympathetically on humanitarian grounds for the sake of the safety of Dr.Rajesh Jale and Dr.Sudesh Jale. In the event of said Dr.Jale being posted in Gurgaon or Faridabad or any other safe place the local police will give special attention to their safety.
5.  At the time when we directed counselling of Dr.Sudesh Jale, we issued an order restraining the parents and relatives of Dr.Sudesh Jale from contacting her without her consent or in any manner intimidating her or her husband. The said injunction will continue.
6.  The letter submitted by Dr.Sudesh Jale shall be kept in a sealed cover in the file.
7.  We record our appreciation of the assistance rendered by Ms. Sreerupa Mitra Chaudhury, and her organisation and we request the Supreme Court Legal Service Committee to pay a sum of Rs.15,000/- to "Sudinalay Rehabilitation Centre, Home for Women and Children", Municipal Community Centre, Sunlight Colony, Part II, New Delhi. A copy of this order will be handed over to Ms. Sreerupa Mitra Chaudhury so that she can contact SCLSC for receiving the said amount.
8.  List this matter for further orders on 10-5-2005. On that day both Dr.Sudesh Jale as well as Dr.Rajesh Jale shall be present in the Court.
Order accordingly.
