State Farm Corporation of India Limited v Nijjer Agro Foods Limited and others
Supreme Court of India

21 July 2005
Cr.As. Nos. 908-09 of 2005 (Arising out of S.L.Ps. (Cri.) Nos. 876-77 of 2004)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Two complaints under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act were filed by the appellant against the respondents. In those complaints, the Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi issued summons to the respondents. An application filed by them for dropping the proceedings was dismissed in terms of the order of the learned Magistrate dated 26-4-1999, holding that "whether the cheques were issued for discharge of debt/liability can be decided only after recording evidence. At the stage of summoning the respondents the court has just to see whether prima facie case is made out against the accused or not under Section 138 of the NI Act.
2. Further, it was held, whether the respondents have made payment by way of bank drafts in lieu of the cheques which are subject-matter of complaints can also be decided at the trial and not at the stage of summoning and by way of an application seeking to drop the criminal complaint proceedings.
3.  Quite strangely, the High Court by the impugned judgment dated 14-10-2003, while exercising revisional jurisdiction, examined the defence on merits and allowed the criminal revision petition filed by the respondents and reversed the decision of the Magistrate declining to drop the proceedings by holding that by making payment of Rs 40 lakhs, the respondents had discharged their liability. It was no stage to examine the defence of the respondents.
4.  Though, at this stage, we are not going into the merits but we may only note that the subject-matter of the two complaints are four cheques in all amounting to Rs 76,55,917.47p. According to the respondents, they made payment of Rs 40 lakhs by six bank drafts after the issue of some of the cheques. Whether the said payment has been made or it is towards some of the amounts covered by the cheques are all the questions which can be decided only at the trial of the complaint cases under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act and could not have been made the basis of allowing the revision petition. The approach of the High Court is clearly erroneous.
5.  For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and restore the Complaint Cases Nos. 111 and 211 dated 2-1-1997 to be tried on merits in accordance with law. The parties are directed to appear before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate on 29-8-2005 for appropriate directions.
The appeals are allowed accordingly.
Appeals allowed.
