Himadri Coke and Petro Limited v Soneko Developers Private Limited and Others
Supreme Court of India

17 January 2005
C.A. No. 599 of 2005, (Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) No. 5873 of 2004)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  Respondent No. 2 obtained a decree against respondent No. 3. For execution of the decree, the property belonging to respondent No. 3 was put up for sale. After a series of advertisements pursuant to the last sale notice, respondent No. 1 was found to be the highest bidder for the property having bid an amount of Rs. 62 lacs. Respondent No. 1 deposited 25% of the offered amount. In terms of the conditions of sale, the balance amount was to be deposited on 15th April, 2003. It was made clear in the terms and conditions of sale that the payment was to be made by way of bank draft.
2.  Undisputedly respondent No. 1 did not make payment of the balance amount within the specified time. The Tribunal set up under the Recovery Of Debts Due To Banks And Financial Institutions Act, 1993 accordingly cancelled the sale to respondent No. 1 by order dated 16th June, 2003.
3.  Respondent No. 1 filed an appeal before the Presiding Officer. While the appeal was pending, the appellant submitted an offer to the receiver for purchase of assets of the judgment-debtor for a sum of Rs. 64 lacs. According to the appellant, this offer was placed before the Recovery Officer by 12th September, 2003. The appellant then made an application before the D.R.T. offering to purchase respondent No. 3's assets for Rs. 64 lacs. D.R.A.T. however confirmed the said sale in favour of respondent No. 1. The appellant challenged the order of confirmation of sale under Art. 227 of the Constitution Of India, 1950. The application was disposed off by the High Court by directing the Presiding Officer to dispose off the appellant's application offering Rs. 64 lacs.
4.  The Presiding Officer rejected the application filed by the appellant and confirmed the sale in favour of respondent No. 1. The appellant filed an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal. The appeal was allowed and the order of the Presiding Officer rejecting the appellant's application was set aside. The sale of the property was confirmed in favour of the appellant for a sum of Rs. 70 lacs. It is the appellant's case that respondent No. 1 has been asked to increase his offer of Rs. 62 lacs, but respondent No. 1 refused to do so. Respondent No. 1 challenged the order of the Appellate Tribunal confirming the sale in favour of the appellant under Art. 227 before the High Court. The High Court stayed the order of the Presiding Officer relating to the confirmation of sale in favour of the appellant subject to respondent No. 1 depositing a sum of Rs. 8 lacs.
5. According to respondent No. 1 the amount has been duly deposited. As a consequence, respondent No. 1 has deposited a total of Rs. 70 lacs towards the price of the property being sold.
6.  The High Court by the impugned order allowed the application of respondent No. 1 and confirmed the sale in favour of respondent No. 1 for Rs. 70 lacs. The appellant claimed that it had raised its offer by a further sum of Rs. 10 lacs. The High Court did not accept the appellant's offer. Incidentally, the appellant has also deposited an amount of Rs. 70 lacs with the receiver consequent upon the order of the Appellate Tribunal in his favour. On the basis of the High Court's order allowing the sale of the property in favour of respondent No. 1 the Recovery Officer has confirmed the sale in his favour on 27th March, 2004.
7.  The appellant preferred this appeal in March, 2004 when this Court granted an interim order directing the status quo to be maintained. The order is still operating.
8.  We are of the view that the sale must be set aside and the property be sold after re-advertisement. As far as the appellant is concerned it could not have been allowed to participate in the proceedings as it had not submitted an offer pursuant to the last advertisement. If any person's offer other than the offers received in response to the advertisement has to be considered, then an opportunity must be granted to other offerers pursuant to a fresh advertisement. The appellant could not have been permitted to enter into the arena by making an offer which was not in response to the advertisement. The last date specified in the advertisement resulting in the sale to respondent No. 1 has long since expired.
9.  As far as respondent No. 1 is concerned, we are of the view that it was bound by the terms and conditions of sale as was the authority concerned. It was not up to them to extend the dates for submission of the balance price when there was no clause in the terms and conditions of the sale allowing the authority to extend the time beyond the period specified in the advertisement for making the initial deposit or the balance price.
10.  Consequently, we are of the view that the entire sale should be set aside. We note that the appellant has offered now to purchase the property for Rs. 1 crore. Although we will not accept the offer of the appellant at this stage but we will use it as a benchmark for the purpose of directing a fresh sale to be held by the Recovery Officer. The sale shall be advertised in two newspapers, one having circulation throughout the country and one having circulation in the local area. The advertisements may be made in local language for the local newspaper but the advertisements in the national newspaper shall be made only in English. The terms and conditions of sale shall specify that the lowest acceptable offer for the purchase of the property in question is Rs. 1 crore. Both the parties before us will also be entitled to participate and bid for the property. If there are bids over and above Rs. 1 crore, the sale will be made to the highest bidder.
11. If on the other hand the bids do not reach Rs. 1 crore, the appellant shall be obliged to purchase the property at a price of Rs. 1 crore. The parties are at liberty to withdraw any amount which they may have already deposited with the authorities concerned, if they so desire. As far as respondent No. 1 is concerned, the earnest money deposited shall be returned, after defraying the cost of the sale. The advertisements shall be made within a period of three weeks.
The appeal is disposed off accordingly.
Appeal disposed of.
