Delhi Development Authority v Skipper Construction Limited and another
Supreme Court of India

19 September 2005
IA.Nos. 112 & 114 in Petition(S) For Special Leave To Appeal (Civil) No. 21000 of 1993 with IA.No. 67. 95, 98, 104, 106, 107, 108, 110, 111, 115, 116, 117 & 118 in S.L.P.(C)No.21000/1993
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Mr. H. P. Sharma, Ex-Registrar(Vigilance), Delhi High Court is appointed as the Claims Tribunal in place of Mr.S.N. Agarwal, Additional District Judge who had been nominated by the Delhi High Court pursuant to the orders of this Court. After Mr.H.P. Sharma assumes charge, he will make available to this Court the list of his requirements for setting up the necessary infrastructure for discharging his duties.
Once that has been notified to this Court the necessary finances will be made available to Mr.Sharma. The amounts already deposited by M/s Shikha Developers Pvt. Ltd. in respect of the 113 unpaid claims, shall be shifted to an account operateable by the Claims Tribunal. Subject to the verification and identification of the claimants by the Claims Tribunal, the Claims Tribunal must disburse the amounts payable to each claimant, as certified by M/s Shikha Developers Pvt. Ltd., together with any proportionate bank interest that may accrue thereon.
The amount which has been transferred to the Claims Tribunal shall be kept in a short term fixed deposit account so that it may accrue interest. The Claims Tribunal will also be responsible for deciding all other issues for which the earlier Claims Tribunal had been constituted as indicated in our earlier order. All the amounts must be disbursed within a period of three months from the date on which Mr.H.P.Sharma assumes charge. If there is any amount outstanding after meeting the claims of such claimants, the same will be drawn to the attention of this Court by the Claims Tribunal. The amount in the meantime be placed in a short term fixed deposit account pending further orders of this Court.
2. The rate of interest which had been temporarily fixed at 7% on the amount to be deposited by M/s Shikha Developers is confirmed.
3. List all other applications before the regular bench.
Order accordingly
