Sajita Dipak Nambiar v Dipak Nambiar
Supreme Court of India

11 April 2005
Transfer Petition (C) No. 723 of 2003
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  By IA No. 2, it is reported that the parties have arrived at a settlement. The memorandum of understanding has been signed between the parties. The petitioner wife is in Delhi and the respondent husband, a resident of Chennai, is presently in Boston (USA). It is stated at the Bar that the parties have agreed to dissolve the marriage by mutual consent. The question that remains to be examined is whether the respondent husband should personally appear for giving his consent to a decree based on such consent being passed or whether he can authorise someone to make a statement in that regard and enable the court passing the consent decree.
2.  Whether the matter is in Delhi or in Chennai, the fact remains that the respondent himself or a person authorised by him depending on the order which the trial court may make, shall have to appear before the court.
3.  In our opinion, keeping in view the convenience of the parties, it would be better if the matrimonial case between the parties is directed to be transferred at Delhi and the proceedings are held thereat.
4.  The transfer petition is allowed. Matrimonial petition being OP No. 1737 of 2003 titled Dipak Nambiar v. Sajita filed by the respondent herein and pending in the Family Court at Chennai (Tamil Nadu) is directed to be transferred to the Court of District Judge, Tis Hazari, Delhi.
5.  The Presiding Officer, Family Court, Chennai (Tamil Nadu) shall, soon on communication of this order, transfer the record of proceedings of OP No. 1737 of 2003 titled Dipak Nambiar v. Sajita to the District Judge, Tis Hazari, Delhi.
6.  The parties through their respective counsel are directed to appear before the District Judge, Delhi on 9-5-2005. The District Judge, Delhi may either try the petition himself or make over the same for hearing and disposal in accordance with law to a court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to him. The parties shall solicit the orders of the Court in the matter of further proceedings.
7. If the Court feels the necessity of the respondent husband being personally present before it, a date convenient to both the parties shall be appointed as the respondent shall have to come from USA for the purpose.
No order as to costs.
Petiton allowed.
