Jayaswals Neco Limited v Commissioner of Central Excise, Nagpur
Supreme Court of India

19 January 2006
C.A. No. 5990 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. The present appeal has been filed under Section 35L(b) of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (for short "the Act") impugning the Final Order No. 925/2000-B, dated 20th June, 2000 in Appeal No. E/2677/94-B passed by the Customs, Excise & Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi (for short "the Tribunal"), rejecting the appeal filed by the assessee-appellant.
2. The appellants are engaged in the manufacture of Malleable Cast Iron (MCI) inserts. These inserts are meant for the manufacture of concrete sleepers for exclusive use by the Indian Railways. The assessee-appellant was served with a show cause notice dated 25th February 1994 under Section 11A of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944 on the ground that there was suppression of facts by the assessee regarding classification thereby making themselves eligible and taking the benefit of Notification No. 223/88-C.E. issued by the Central Government, Ministry of Finance.
3.  The show cause notice, apart from holding that the assessee was not entitled to the benefit of Notification No. 223/88-C.E., also demanded differential duty for the exemption already availed by the assessee by suppression and mis-statement. The appellants filed their objections to the notice on both counts, viz. on merits as well as on limitation, which were rejected by the Collector of Central Excise, Nagpur (for short "the Assessing Authority") vide his Order-in-Original No. 27/1994. The assessing Authority while holding the notice to be beyond the period of limitation and therefore bad in law, decided against the assessee on merits.
4.  Aggrieved against the aforesaid Order passed by the assessing Authority, the assessee-appellant filed Appeal No. E/2677/94-B before the Tribunal, which was rejected vide Tribunal's Final Order No. 925/2000-B, dated 20th June 2000. It affirmed the decision of the Assessing Authority to the effect that the assessee is not entitled to the exemption under Notification No. 223/88-C.E. The said order of the Tribunal dismissing the appeal preferred by the assessee against the order of the Assessing Authority, is under challenge in the present appeal.
5. Heard counsel appearing for the assessee as well as for the department.
6. Without going into the other facts, it may be stated that the Tribunal in the case of Hindustan Gas and Industries Limited v. CC.E.,  laid down the test that the inserts required a precision machining to come out of the exemption notification. The Tribunal in the said judgment  observed, thus :
"7. Before the introduction of the new Tariff from 1-3-1986, these Inserts were classified as Castings of Iron and Steel. They were not being classified under Tariff Item 68 of the Tariff. In the case of Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. v. U.O.I1988 Indlaw SC 493, the Supreme Court had gone to deal with the forged products in rough machined conditions. The Supreme Court observed that machining and polishing is done to remove excess surface skin from the forged product and was incidental or ancillary to the manufacture of forged product as per S. 2(f) of the Central Excise Act, 1944. In that case before the Supreme Court, the goods were supplied to the Railways in rough machined condition under which excess skin or manufacturing defects were removed and those products were subsequently precision machined by the Railways themselves at their workshops before being put to use. The Supreme Court observed that the duty was payable at two stages viz. under Tariff Item 26AA on the forged products and under Tariff Item 68 on the completion of the manufacture of finished goods. They added that since the precision machining is done at Railways workshops, the appellants in that case was not liable to pay duty under Tariff Item 68.
8. In the case before us, there is nothing on record to show that the Inserts required any precision machining or that any such machining was done by the appellants. We, therefore, consider that only the first stage duty under Heading No. 73.07 was chargeable, which had already been paid by the appellants. Heading No. 73.07 is extracted below :-
9. It is also seen that the matter is covered by the Tribunal's decision in the case of Shivaji Works Ltd. v. CCE, Aurangabad reported at 1993 Indlaw CEGAT 150 (Tribunal). The Id. JDR have also referred to the Board's Circular No. 225/59/96-CX, dated 1-7-1996, which had been issued by the Board after the Tribunal's decision in the case of Shivaji Works Ltd. referred to above. The Board's clarification also supports the case of the appellants."
7. In the aforesaid case, it was held by the Tribunal that the inserts did not require any precision machining and, therefore the inserts produced by the assessees were entitled to the exemption provided in Notification No. 208/83-C.E. The notifications in the present case with which we are concerned is Notification No. 223/88-CE. which was succeeded to by Notification No. 275/88-C.E. Both these notifications are the same in contents. The department accepted the decision in Hindustan Gas and Industries Ltd. v. CCE, Vadodara 1996 Indlaw CEGAT 1862 and did not file any appeal there-against. Having accepted the said decision, the Department was not entitled to re-agitate the same.
8.  This Court in Birla Corporation Ltd. V. Commissioner of Central Excise 2005 Indlaw SC 444 relying upon an earlier decision of this Court, held that the department having accepted the principles laid down in the earlier case cannot be permitted to take a contra stand in the subsequent cases. In the said judgment it was observed, thus :
"In the instant case the same question arises for consideration and the facts are almost identical. We cannot permit the Revenue to take a different stand in this case. The earlier appeal involving identical issue was not pressed and was therefore, dismissed. The respondent having taken a conscious decision to accept the principles laid down in Pepsico India Holdings Ltd. (supra) cannot be permitted to take the opposite stand in this case. If we were to permit them to do so, the law will be in a state of confusion and will place the authorities as well as the assessees in a quandary".
9.  Since the point involved in the present case is identical to the point decided in the Hindustan Gas and Industries case (supra) and the department having accepted the principle laid therein to the effect that the inserts did not require any precision machining or that any such machining was done by the appellant, cannot be permitted to take a stand different than the principles laid down in the earlier case.
10. The aforesaid decision of the Tribunal in Hindustan Gas and Industries case (supra), amongst other decisions, was relied upon by the assessee before the Tribunal as noticed by the Tribunal and dealt with in  the impugned Final Order, the Tribunal held that this case has no applicability to the present case. The Tribunal has, in fact, not deliberated on the said decision of a co-ordinate Bench of the same Tribunal and, without examining the ratio therein, simply held the same to be inapplicable to the present case.
11.  Assuming even if it were to disagree with the test laid down in Hindustan Gas & Industries case (supra), in order to maintain the judicial propriety in decision-making, the Tribunal ought to have referred the matter to a larger Bench, which it did not do. If a Bench of co-ordinate jurisdiction does not agree with a Bench of the same strength, then it should refer the matter to a larger Bench and refrain from taking upon itself not to follow such decision and take a contra view. This inevitably leads to uncertainty and creates confusion. This practice must be deprecated at all costs.
12.  A Bench of co-ordinate jurisdiction must not disregard the decision of the same strength on its own on an identical question. The rationale of this rule is the need for consistency, certainty and predictability in the administration of justice. Classification of particular goods adopted in earlier decisions must not be lightly disregarded in subsequent decisions, lest such judicial inconsistency shake public confidence in the administration of justice. It is undoubtedly vital in the administration of justice that those exercising judicial power must have the necessary freedom to doubt the correctness of an earlier decision if and when subsequent proceedings bring to light what is perceived by them as an erroneous decision in the earlier case. In such circumstances, it is reasonable and indeed efficacious to refer the case to a Larger Bench.
13.  For the foregoing reasons, the impugned orders are set aside and the appeal allowed with costs. The assessees would be entitled to the benefit under the exemption Notification No. 223/1988-CE.
Appeal allowed.
