Irfan Ahmed v Aftab Ali Rizvi and another
Supreme Court of India

3 April 2006
C.A. No. 1879 of 2006 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 10780 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Special leave granted.
1.  We have heard counsel for the parties. The appellant before us is the landlord who is aggrieved by the impugned order of the High Court dated 3-2-2005 whereby the High Court has disposed of the writ petition preferred by the respondents permitting the respondents to file a review application u/s. 16(5) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"). In the last sentence of the operative part of the impugned order a direction is given to the Rent Controller and Eviction Officer to consider the argument with regard to declaration of vacancy also along with application, if any, u/s. 16(5) of the Act.
2.  Counsel for the appellant submits that though an order made u/s. 16 ordering a release may be reviewed u/s. 16(5) of the Act only on the grounds enumerated therein, the said provision will not apply to an order declaring a vacancy which is passed u/s. 12 of the Act and which in the instant case has attained finality. Counsel for the respondents submits that in the instant case he will be satisfied if the direction made by the High Court is confined to review of the order passed u/s. 16 of the Act without considering the question as to the validity of the release order made u/s. 12 of the Act.
3.  In the circumstances, we dispose of this appeal by modifying the impugned order of the High Court to the extent that the Rent Controller and Eviction Officer will consider the review application, if any, filed u/s. 16(5) of the Act only against the order passed u/s. 16 of the Act and on the grounds enumerated in S. 16(5). This appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above. The counsel for the respondents states that they will be filing the review application within a month from today. Let that be done.
No order as to the costs.
Order accordingly.
