Goetze (India) Limited v Commisioner of Income Tax
Supreme Court of India

24 March 2006
C.A. No. 1761 of 2006 Is By Special Leave From the Judgment and Order Dt. 17 December 2004 of the Delhi High Court In I. T. A. No. 770 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  The question raised in this appeal relates to whether the appellant assessee could make a claim for deduction other than by filing a revised return. The assessment year in question was 1995-96. The return was filed on November 30, 1995, by the appellant for the assessment year in question. On January 12, 1998, the appellant sought to claim a deduction by way of a letter before the Assessing Officer. The deduction was disallowed by the Assessing Officer on the ground that there was no provision under the Income-tax Act to make amendment in the return of income by modifying an application at the assessment stage without revising the return.
2.  This appellant's appeal before the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) was allowed. However, the order of the further appeal of the Department before the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was allowed. The appellant has approached this court and has submitted that the Tribunal was wrong in upholding the Assessing Officer's order. He has relied upon the decision of this court in National Thermal Power Company Ltd. v. CIT 1996 Indlaw SC 1625, to contend that it was open to the assessee to raise the points of law even before the Appellate Tribunal.
3.  The decision in question is that the power of the Tribunal under section 254 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, is to entertain for the first time a point of law provided the fact on the basis of which the issue of law can be raised before the Tribunal. The decision does not in any way relate to the power of the Assessing Officer to entertain a claim for deduction otherwise than by filing a revised return. In the circumstances of the case, we dismiss the civil appeal.
4.  However, we make it clear that the issue in this case is limited to the power of the assessing authority and does not impinge on the power of the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal under section 254 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
