Mangla Bansod v Vijay H. Mankar
Supreme Court of India

1  May  2006
C.A. No. 645 of 2000
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Heard Mr. Gupta, Sr. Adv., for the appellant and Mr. K.V. Mohan, Advocate for the Respondent.
2. This appeal is directed against final judgment and order dated 24.11.1999 passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in O.P. No. 221 of 1992 filed by the complainant / respondent against the appellant. Carelessness and medical negligence on the part of the appellant Dr. Mangla Bansod, appellant herein, had been alleged before the Commission. The National Commission by its order dated 24.11.1999 directed the appellant herein to pay a compensation of Rs. 2,50,000/- to the complainant on account of mental agony and suffering caused to the family of the deceased. The Commission had also directed the appellant to pay to the complainant cost of Rs. 5000/- and disposed of the original petition.
3. The Medical Practitioner is now before us in this appeal. The matter was heard at length on 19.4.2006 and listed for further argument today before this Court. In the interregnum period, both the parties after due deliberations and discussions, have reached an amicable settlement by which the appellant has agreed to pay a sum of Rs. One lakh in addition to the sum of Rs. 1.5 lakhs earlier paid as per the order of this Court i.e. in all, total a sum of Rs. 2.5 lakhs. It is not in dispute that Rs. 1.5 lakhs have already been withdrawn.
4. A crossed account payee Cheque bearing No. 233274 dated 1.5.2006, drawn on Bank of Baroda, payable in favour of the Respondent Mr. V.H. Mankar for a sum of Rs. one lakh has been placed before us. The cheque is handed over to the learned counsel for the respondent Mr. K.V. Mohan in the Court towards full and final settlement of the claim made by the respondent and as per the order passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.
5. In view of the settlement now reached among the parties, we are not decided the correctness or the legality of the findings in the order passed by the National Commission. In view of the payment now made in the Court, the impugned order dated 24.11.1999 of the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi is set aside and the present appeal is disposed of accordingly.
6. It is stated by Mr. K.V. Mohan, learned counsel for the respondent that the appellant in addition to filing of this appeal has also filed a defamation suit in the Civil Court of Nagpur against the respondent herein. In view of the amicable settlement now reached between the parties, the appellant will not pursue the said suit. The said suit shall stand dismissed as not pressed. The appellant will inform the said Court about this order now passed. The parties to this action will have no claim against each other.
7. The Civil Appeal stands disposed of accordingly. There shall be no orders as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
