In Re : News Item Published In Hindustan Times Titled "and Quiet Flows The Maily Yamuna"
Supreme Court of India

14 February 2006
W.P. (C) No. 725 of 1994 with IAs Nos. 20-21 in W.P. (C) No. 4677 of 1985
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This order is in continuation of the orders already made on 12-4-2005, 7-9-2005 and 10-1-2006.
2.  We have perused the detailed affidavit filed by Mr. Arun Mathur, Chief Executive Officer of Delhi Jal Board, dated 11-2-2006. The affidavit though addresses the problem and the present status of the problem which has also been highlighted in the earlier affidavits of others as well, sets out the aspects on which Delhi Jal Board seeks issue of appropriate directions for supply of potable water of Category C in Delhi but despite the length of the affidavit on most of the issues, the plan of action and specific measures required are lacking.
3. To illustrate, it may be noted that the affidavit states that there is no facility of coliform reduction when it is admitted that it is one of the pollutants of water. The water quality of River Yamuna after periodical inspection was supplied by the Central Pollution Control Board in its report of November 2005, which shows high quantity of coliform (p. 2236, Vol. XI). It is not stated that, besides the lack of availability of adequate supply of water, what other measures are available, nationally or internationally, to achieve the reduction of coliform contents. During the course of submission, learned counsel for Delhi Jal Board submitted that some international technique is available which is very expensive but the learned counsel was not aware about the details thereof. The affidavit also does not refer to such treatment.
4.  Again, in respect of desilting of trunk-sewage system, it is not disputed that it is crucial for improving the quality of the water. Out of 91 km, in the last about ten years, only 42 km of trunk sewers have been desilted and rehabilitated. It is stated that work is in progress in the length of 11.5 km. It is stated that part of it is slated to be completed by June 2006 and remaining by December 2006. This would leave another about 37 km for which targeted date of completion is December 2008. Though in Annexure C, the target date of completion is said to be December 2008, but in the body of the affidavit, it is stated that the balance length of desilting of 51 km trunk sewers will take about 36 to 40 months by employing four-five different agencies at a time after award of the work.
5.  It is further stated that international consultants are being appointed for expert advice on technology for rehabilitation and mode of desilting, etc. Further, it is stated that the Delhi Jal Board is currently making effort to find out innovative and convenient ways of transporting waste to the sewage plants so that pollution control objectives are met but details thereof are lacking.
6.  We do not know what are the so-called innovative and convenient ways of which suggestion is given in the affidavit. The authorities have to be clear in their perception and plan of action lest the huge amounts incurred with a view to improve the water quality go down the drain. After clearly laying down the plan of action in consultation with all concerned, there has to be meticulous implementation, then alone some progress can be made in improving the quality of water.
7.  This Court has been seized of this issue for the last about ten years. We hope that now, on all these issues, a concerted and integrated effort will be made, matter thoroughly examined and then placed before this Court. For this purpose, we grant to the authorities a period of four weeks. The requisite affidavits with materials shall be filed within four weeks.
8.  In case the State/authorities are not in a position to make available the basic services in respect whereof it is admitted that there are severe limitations, there shall be no regularisation of unauthorised colonies. In other words, it means that the regularisation should be made only if it is possible for the respondents to make available the basic services. This order will continue till further orders.
The matter is adjourned for five weeks.
Order accordingly.
