Union of India v Madhumilan Syntex Limited
Supreme Court of India

7 February 2006
C.A. No. 743 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This case has a chequered history. The case had come up to this Court on four occasions earlier also, but we need not go into that aspect of the matter. In the year 1990, the writ-petitioner (respondent herein) filed a writ petition being MP No. 512/1990 in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur (lndore Bench). The writ petition was disposed of in terms of the consent order dated 25th April 1992, which reads as under :
"1. There shall be no dispute as to classification of the petitioners manufacture till 24-7-91 and no demand in that respect shall be made by the respondents against the petitioners.
2. The amended classification list dt 29-7-91 /5-8-91 and 3-3-92 shall be finalised by the Central Excise authorities in accordance with law after giving a show cause notice to the petitioners and opportunity of hearing and adducing evidence, if the petitioners-
- As far later period that is from 25-7-91 onwards the petitioners shall not raise any plea of limitation before the adjudicating authorities or courts as to demand if any that may be raised against them in consequence to reclassification of their manufacture in terms of the order that may be made. If as a result approved classification is revised such revision shall take effect ac cording as may be from 25-7-91 or 1-3-92 according as the adjudicating authorities finds in the matter and duty, if any shall be recoverable accordingly.
- The Petitioner's apprehension that he may not be allowed proper hearing by the authorities should be properly allayed so that he has full confidence in the procedure adopted by the adjudicating authorities and reason able opportunity should be given to the petitioner.
- It is made clear that the revision or amendment of classification list, if any, would not deprive the petitioner of his right of appeal or that other legal remedy as provided in law. The adjudicating authority shall finalise approval of classification list in the manner aforesaid by 30-6-92 and report compliance to this court. If for any reason further extension of time becomes necessary this court shall be approached by the adjudicating authorities for the purpose.
- In the meanwhile the petitioner as before shall be allowed to clear his goods on bond that is till 30-6-92.
- The parties shall cooperate in all respects in the matter of expeditious disposal of hearing before the adjudicating authorities."
2.  On 1st of May 1992 the Union of India-the appellant herein issued a show cause notice/order reclassifying the goods under SI. No. 14(b) of the Notification No. 53/91-C.E., dated 25-7-1991 as further amended by Notification No. 23/92-C.E., dated 1st March, 1992. Since this order had been passed by the appellant without affording an opportunity to the respondent-writ petitioner, the apprehension expressed by it which finds mention in the order appears to be correct.
3.  The respondent thereafter filed a review application seeking deletion of the expression from the consent order regarding condition that the respondent "shall not raise any plea of limitation" before the adjudicating authority. The matter came up before a Division Bench of the High Court which passed the order in terms of the consent. Since there was a difference of opinion between the two Hon'ble Judges the matter was referred to the Hon'ble Chief Justice of the High Court for assigning the matter to the Umpire (third Judge).
4.  The Hon'ble Chief Justice retained the same on his board and agreed with the view expressed by Mr. Justice V.D. Gyani, J. that power under the statute could not be taken away either collaterally or incidentally and therefore, the respondent could not be debarred from taking the plea of limitation.
Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the present appeal has been filed.
We have heard the Counsel for the parties.
5.  Counsel appearing for the revenue fairly concedes in principle that the power/right conferred under the statute could not be given up on the basis of a concession made by any party to the lis.
6.  Under the circumstances, we do not find any merit in this appeal and dismiss the same leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.
