State of Uttar Pradesh and Another v Sugal and Damani
Supreme Court of India

27 July 2006
C.A. No. 24 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. The writ petitioners, respondents herein, filed a writ petition in the High Court seeking appropriate writ, order or direction declaring clause (c-1) of sub-s. (1) of section 3A of the U. P. Trade Tax Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), inserted by U. P. Act No. 31 of 1995 of imposing sales tax on the sale of lotteries as ultra vires.
2. The High Court by the impugned order held that the impugned notifications were bad in law as the same had not been placed before the both houses of the Legislature as mandated by the Act.
3. The tax was imposed by the State based on a judgment of this court in the case of H. Anraj v. Government of Tamil Nadu , in which it has been held that lottery tickets were goods and, therefore, sales tax could be levied. A further distinction was made that not one but two distinct rights were transferred to the purchaser of a lottery ticket, i.e., right to participate in the draw and chance to win. It was held that the tax could be levied on the right to participate in the draw which was taken to be the goods but not on the chance to win which was held to be an actionable claim.
4. The decision in H. Anraj's case 1, was specifically overruled prospectively by a Constitution Bench of this court in the case of Sunrise Associates v. Government of NCT of Delhi reported in , with effect from the date of the judgment. It was held that the distinction sought to be drawn in H. Anraj's case
5. Explaining the principle of prospective overruling, a Constitution Bench of this court in the case of Somaiya Organics (India) Ltd. v. State of U. P. reported in 2001 Indlaw SC 4622001 Indlaw SC 462 (SC), observed as follows :
"It is declared that the vend fee realised by the States is not to be refunded to the appellants and, at the same time, the State cannot collect any vend fee for the period prior to October 25, 1989 or thereafter notwithstanding that notices of demand may have been issued or recovery proceeding initiated"
6. the view expressed in para 35, honourable Justice Ruma Pal explained the effect of prospective overruling in para 37 in the following terms:
"The argument of the appellant proceeds on a misunderstanding of the effect of prospective overruling. As has been elaborately stated in my learned brother's judgment, by prospective overruling the court does not grant the relief claimed even after holding in the claimant's favour. In this case, the court held that the statutory provision imposing vend fee was invalid. Strictly speaking, this would have entitled the appellant to a refund from the respondents of all amounts collected by way of vend fee.
But because, as stated in the Synthetics decision 1989 Indlaw SC 286, itself, over a period of time imposts and levies had been imposed by virtue of the earlier decision and that the States as well as the petitioners and manufacturers had adjusted their rights and their positions on that basis, this relief was denied. The court did not, by denying the relief, authorise or validate what had been declared to be illegal or void nor did it imbue the Legislature with competence up to the date of the judgment."
to mean that neither the State will be liable to refund the tax, already collected nor collect any further tax for the period prior to the date of the judgment.
7. Mr. Soli Sorabjee, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent fairly concedes that respondents would not claim any refund of the tax, already paid but they would not be liable to pay any further tax.
8. Appeal is dismissed. Neither the State will be liable to refund the tax, already collected nor collect any further tax for the period prior to the date of the judgment. Parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.
