Goa MRF Employees Union v MRF Limited
Supreme Court of India

8 March 2006
C.A. No(s). 1007 of 2004
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. During the course of hearing of the appeal a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in The Management of Hotel Imperial, New Delhi & Ors. Vs. Hotel Workers' Union 1960 1 SCC 476 was cited. The question involved in the present appeal is "Does the Industrial Tribunal have the power to grant reliefs including in the nature of injunction in a complaint filed before it u/s. 33 A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947" (in short the 'Act').
2. The foundation of the claim of the appellant is that such a power flows from S. 10(4) of the Act, which reads as follows:
"Where in an order referring an industrial dispute to (a) Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal) under this section or in a subsequent order, the appropriate Government has specified the points of dispute for adjudication, the Labour Court or the Tribunal or the National Tribunal, as the case may be shall confined its adjudication to those points and matters incidental thereto".
3. It was noted in the Hotel Imperial case (supra) as follows:
"The next question is as to how the tribunal should proceed in the matter if it decides to grant interim relief. The definition of the word "award" shows that it can be either an interim or final determination either of the whole of the dispute referred to the tribunal or of any question relating thereto. Thus it is open to the tribunal to given an award about the entire dispute at the end of all proceedings. This will be final determination of the industrial dispute referred to it. It is also open to the tribunal to make an award about some of the matters referred to it whilst some others still remain to be decided. This will be an interim determination of any question relating thereto. In either case it will have to be published as requires by S.17. Suchawards are however not in the nature of interim relief for they decide the industrial dispute or some question relating thereto. Interim relief, on the other hand, is granted under the power conferred on the tribunal under s. 10 (4) with respect to matters incidental to the points of dispute for adjudication. "
4. In the immediately preceding quoted paragraph it was observed that where an order referring to an industrial dispute has specific point of dispute for adjudication, the tribunal has to confine itself to the points in reference and matters incidental thereto. In that context, the Bench observed that where the question is incidental to the issue which has been referred, there is no need for specifically referring to the matter which is incidental.
But applicability of the logic of "incidental thereto" relating to main point of adjudication to infer existence of a power to grant interim relief is open to doubt. Prima facie we do not agree with the view expressed that interim relief is granted in exercise of the power conferred on the tribunal under S. 10(4) with respect to matters incidental to the points of dispute for adjudication. We are of the view that the same relates to the subject matters of adjudication relating to the points of dispute specified and matters incidental thereto, and does not in any way refer to interim relief.
Larger Bench has to decide as to whether any interim relief could be granted in view of the use of expression "matters incidental thereto" in S. 10(4). Since the decision in question was that of a three Judge Bench, we refer the matter to a larger Bench. Papers be placed before the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India for necessary orders.
Order accordingly
