Gurdeep Singh Dhillon v Satpal and others
Supreme Court of India

20 March 2006
C.A. No. 1662 of 2006 (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 12411 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  At the request of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, the names of Respondents 18 to 20 (both inclusive) are hereby deleted from the array of parties.
Leave granted.
We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.  The only issue involved in this appeal is whether the High Court could have entertained a writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India to interfere with an election to a Municipal Council. The answer unhesitatingly is in the negative in view of the specific bar under Article 243-ZG(b) of the Constitution of India which provides as follows:
"243-ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,-
(a) ***
(b) no election to any municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the legislature of a State."
3.  There is no dispute that the writ petition was moved only to challenge the election of the appellant to Municipal Council, Ferozepur City. Instead of challenging the said election by an election petition under Section 74 of the Punjab State Election Commission Act, 1994 Respondents 1 to 13 took a short cut by filing a writ petition and invoking the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution.
4. This petition ought not to have been entertained in view of the specific bar under Article 243-ZG(b) of the Constitution of India. The only remedy available to challenge the election was by raising an election dispute under the local statute.
5.  In this view of the matter, we allow this appeal and set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court. The parties are left to resolve their election dispute in the manner permitted by the Constitution of India and the law.
The appeal is allowed accordingly. No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
