Asianet Satellite Communications Limited v Commissioner of Central Excise and Customs, Cochin
Supreme Court of India

13 January 2006
Transfer Petition (C) No. 65, Decided On 13 January 2006
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The petitioner herein has filed this transfer petition for transfer of W.P. No. 29008/2003 pending before the High Court of Judicature at Madras titled 'Commissioner of Central Excise and Customs, Cochin and Ors. v. Asianet Sattelite Communications (P) Ltd. and Am. to the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam.
2.  It is not in dispute that the respondents herein have also filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of Judicature at Madras being Writ Petition No. 29008/2003 questioning the same order passed by the Settlement Commissioner. The main prayer made in the transfer petition is that both the matters should be clubbed together. The respondents in their counter affidavit stated as follows:
"In reply to paragraph 1 of the petition, it is submitted that in principle the respondents have no objection to the clubbing of the two petitions pending before the Hon'ble High Courts of Chennai and Kerala. However, since bulk of the import took place in Tamil Nadu (Chennai Airport, Chennai Seaport and Tuticorin Port), the respondents would prefer that the two matters are adjudicated upon by the Hon'ble Chennai High Court and the writ petition filed by the petitioner be transferred to the Hon'ble Chennai High Court."
3.  Having regard to the statements made in the counter affidavit as also the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the ends of justice would be subserved if OP No. 27493/2002, pending before the High Court of Kerala, is transferred to the High Court of Chennai and both the aforementioned petitions be heard together by an appropriate Bench.
4.  We would, however, request the concerned Bench of the High Court to consider the desirability of hearing out the matter as expeditiously as possible preferably within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the records from the Kerala High Court.
The transfer petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition disposed of.
