BPL Display Devices Limited v Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai
Supreme Court of India

3  May  2006
Civil Appeal No. 1729 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The appellant entered into a collaboration agreement with two Japanese companies namely, M/s.Toshiba Corporation (for short M/s.Toshiba') and M/s.Mitsubishi Corporation (for short M/s.Mitsubishi') to manufacture colour T.V.picture tubes in India.
The greement was entered into in July, 1985. Broadly speaking, it rovided for M/s.Toshiba to make available designs to M/s.Mitsubishi hich would then manufacture various items to enable the setting up of plant in India to manufacture colour T.V.picture tubes. For this urpose, M/s.Toshiba was entitled to the price not only of the goods upplied but also for the technical know-how given to run the plant.
2. The question is whether the cost of the fees payable on account of the echnical know-how was includible in the value of the imported goods.
3. The technical know-how fees was paid by the appellant in five yearly nstallments. The first three installments were paid prior to 16th ugust, 1988. Two installments were paid thereafter. The relevance f the date 16th August, 1988 lies in the fact that the Customs aluation Rules, 1988 came into force with effect from that date eplacing the earlier rules then holding the field. The customs uthorities sought to add on the value of these two installments to the alue of the imported goods under Rule 9(1)(b)(iv) of the 1988 Rules.
4. The rule provides :
"9. Cost and services - (1) In determining the transaction alue, there shall be added to the price actually paid or ayable for the imported goods, -
(a) the following cost and services, to the extent they are ncurred by the buyer but are not included in the price ctually paid or payable for the imported goods, namely :-
(i) commissions and brokerage, except buying ommissions;
(ii)the cost of the containers which are treated as being ne for customs purposes with the goods in question;
(iii)the cost of packing whether for labour or materials;
(b) the value, apportioned as appropriate, of the following oods and services where supplied directly or indirectly by he buyer free of charge or at reduced cost for use in onnection with the production and sale for export of mported goods, to the extent that such value has not been ncluded in the price actually paid or payable, namely:-
(i) materials, components, parts and similar items ncorporated in the imported goods;
(ii)tools, dies, moulds and similar items used in the roduction of the imported goods;
(iii)materials consumed in the production of the imported oods;
(iv)engineering, development, art work, design work, and lans and sketches undertaken elsewhere than in India nd necessary for the production of the imported goods;
[copy] royalities and licence fees related to the imported goods hat the buyer is required to pay, directly or indirectly, as a ondition of the sale of the goods being valued, to the extent hat such royalties and fees are not included in the price ctually paid or payable,
(d)the value of any part of the proceeds of any subsequent esale, disposal or use of the imported goods that accrues, directly or indirectly, to the seller;
(e) all other payments actually made or to be made as a ondition of sale of the imported goods, by the buyer to the eller, or by the buyer to a third party to satisfy an obligation f the seller to the extent that such payments are not ncluded in the price actually paid or payable."
5. Analysed, the rule enables the addition of the value of the goods and ervices supplied by the buyer in connection with the production and ale for export of the imported goods. The addible value can only be "to he extent that such value has not been included in the price actually aid". The goods and services include those specified in Clause (4). Here again, it must be noted that the design work, plans, sketches etc. should have been undertaken elsewhere than in India.
6. The Assistant Collector was of the view that the price of the echnical know-how was not includible in the value of the imported oods for setting up of a plant. The Commissioner, however, on appeal y the Department, reversed that finding. The ground, as far as we ave been able to decipher, was that the agreement between the parties howed that M/s.Mitsubishi was to manufacture the goods in ccordance with M/s.Toshiba's designs.
The Commissioner concluded hat, in effect, the equipments and parts were being supplied by /s.Toshiba and M/s.Mitsubishi was only a via media. Article 5.1 of he agreement was also referred to, to say that the technical documents ere necessary and were relatable to the value of the equipments upplied. Therefore, according to the Commissioner, the value of the echnical documents had to be added to the value of the equipments.
7. The reasoning is incoherent, illogical and unsustainable. None of the actors referred to by the Commissioner fulfill the requirements of Rule 9 (1)(b)(iv). Similarly, the Tribunal, which affirmed the Commissioner's rder, appears to have overlooked the basic elements of the Rule. The ribunal held :-
"...........In the present case, the proprietary equipment of /s.Toshiba manufactured by M/s.Mitsubishi and other ontractors, was part of the plant and machinery nstalled in the manufacture of colour picture tubes.
These equipments were the proprietary items of /s.Toshiba and were manufactured according to the rawings etc. supplied by M/s.Toshiba. The know how greement covered all know how including the know how or the proprietary equipment. The various clauses relied pon by the Revenue make it clear that the proprietary quipment of M/s.Toshiba was part of the know how ransfer. These were made according to the drawings, specifications etc. of M/s.Toshiba and those drawings ere required to be approved by M/s.Toshiba, the ppellants and M/s.Mitsubishi before manufacture. In hese circumstances, the only conclusion that can be rawn is that the payment for know how made by the ppellants included the payment for drawings, designs tc. of the proprietary equipment of M/s.Toshiba and anufactured by M/s.Mitsubishi. Thus, this is a case of ndirect supply to the manufacturer of the imported oods of design, drawing etc. which had been developed broad at the cost of the importer..........."
8. There is nothing to show that the drawings etc. were supplied y the appellant at all, within the language of Rule 9(1)(b)(iv). We have been taken through the clauses of the agreement to how that in any event the know-how did not cover the know-how for he proprietary equipment and indeed the proprietary equipment of /s.Toshiba did not cover the know-how transferred at all. On the ontrary, Clause (4) of the agreement listed under the heading xclusion of technical information, reads :
"4.5 Information and data for the manufacture of achines, apparatuses and dies for PRODUCT and for omponents (including COMPONENT) thereof."
9. The basis of the reasoning given by the Tribunal is, therefore, not at all in keeping with the fact and records and was perverse.
10. The appeal is accordingly allowed and the order of the ssistant Collector is set aside. There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed
