Devangere Cotton Mills Limited v Commissioner of Central Excise, Belgaum
Supreme Court of India

18 April 2006
C.A. No. 1/200P With C.A. Nos. 1621-1627'/200P, C.A. Nos. 2620-2635/200P & C.A. Nos. 5487-5489/2004
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The common question in these appeals is whether the assessee/appellant was entitled to the benefit of Notification No. 35/95-CE., dated 16-3-1995 as amended by Notifications No. 77/95-C.E., dated 3-4-1995; No. 81/95-C.E., dated 7-4-1995; No. 84/95-C.E., dated 18-5-1995 and No. 115/95-C.E., dated 3-11-1995 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Notification').
2.  The Notification provided exemption in respect of items mentioned in Serial No. 1 to 6 subject to the conditions specified in Column-5 of the Table appended to the Notification. We are concerned with Serial No.1 and 5 which read as under:
3.  The Notification ends with the proviso to the effect that the exemption contained relating to Serial No. 1 or 2 shall not apply to clearances of yarn from a factory having facilities (including plant and equipment) for producing single yarn. One of the appellants before us, namely, M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd. (C.A.No. 1/2001) had initially claimed benefit of the exemption by invoking Serial No.1. The benefit was denied to the appellant on the ground that it was hit by the proviso since the appellants manufactured the yarn out of single yarn for which they had the plant and equipment.
4.  The appeal in the lead matter namely the Commissioner of Central Excise, Madurai v. M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd. also related to a case where the assessee manufactured double yarn out of single yarn on which duty was paid. The double yarn which was subjected to diverse processes and were then used in the manufacture of fabrics on which duty was also paid. M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd however, unlike M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd claimed the exemption in respect of the double yarn under Serial No. 5 of the Notification.
5. The Commissioner of Central Excise (Appeals) held that the assessee was entitled to the benefit of the exemption. Being aggrieved the Revenue preferred an appeal before the Central Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT). The two members constituting the Tribunal differed in their conclusions. The matter was referred to a third member. The third member agreed with the view that M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd were entitled to the benefit of Serial No. 5 of the Notification and accordingly dismissed the appeal. Hence the appeal preferred by the Revenue before us.
6.  As far as M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd was concerned they sought to contend before the third member that they were similarly situated as M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd. and even if they were not entitled to invoke Serial No. 1, nevertheless, they were entitled to invoke Serial No.5 and be granted the same benefit as M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd. was. The third member of the Tribunal, however, was of the view that since the arguments had not been raised at any earlier stage, it could not be permitted to be raised and accordingly rejected the plea. Being aggrieved M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd are also before us in appeal (CA.No.1/2001).
7.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant in CA.No. 1/01 has submitted that the proviso could not be relied upon to reject the claim of the appellant under Serial No.1 inasmuch as it was limited to double yarn which has been cleared from a factory. As far as the appellant was concerned the double yarn was not cleared from the factory but captively consumed in manufacturing fabrics. It was further submitted that in any event the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the decision of the Tribunal in the matter of Coats Viyella (India) Ltd. and that the third member had the jurisdiction under the provisions of Rule 10 of the Customs and Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal Procedure Rules, 1982 to consider the issue.
8.  Rule 10 of the 1982 Rules allows the parties to urge ground not taken in the appeal provided the Tribunal grants leave to the parties to do so. The Tribunal has also been given a wide power to decide the appeal on grounds not taken in the memorandum of appeal. The only limitation on this power of the Tribunal is that the party affected must be given an opportunity of being heard in respect of the new grounds sought to be urged. According to M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd., the issue had been raised originally before the Tribunal and again before the third member when it was referred to the third member on a difference of opinion, the Revenue had ample opportunity of dealing with the submission. Besides, it was submitted, that the issue was in any event being agitated in the matter of M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd and there was no question of taking the Revenue by surprise.
9.  We are of the view that the Tribunal did erred in refusing to hear the appellant only on the ground that the ground had not been raised earlier. Rule 10 was sufficiently widely framed to allow the Tribunal to do so. Having regard to the fact that the Tribunal was itself considering the issue on a contested hearing there was no reason why the appellant should have been shut out from pleading its case on the same basis.
10.  As far as the decision on merits is concerned, Serial No.5 leaves no doubt in our mind that the yarn referred to in Col.3 is double yarn. This is clear from the condition mentioned in Col.5 namely that the yarn must be produced falling within Chapter 52, 54 and 55 of the Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
11. The Tribunal has also considered the fact that unless double yarn was subjected to the processes mentioned in Col.3 of the Notification, there was no question of the yarn being marketable. The proviso is limited to Serial Nos.1 and 2 and does not affect Serial No.5. The reasoning of the Tribunal, in our opinion, is unexceptionable.
12.  The appeal as far as the M/s. Devangere Cotton Mills Ltd. is concerned the same is allowed. As far as the appeals preferred by the Revenue in the appeals against M/s. Coats Viyella (India) Ltd, the same are dismissed. No order as to costs.
Appeals disposed of.
