Rashmi Fadnavis and Another v Mumbai Grahak Panchayat and Others
Supreme Court of India

21 March 2006
C.A. No. 4133 of 1999
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
1.  The State Commission by its order dated 2nd August, 1993 granted compensation to the tune of Rs. 2, 55, 355/- to be paid to the complainants apart from Rs. 5, 000/- as cost of the proceeding. Apart from this, by the same order it was directed that the said amount shall be paid within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of order passed by the State Commission, failing which the amount shall carry interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum till realisation.
2. Against the said order, when the matter was taken in appeal, the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (for short, "the National Commission") confirmed the same. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
3.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants first tried to persuade us to hold that the National Commission was not justified in confirming the amount of compensation awarded against the appellants. Having heard the parties and perused the records, we are of the view that on the question of payment of compensation both courts have concurrently found that the appellants are liable to pay compensation as they were guilty of negligence and we do not find any infirmity in the finding recorded by the two forums, as such it is not possible to interfere with the same.
4.  Learned counsel next submitted that in any view of the matter, the State Commission was not justified in awarding interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum. Having considered all the pros and cons of the matter, we are of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the case, the claimants are entitled to interest at the rate of 10 per cent and not 18 per cent.
5.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in part and the impugned orders in relation to interest are modified and the appellants are directed to pay interest at the rate of 10 percent instead of 18 per cent as directed by the State Commission.
No costs.
Appeal partly allowed.
