State of Assam v Union of India and others
Supreme Court of India

25 September 2006
I.A. Nos. 9-13 in Orgnl. Suit No. 2 of 1988 with I.A. Nos. 4-5 in Orgnl. Suit No. 1 of 1989
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  In terms of the order dated 11th September, 2006, the Chief Secretary of the Government of Nagaland has filed an affidavit dated 15th September, 2006, inter alia, stating that the Government of Nagaland shall render all possible assistance to the Local Commission to be appointed in terms of the order dated 13th September, 2004.
2. In view of the order dated 13th September, 2004, which also records the agreement of all the parties as also of the learned Attorney General of India to the appointment of the Local Commissioner, we appoint Hon'ble Mr.Justice S.N. Variava, a former Judge of this Court, as the Chairperson of the Local Commission. Justice S.N. Variava shall be entitled to all facilities as are provided to a sitting Judge of this Court, including, providing secretarial services, wherever required, besides, travel expenses, transportation and arrangements for stay befitting his status and paid a reasonable sum as honorarium when performing functions of Chairperson. He will be assisted by Mr.Kamal Naidu, Retired Principal Chief Conservator of Forest, Andhra Pradesh, and Mr. S.P. Goel, Additional Surveyor General of India, as Members. These names were suggested by the learned Attorney General. The Members shall be entitled to all facilities, as above, befitting the status of the posts which they held. For the present, all the cost and expenses of the Local Commission shall be borne by the Central Government. The Local Commission shall identify the boundaries between the States of Nagaland, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. All the States shall cooperate with the Local Commission.
3.  We may, however, clarify that this Local Commission is not the boundary commission postulated by the Constitution of India and that all factual and legal objections are kept open for the parties to be urged and agitated after the receipt of the Report from the Commission. None should be taken to have given up any right on agreeing to the appointment of this Local Commission. We hope that the Local Commission will be able to furnish the Report within a period of one year or such extended time, as may be considered necessary by this Court. It would be open to the Commission to seek such directions from this Court, as deemed necessary. List the original suit after receipt of the Report.
Order accordingly.
