Niraradia v Dheeraj Singh and another
Supreme Court of India

10  May  2006
Cr.A. No. 626 of 2006 (Arising out of S.L.P. (Cri.) No. 3555 of 2005)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Leave granted.
1.  We find that while dealing with an application for bail, the learned Single Judge of the High Court has made elaborate and detailed analysis of the evidence/materials and has recorded findings which virtually amounts to acceptability or otherwise thereof. This is not the course to be adopted by the High Court while dealing with a bail application. Though, some reference to the materials would be necessary, that would not be a substitute for making a detailed and in depth analysis of the materials and recording findings on their acceptability or otherwise. That essentially is a matter for trial.
2. In this view of the matter, we set aside the order of the High Court, remit the matter to the High Court for a fresh consideration of the bail application. We request the High Court to take up the bail application afresh on 17-5-2006. Learned counsel for the parties have stated that they shall appear on that date before the High Court. The learned Acting Chief Justice of the High Court is requested to allot the matter to the appropriate Bench for hearing on the date indicated. The High Court is requested to dispose of the matter before the Court is closed for the summer vacation.
3.  We are told that the next date of hearing before the trial court is 20-5-2006. We request the trial court to complete the trial by the end of August 2006. The trial court shall not take into consideration any observations made by the High Court in the impugned order.
4.  We also make it clear that we are not expressing any opinion on the merits of the bail application, as the same is to be considered afresh by the High Court. Though, we have set aside the impugned order, Respondent 1 need not surrender to custody. This shall, however, be subject to the outcome of the bail application which is to be heard by the High Court. The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.
Appeal disposed of.
