Shahjadi and others v State of Uttar Pradesh and others
Supreme Court of India

8 January 2007
C.A. No. 114 of 2007 (S.L.P.(C) No. 10172/2006)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  We have heard Mr. Awadhesh Kr. Singh, learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel for the U.P. State Road Transport Corporation, and perused the order impugned in this appeal. A suit for permanent injunction restraining the respondents from demolishing the houses raised by the appellants was filed.
2. According to the respondents, the construction was raised by the appellants on the disputed land and there is encroachment of the public land by the appellants. The Trial Court refused to grant injunction. The District Judge dismissed the civil revision petitions. Aggrieved by the said decision, the appellants filed a writ petition, which was dismissed by the High Court.
The High Court passed the following order:
"We hereby quash the Plaint of Original Suit No.188 of 2000 (Anwar Hussain and Ors. vs. State of U.P. and Ors.) and direct the respondents to file a certified copy of this judgment in Original Suit No.188 of 2000 (Anwar Hussain and Ors. vs. State of U.P. and Ors.) within four weeks of receipt of it and to inform the concerned Trial Court forthwith.
Respondent nos. 1 and 2 are hereby directed to take possession forthwith of the premises in question-Nazul Plot No.13, Civil Station, (2 Nawab Yusuf Road), Allahabad.
We direct each petitioner to pay Rs. 10,000/- as costs which shall be deposited with the District Magistrate, Allahabad within one month of receipt of notice from concerned Respondent or within one month of receipt of certified copy of this judgment. In default, such cost shall be recovered by Respondent no.2 /Collector, Allahabad, as land revenue. Out of said cost of Rs. 10,000/- Respondent no.2 shall be entitled to retain Rs.7,500/- and balance Rs. 2,500/- shall be paid to the Applicant- Respondent/U.P.S.R.T.C.
Subject to the above directions writ petition is dismissed with costs, as indicated above."
3.  In our opinion, the High Court has committed a grave error in quashing the plaint of the original suit no.188/2000 (Anwar Hussain and Ors. vs. State of U.P.and Ors.).
4. We accordingly set aside that part of the order passed by the High Court. However, we are not making any observation on the merits of the rival contentions.
The Civil Appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.
No order is passed on application for transposition.
Appeal allowed.
