Sakiri Vasu v State of Uttar Pradesh and Others
Supreme Court of India

7 December 2007
Cr.A. No. 1685 of 2007 (Arising Out of S.L.P. (Criminal) No.6404/ 2007)
The Judgment was delivered by: MARKANDEY KATJU, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. This appeal is directed against the impugned judgment and order dated 13.7.2007 passed by the Allahabad High Court in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 9308 of 2007.
3. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4. The son of the appellant was a Major in the Indian Army. His dead body was found on 23.8.2003 at Mathura Railway Station. The G.R.P, Mathura investigated the matter and gave a detailed report on 29.8.2003 stating that the death was due to an accident or suicide.
5. The Army officials at Mathura also held two Courts of Inquiry and both times submitted the report that the deceased Major S. Ravishankar had committed suicide at the railway track at Mathura junction. The Court of Inquiry relied on the statement of the Sahayak (domestic servant) Pradeep Kumar who made a statement that 'deceased Major Ravishankar never looked cheerful; he used to sit on a chair in the verandah gazing at the roof with blank eyes and deeply involved in some thoughts and used to remain oblivious of the surroundings'. The Court of Inquiry also relied on the deposition of the main eye-witness, gangman Roop Singh, who stated that Major Ravishankar was hit by a goods train that came from Delhi.
6. The appellant who is the father of Major Ravishankar alleged that in fact it was a case of murder and not suicide. He alleged that in the Mathura unit of the Army there was rampant corruption about which Major Ravishankar came to know and he made oral complaints about it to his superiors and also to his father. According to the appellant, it was for this reason that his son was murdered.
7. The first Court of Inquiry was held by the Army which gave its report in September, 2003 stating that it was a case of suicide. The appellant was not satisfied with the findings of this Court of Inquiry and hence on 22.4.2004 he made a representation to the then Chief of the Army Staff, General N.C. Vij, as a result of which another Court of Inquiry was held. However, the second Court of Inquiry came to the same conclusion as that of the first inquiry namely, that it was a case of suicide.
8. Aggrieved, a writ petition was filed in the High Court which was dismissed by the impugned judgment. Hence this appeal.
9. The petitioner (appellant herein) prayed in the writ petition that the matter be ordered to be investigated by the Central Bureau of Investigation . Since his prayer was rejected by the High Court, hence this appeal by way of special leave.
10. It has been held by this Court in CBI and another vs. Rajesh Gandhi and another 1996 Indlaw SC 2193 that no one can insist that an offence be investigated by a particular agency. We fully agree with the view in the aforesaid decision. An aggrieved person can only claim that the offence he alleges be investigated properly, but he has no right to claim that it be investigated by any particular agency of his choice.
11. In this connection we would like to state that if a person has a grievance that the police station is not registering his FIR u/s. 154 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973, then he can approach the Superintendent of Police u/s. 154(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 by an application in writing. Even if that does not yield any satisfactory result in the sense that either the FIR is still not registered, or that even after registering it no proper investigation is held, it is open to the aggrieved person to file an application u/s. 156 (3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the learned Magistrate concerned. If such an application u/s. 156 (3) is filed before the Magistrate, the Magistrate can direct the FIR to be registered and also can direct a proper investigation to be made, in a case where, according to the aggrieved person, no proper investigation was made. The Magistrate can also under the same provision monitor the investigation to ensure a proper investigation.
12. Thus in Mohd. Yousuf vs. Smt. Afaq Jahan and Anr. 2006 Indlaw SC 1259, this Court observed:
"The clear position therefore is that any judicial Magistrate, before taking cognizance of the offence, can order investigation u/s. 156(3) of the Code. If he does so, he is not to examine the complainant on oath because he was not taking cognizance of any offence therein. For the purpose of enabling the police to start investigation it is open to the Magistrate to direct the police to register an FIR. There is nothing illegal in doing so. After all registration of an FIR involves only the process of entering the substance of the information relating to the commission of the cognizable offence in a book kept by the officer in charge of the police station as indicated in S. 154 of the Code. Even if a Magistrate does not say in so many words while directing investigating u/s. 156(3) of the Code that an FIR should be registered, it is the duty of the officer in charge of the police station to register the FIR regarding the cognizable offence disclosed by the complaint because that police officer could take further steps contemplated in Chapter XII of the Code only thereafter.".
13. The same view was taken by this Court in Dilawar Singh vs. State of Delhi 2007 (10) JT 585. We would further clarify that even if an FIR has been registered and even if the police has made the investigation, or is actually making the investigation, which the aggrieved person feels is not proper, such a person can approach the Magistrate u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and if the Magistrate is satisfied he can order a proper investigation and take other suitable steps and pass such order orders as he thinks necessary for ensuring a proper investigation. All these powers a Magistrate enjoys u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973
14. S. 156 (3) states:
"Any Magistrate empowered u/s. 190 may order such an investigation as abovementioned."
1. The words 'as abovementioned obviously refer to S. 156 (1), which contemplates investigation by the officer in charge of the Police Station.
15. S. 156(3) provides for a check by the Magistrate on the police performing its duties under Chapter XII Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 In cases where the Magistrate finds that the police has not done its duty of investigating the case at all, or has not done it satisfactorily, he can issue a direction to the police to do the investigation properly, and can monitor the same.
16. The power in the Magistrate to order further investigation u/s. 156(3) is an independent power, and does not affect the power of the investigating officer to further investigate the case even after submission of his report vide S. 173(8). Hence the Magistrate can order re-opening of the investigation even after the police submits the final report, vide State of Bihar vs. A.C. Saldanna 1979 Indlaw SC 344.
17. In our opinion S. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is wide enough to include all such powers in a Magistrate which are necessary for ensuring a proper investigation, and it includes the power to order registration of an F.I.R. and of ordering a proper investigation if the Magistrate is satisfied that a proper investigation has not been done, or is not being done by the police. S. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 though briefly worded, in our opinion, is very wide and it will include all such incidental powers as are necessary for ensuring a proper investigation.
18. It is well-settled that when a power is given to an authority to do something it includes such incidental or implied powers which would ensure the proper doing of that thing. In other words, when any power is expressly granted by the statute, there is impliedly included in the grant, even without special mention, every power and every control the denial of which would render the grant itself ineffective. Thus where an Act confers jurisdiction it impliedly also grants the power of doing all such acts or employ such means as are essentially necessary to its execution.
19. The reason for the rule  is quite apparent. Many matters of minor details are omitted from legislation. As Crawford observes in his 'Statutory Construction' :-
"If these details could not be inserted by implication, the drafting of legislation would be an indeterminable process and the legislative intent would likely be defeated by a most insignificant omission".
20. In ascertaining a necessary implication, the Court simply determines the legislative will and makes it effective. What is necessarily implied is as much part of the statute as if it were specifically written therein.
21. An express grant of statutory powers carries with it by necessary implication the authority to use all reasonable means to make such grant effective. Thus in ITO, Cannanore vs. M.K. Mohammad Kunhi, 1968 Indlaw SC 218, this Court held that the income tax appellate tribunal has implied powers to grant stay, although no such power has been expressly granted to it by the Income-tax Act, 1961
22. Similar examples where this Court has affirmed the doctrine of implied powers are Union of India vs. Paras Laminates 1990 Indlaw SC 371, Reserve Bank of India vs. Peerless General Finance and Investment Company Ltd 1996 Indlaw SC 1148, Chief Executive Officer and Vice Chairman Gujarat Maritime Board vs. Haji Daud Haji Harun Abu 1996 Indlaw SC 1912, J.K. Synthetics Ltd. vs. Collector of Central Excise, 1996 Indlaw SC 4044, State of Karnataka vs. Vishwabharati House Building Co-op Society 2003 Indlaw SC 37 etc.
23. In Savitri vs. Govind Singh Rawat 1985 Indlaw SC 62 this Court held that the power conferred on the Magistrate u/s. 125 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to grant maintenance to the wife implies the power to grant interim maintenance during the pendency of the proceeding, otherwise she may starve during this period.
24. In view of the abovementioned legal position, we are of the view that although S. 156(3) is verybriefly worded, there is an implied power in the Magistrate u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to order registration of a criminal offence and /or to direct the officer in charge of the concerned police station to hold a proper investigation and take all such necessary steps that may be necessary for ensuring a proper investigation including monitoring the same. Even though these powers have not been expressly mentioned in S. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 we are of the opinion that they are implied in the above provision.
25. We have elaborated on the above matter because we often find that when someone has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered at the police station and/or a proper investigation is not being done by the police, he rushes to the High Court to file a writ petition or a petition u/s. 482 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 We are of the opinion that the High Court should not encourage this practice and should ordinarily refuse to interfere in such matters, and relegate the petitioner to his alternating remedy, firstly u/s. 154(3) and S. 36 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the concerned police officers, and if that is of no avail, by approaching the concerned Magistrate u/s. 156(3).
26. If a person has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered by the police station his first remedy is to approach the Superintendent of Police u/s. 154(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or other police officer referred to in S. 36 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 If despite approaching the Superintendent of Police or the officer referred to in S. 36 his grievance still persists, then he can approach a Magistrate u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 instead of rushing to the High Court by way of a writ petition or a petition u/s. 482 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 Moreover he has a further remedy of filing a criminal complaint u/s. 200 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 Why then should writ petitions or S. 482 petitions be entertained when there are so many alternative remedies?
27. As we have already observed above, the Magistrate has very wide powers to direct registration of an FIR and to ensure a proper investigation, and for this purpose he can monitor the investigation to ensure that the investigation is done properly . The High Court should discourage the practice of filing a writ petition or petition u/s. 482 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 simply because a person has a grievance that his FIR has not been registered by the police, or after being registered, proper investigation has not been done by the police. For this grievance, the remedy lies u/ss. 36 and 154(3) before the concerned police officers, and if that is of no avail, u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the Magistrate or by filing a criminal complaint u/s. 200 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and not by filing a writ petition or a petition u/s. 482 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973
28. It is true that alternative remedy is not an absolute bar to a writ petition, but it is equally well settled that if there is an alternative remedy the High Court should not ordinarily interfere.
29. In Union of India vs. Prakash P. Hinduja and another 2003 Indlaw SC 490, it has been observed by this Court that a Magistrate cannot interfere with the investigation by the police. However, in our opinion, the ratio of this decision would only apply when a proper investigation is being done by the police. If the Magistrate on an application u/s. 156(3) Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is satisfied that proper investigation has not been done, or is not being done by the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station, he can certainly direct the officer in charge of the police station to make a proper investigation and can further monitor the same .
30. It may be further mentioned that in view of S. 36 Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973 if a person is aggrieved that a proper investigation has not been made by the officer-in-charge of the concerned police station, such aggrieved person can approach the Superintendent of Police or other police officer superior in rank to the officer-in-charge of the police station and such superior officer can, if he so wishes, do the investigation vide CBI vs. State of Rajasthan and another 2001 Indlaw SC 20336, R.P. Kapur vs. S.P. Singh 1960 Indlaw SC 501 etc. Also, the State Government is competent to direct the Inspector General, Vigilance to take over the investigation of a cognizable offence registered at a police station vide State of Bihar vs. A.C. Saldanna (supra).
31. No doubt the Magistrate cannot order investigation by the CBI vide CBI vs. State of Rajasthan and another (Supra), but this Court or the High Court has power u/art. 136 or Art. 226 to order investigation by the CBI. That, however should be done only in some rare and exceptional case, otherwise, the CBI would be flooded with a large number of cases and would find it impossible to properly investigate all of them.
32. In the present case, there was an investigation by the G.R.P., Mathura and also two Courts of Inquiry held by the Army authorities and they found that it was a case of suicide. Hence, in our opinion, the High Court was justified in rejecting the prayer for a CBI inquiry.
33. In Secretary, Minor Irrigation and Rural Engineering Services U.P. and others vs. Sahngoo Ram Arya and another 2002 Indlaw SC 314 , this Court observed that although the High Court has power to order a CBI inquiry, that power should only be exercised if the High Court after considering the material on record comes to a conclusion that such material discloses prima facie a case calling for investigation by the CBI or by any other similar agency. A CBI inquiry cannot be ordered as a matter of routine or merely because the party makes some allegation.
34. In the present case, we are of the opinion that the material on record does not disclose a prima facie case calling for an investigation by the CBI. The mere allegation of the appellant that his son was murdered because he had discovered some corruption cannot, in our opinion, justify a CBI inquiry, particularly when inquiries were held by the Army authorities as well as by the G.R.P. at Mathura, which revealed that it was a case of suicide.
35. It has been stated in the impugned order of the High Court that the G.R.P. at Mathura had investigated the matter and gave a detailed report on 29.8.2003. It is not clear whether this report was accepted by the Magistrate or not. If the report has been accepted by the Magistrate and no appeal/revision was filed against the order of the learned Magistrate accepting the police report, then that is the end of the matter. However, if the Magistrate has not yet passed any order on the police report, he may do so in accordance with law and in the light of the observations made above.
36. With the above observations, this appeal stands dismissed.
37.Let a copy of this judgment be sent by the Secretary General of this Court to the Registrar Generals/Registrars of all the High Courts, who shall circulate a copy of this Judgment to all the Hon'ble Judges of the High Courts.
Appeal dismissed.
