People\022S Union For Civil Liberties v Union of India and another
Supreme Court of India

20 November 2007
Writ Petition (civil) 196 of 2001 IA NOS. 34, 35, 37, 40, 49, 54, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62 & 77 IN WRIT PETITION (C) NO. 196 OF 2001 WITH  CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NO. 128 OF 2007 IN W.P. (C) NO.196 OF 2001
The Judgment was delivered by : Hon'ble Justice Arijit Pasayat
1. By this order two IAs Nos. 37 of 2004 and 54 of 2005 stand disposed of. LA No. 37 of 2004 is an application by the Union of India for permission to modify the National Maternity Benefit Scheme and to introduce a new scheme called Janani Suraksha Yojana . IA No. 54 of 2005 is an application by the petitioner questioning legality of the discontinuation of the benefit under NMBS due to introduction of JSY. By order dated 27-4-2004 this Court directed as follows:
"No Scheme ... in particular ... National Maternity Benefit Scheme shall be discontinued or restricted in any way without prior approval of the Court."
Again, by order dated 9-5-2005 this Court directed as follows:
"By IA No. 37, permission is sought to modify the National Maternity Benefit Scheme (NMBS) and to introduce a new scheme, namely, Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY). Whereas in IA No. 54, the prayer is that the Scheme should not be modified by reducing, abridging or qualifying in any way the social assistance entitlements created under the original scheme of NMBS for expecting BPL mothers, including cash entitlement of Rs 500 provided therein. We have requested learned Additional Solicitor General to place on record further material in the form of affidavit to effectively implement the new Scheme sought to be introduced. The further material shall include the approximate distance of Public Health Centre from the residential complexes and the facility of transportation, etc. The Commissioner shall also examine the matter in depth and file a report. The response to the application may be filed within eight weeks. Meanwhile, the existing National Maternity Benefit Scheme will continue."
The Government set a numerical ceiling of 57.5 lakh beneficiaries as the annual target for NMBS. However, the number of beneficiaries under JSY in 2006-2007 was only 26.2 lakhs i.e. 45.5% and in the year 2005-2006 this was as low as 5.7 lakhs i.e. 10%. While there has been an improvement in the last one year, the coverage under this Scheme is still way below the target number of women to be covered by NMBS.
2. According to the Union of India, JSY was introduced to put a premium on the willingness of poor women to go in for institutional delivery instead of home delivery. But it was recognised that in the States with lower institutional delivery rates, one of the reasons for low performance have been lesser availability of facilities in the health centres, which acts as disincentive for the poor illiterate women to seek the services.
3. Pursuant to the order of this Court dated 9-5-2005 the Commissioner had prepared a report.
4. After discussions with the Commissioner appointed by this Court, senior officials of the Central Government took a decision to modify JSY Scheme to continue benefits of NMBS and also to improve upon such benefits for non-institutional delivery, where the woman chooses to deliver her baby at home. In this connection, a letter dated 13-7-2006 was written to the Commissioner by the Secretary, Health and Family Welfare under the amended JSY. The low performing States and the high performing States were defined as follows:
"The Scheme focuses on the poor pregnant women with special dispensation for the States having low institutional delivery rates, namely, the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Rajasthan, Orissa and Jammu and Kashmir. While these States have been named as low performing States (LPS), the remaining States have been named as high performing States (HPS)."
5. The table below gives details of the number of beneficiaries under JSY  vis-a-vis the annual targets set by the Government of India for NMBS:
6. The Scheme as the details above go to show has virtually not taken off in many States. Delhi has given the benefit under NMBS to only twenty women in 2006-2007, while in Chandigarh the number of beneficiaries is zero. In Sikkim, Meghalaya, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Dadra & Nagar Haveli less than even 10% of the eligible beneficiaries have been covered under NMBS. Except for the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Assam, Orissa and Mizoram where more than 75% of the eligible beneficiaries seem to have been reached out to, the performance of this Scheme has been very poor in all the other States:
Indicated below are percentage of home delivery figures
7. In the States of Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, Manipur and Delhi there are almost no JSY beneficiaries who had a home delivery. This indicates that in these States the Scheme's focus continues to be only on institutional deliveries and not on all deliveries. Even in the States of Assam, Rajasthan, Meghalaya, Orissa and Chhattisgarh JSY has been disproportionately given to only those who have had institutional deliveries.
At this juncture, the financial performance needs to be noted.
8. Janani Suraksha Yojana is a Centrally sponsored scheme with the Centre providing 100% of the funds. Some States e.g. Andhra Pradesh make their own contribution thereby increasing the amount of cash assistance for institutional deliveries. Tamil Nadu has introduced a separate scheme for providing mothers with Rs 1000 per month for six months i.e. three months prior to the delivery and three months after.
9. Given below are the details of allocation and utilisation of the funds provided by the Central Government. Out of the funds provided for JSY for 2006-2007, about 71.2% of the funds allocated have been utilised in the year 2006-2007.
Utilisation of funds allocated by JSY
10. Looking at the State wise break up it is seen that States like Delhi, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh, and Union Territories of Chandigarh and Daman & Diu have not at all utilised the funds allocated to them for the purpose of JSY. Among other States, Manipur, Jharkhand and Haryana utilised less than 20% of the funds released to them. Only ten States spent more than 70% of the funds allocated to them under JSY.
11. At the time of hearing of the applications, learned counsel for the petitioner and the Union of India highlighted various aspects. Considering the submissions and the material data placed on record we direct as follows:
(a) The Union of India and all the State Governments and the Union Territories shall (i) continue with NMBS, and (ii) ensure that all BPL pregnant women get cash assistance 8-12 weeks prior to the delivery.
(b) The amount shall be Rs 500 per birth irrespective of number of children and the age of the woman.
(c) The Union of India, the State Governments and the Union Territories shall file affidavits within 8 weeks from today indicating the total number of births in the State, number of eligible BPL women who have received the benefits, number of BPL women who had home/non- institutional deliveries and have received the benefit, number of BPL women who had institutional deliveries and have received the benefit.
(d) The total number of resources  allocated and utilised for the period 2000-2006.
(e) All Governments concerned are directed to regularly advertise the revised scheme so that the intended beneficiaries can become aware of the Scheme.
(f) The Central Government shall ensure that the money earmarked for the Scheme is not utilised for any other purpose. The mere insistence on utilisation certificate may not yield the expected result.
(g) It shall be the duty of all concerned to ensure that the benefits of the Scheme reach the intended beneficiaries. In case it is noticed that there is any diversion of the funds allocated for the Scheme, such stringent action as is called for shall be taken against the erring officials responsible for diversion of the funds.
12. At this juncture it would be necessary to take note of certain connected issues which have relevance. It seems from the Scheme that irrespective of number of children, the beneficiaries are given the benefit. This in a way goes against the concept of family planning which is intended to curb the population growth. Further, the age of the mother is a relevant factor because women below a particular age are prohibited from legally getting married. The Union of India shall consider this aspect while considering the desirability of the continuation of the Scheme in the present form. After considering the aforesaid aspects and if need be, necessary amendments may be made.
The IAs are accordingly disposed of.
