Commissioner of Customs v Creotex Industries
Supreme Court of India

30 October 2007
Civil Appeal No(s). 1462 of 2002, Civil Appeal No. 1462 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. This civil appeal under Sec. 130 (E) of the Customs Act 1962 filed y the Department is directed against the final order No. C-I/2836/WZB/2001 dated 17.9.2001 passed by Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, West Regional Bench at Mumbai, by which he respondent herein succeeded only on the ground that SCN contained ald allegations of suppression.
2. The issue for consideration before the Tribunal was whether the mport of raw material by the assessee duty free under the Pass Book cheme and sale thereof in open market without utilizing it in the anufacture in their own factory violated Notification No.117/88-COS ated 30.3.1988 read with para 281 of Exim Policy 1988-91.
3. The facts giving rise to this civil appeal are as follows:
On basis of information, officers of Customs Department (Preventive wing) carried out the search in the office of one Shri D.Pallaria who was the Director of M/s. Giriraj Impex Pvt. Ltd.
During the search incriminating documents showing transactions with egard to the sale of duty ree raw material imported under the Pass Book Scheme were seized.
During the investigation statements of the partners of the assessee firm as ell as of Customs House Agent (CHA) (Transporters) were also recorded.
4. On the basis of the said investigation show cause notice was ssued on 8th August 1994 in which it was alleged, inter alia, that fifteen ut of twenty one consignments imported were sold by the assessee in the pen market instead of actual consumption in their factory at Jaipur. In he show cause notice it was further alleged that fifteen consignments ere sold to five parties whose names are given as M/s. Jallan Woolen ndustries, M/s. Nik Polymer International, M/s. Ajanta Printers, M/s. Amar Dyes and Printers and M/s. Vinay Dye Chem Corporation. That, there was no sale to Actual Users as the said firms, namely, M/s. Ajanta rinters, M/s. Amar Dyes and Printers and M/s. Vinay Dyed Chem orporation were non-existent.
5. Having gone through the records of this case we are satisfied that he status of the above three firms remains in doubt. The Commissioner ame to the conclusion that said three firms claimed to be SSI Units but hey had no addresses from which they operated.
6. The basic issue which arose for determination in this civil appeal efore the Commissioner consisted of two-fold points, namely, whether the aid three firms were genuine or bogus, particularly in the absence of roper addresses. Secondly, whether the Department on the facts and ircumstances of this case was entitled to invoke the extended period of imitation on the ground of suppression as alleged. In this onnection the assessee herein contended before the Commissioner that hey had sold the goods through Shri Pallaria the Commission agent(who was also a Director of Giriraj Impex), bona fide. That, the espondent had placed before the assessee the requisite registration ertificates given by the three entities. According to the assessee the said ertificates showed that the three entities were registered as SSI units and herefore the assessee had acted bonafide.
7. Basically two points arise for determination which have not been xamined properly by the Commissioner, namely, whether the three ntities are genuine or bogus and whether the assessee has acted bona fide n the basis of SSI registration certificates produced by Shri Pallaria - the ommission agent. The Commissioner should also have decided whether here was any connection between the assessee and the other Company in hich Shri Pallaria was the Director.
8. In the present case the demand is of about Rupees twenty five akhs. That calculation is based on the CIF value (import value).
For the aforestated reasons we set aside the impugned order of he Tribunal and remit the matter to the adjudicating authority, namely, the Commissioner of Customs (Preventive) Mumbai, for fresh onsideration in accordance with law. We make it clear that in this case he burden will be on the assessee to provide details regarding the status nd the addresses of the aforestated three entities, namely, M/s. Ajanta rinters, M/s. Amar Dyes and Printers and M/s. Vinay Dye Chem Corpn.
9. If the goods have been sold through commission agent then the burden ill be on the assessee to how as to who has paid the amount towards the price of the goods.
Taking into account of these factors the Commissioner is directed to ecide the matter de novo in accordance with law.
10. Accordingly, the Department succeeds. The impugned order of the Tribunal is set aside. The Civil Appeal is allowed with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed
