Sudarshan Prosad Jaiswal and others v Maya Sen and others
Supreme Court of India

6 August 2007
S.L.P. (C) No. 19767 of 2006
The Order of the Court was as follows:
The affidavit filed in Court, be taken on record.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
On 7-3-2007, we passed the following order:
"Heard learned counsel for the petitioners. We do not find any error in the judgment rendered by the High Court so far as the eviction matter is concerned. The petitioners are, however, granted time till 30-9-2007, to vacate the premises in question upon filing usual undertaking in this Court within four weeks from today. Issue notice, limited to the question of grant of mesne profit. Until further orders, direction in the impugned order in relation to ascertainment of mesne profit shall remain stayed."
1.  It appears that though a period of about five months has expired, but the petitioners had not bothered to file an undertaking, which they were required to file within four weeks. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners stated that he has no instruction from the clients.
2. It appears that the petitioners are trying to play hide and seek with the Court, which attitude cannot be tolerated. It has been stated that the execution petition has already been filed, which is pending and the executing court is not in a position to execute the decree by virtue of the aforesaid order passed by this Court.
3.  In the facts and circumstances of the case, the order dated 7-3-2007, granting time to the petitioners to vacate the premises in question by 30-9-2007, is recalled and the executing court is directed to effect delivery of possession within a period of four weeks from the receipt/production of copy of this order.
4.  In case any armed force is necessary for effecting delivery of possession, the same shall be deputed by the Superintendent of Police concerned within forty-eight hours from the receipt of requisition. It is further made clear that if anybody else is found to be in possession of the premises in question, he shall be also dispossessed by the armed force.
5.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the landlords stated that by the same order dated 7-3-2007, this Court issued limited rule on the question of grant of mesne profit. It has been stated that the landlords do not intend to press the claim for mesne profit and the order in this regard should be set aside.
6.  In view of this stand taken on the part of the landlords, our order dated 7-3-2007, directing to issue notice limited to the question of grant of mesne profit is recalled. It is directed that the impugned order in relation to mesne profit stands modified and claim for mesne profit is rejected.
The special leave petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
petition disposed of.
