Kemrock Industries and Exports Limited v Commissioner of Central Excise, Vadodara
Supreme Court of India

29 March 2007
Appeal (Civil) 527 of 2002
The Judgment was delivered by : S. H. Kapadia, J.
1.  This is a statutory appeal filed by the assessee against the final Order no. 185/2001-D dated 11.9.2001 passed by Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi ("CEGAT") in appeal no. E/1994-R/97 Mum. The matter pertains to the issue of classification of Glass Fibres impregnated with resins/plastics.
2.  Assessee-company is the manufacturer of Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastics. They seek classification of the said item under Heading 70.14 of the Schedule to theCentral Excise Tariff Act, 1985. According to the Revenue, the said item is classifiable under Heading 39.20 ofCentral Excise Tariff Act, 1985.
3.  To resolve the above controversy, we quote here in below the above two headings.
4.  We do not find any merit in this civil appeal for the following reasons.
5.  The process of manufacturing articles in question of Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastics is indicated in the Tribunal's Order. In short, the assessee makes use of Fibre Glass Mat of suitable specification and thereafter impregnates the said Mat with a suitable resin, catalyst, pigment and accelerator. On impregnation/injection, the pigment spreads throughout the mat. This impregnation gives stiffness to the mat. The glass fibre mat is used as a raw material to manufacture roofing sheets, panels, doors etc.
6. It is this stiffness which provides value addition to the fibre glass mat in the sense that the strength of the mat gained by impregnation makes the mat strong enough to be used in partitions, roofs etc. But for that stiffness, the fibre glass mat would not be in a position to be used as a roofing sheet. Further, the 'glass fibre mat' is not an Article of glass ware per se under heading 70.14 of CETA. According to the assessee, even after impregnation the essential character of the product remaining a fibre glass mat and, therefore, it is classifiable as a glass fibre under Heading 70.14 ofCentral Excise Tariff Act, 1985. We do not find merit in the said contention.
7.  As stated above, Chapter 39 deals with 'plastics and articles thereof'. As stated above, under Heading 39.20 sheets of plastics, laminated supported or combined with other materials stand covered as plastics and articles thereof. On the other hand, Heading 70.14 falls under Chapter 70, which refers to 'glass and glassware'. It is not in dispute that the item in question is a composite item. However, as found by the Department, in the above process, the glass fibre mat when impregnated with plastic gains certain amount of stiffness which helps manufacturers of roofs and partitions. In the present case, since the article in question is a composite article, the test of essentiality shall apply.
8. This test of essentiality refers to "essential character". The test states that, if the manufactured goods has the essential character, mainly of stiffness, required for the manufacturer of roofs, partitions etc. then one has to treat the item in question as an article of plastic. In the present case, Rule 3(b) of the Rules for the Interpretation of tariff entries would apply. The said Rule require that composite goods, mixtures and goods put up in sets have to be classified on the classification of that material or component which gives to the product their essential character. In the present case, if we keep in mind the manufacture of roofs, partitions etc., then the stiffness is the main attribute of such a product. The glass fibre mat when impregnated gives stiffness which helps in the manufactures of roofs, partitions etc., e.g., in the context of an insulation paper which is a composite of plastic and paper, the item will fall under Heading 39.01/06 of the previousCustoms Tariff Actsince plastic gives higher degree of insulation quality. Rule 3(b) requires classification based on the material which gives it the essential characteristics. This is the test of essentiality. The effect of the tariff schedule is to classify the products under different heads according to the character of the product. In interpreting a tariff entry, Rules for the Interpretation are helpful, particularly in cases of composite goods.
9.  For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any infirmity in the impugned judgment dated 11.9.2001 of the CEGAT and accordingly this civil appeal filed by the assessee is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Civil Appeal No. 3321 of 1998
10. Commnr. Of Central Excise v. M/s S.S.B. Industries Ltd.
11.  In view of our judgment in Civil Appeal No. 527 of 2002(supra), this civil appeal stands allowed with no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.
