Satinder Jit Singh v State of Punjab
Supreme Court of India

8 January 2007
Criminal Appeal No. 31 of 2007 (@Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 2415 of 2006)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Heard both sides.
2. Leave granted.
3. The appellant is an accused in a TADA case. He has been in custody since 2005. Being involved in some other criminal cases, he was facing trial in those cases and, therefore, could not appear in Court in the present case. The learned Judge, Designated Court, thus, took it as a case of absconding and passed an order declaring the appellant as a proclaimed offender. Taking this factor into account, the Designated Court declined to grant bail to the appellant.
4. Originally there were four accused and two accused have already died. Further trial of the case could not be proceeded due to the absence of the witnesses. Charges have been framed and the prosecution is on.
5. In the above circumstances, we are inclined to grant bail on stringent conditions. The appellant shall be released on bail on executing bail bonds for a sum of Rs.25,000/with two solvent sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of the Designated Judge, Jallandhar. The appellant is a permanent resident of Ali Mohallah, Jallandhar. He shall report before the S.H.O., Division No.6, Jallandhar once in a week for a period of six months and thereafter at least once in a month till the trial of the case is over.
6. The appeal is allowed accordingly.
ORDER :
Heard both sides.
Leave granted.
The appellant shall be released on bail on executing bail bonds for a sum of Rs.25,000/ with two solvent sureties of the like amount to the satisfaction of the Designated Judge, Jallandhar. The appellant is a permanent resident of Ali Mohallah, Jallandhar. He shall report before the S.H.O., Division No.6, Jallandhar once in a week for a period of six months and thereafter at least once in a month till the trial of the case is over.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Appeal allowed
