Indira Gandhi K. Vishwavidyalaya, Raipur v Anil Shrivastava and others
Supreme Court of India

5 April 2007
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s). 9179/2006
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  As the learned counsel appearing on behalf the respondents states that she represents all the private respondents, the office report is ignored.
Leave granted.
2.  The respondents were appointed on diverse dates on adhoc/work charge/temporary basis. Their appointments, however, were kept in abeyance by an order dated 5.12.1992 passed by the appropriate authority. Admittedly, the said order was passed keeping in view the fact that the sanction and/or creation of the said posts by the State although necessary but had not been granted.
3.  Respondents herein filed writ applications before the High Court when the offers of appointment made in their favour were cancelled. The learned Single Judge proceeded on the basis that the appointments having only been kept in abeyance, a presumption would arise that they had been made on regular basis; whereas it was prescribed that the appointments in terms of the rules could be made only for a particular period.
4. Despite the fact that the posts were not sanctioned and/or created, the High Court proceeded to perpetuate the illegality not only by directing that the respondents shall continue to hold the said posts but it went to the extent of issuing a direction that the appellants must consider their cases for regularistion in curium in accordance with law.
5.  The question as to whether in a case of this nature, where the appointments have been made on adhoc basis without following the recruitment rules made under the proviso appended to Article 309 of the Constitution of India as also in utter violation of the constitutional scheme adumbrated under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, a direction for regularisation of the services is permissible in law, has now been settled by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Secretary, State of Karnataka and Ors. vs. Umadevi (3) and Ors.2006 Indlaw SC 125 and a large number of decisions following the same.
6. The direction issued by the High Court, in our opinion, is, therefore, unsustainable in view of the aforementioned decision of the Constitution Bench. The impugned judgment, hence, cannot be sustained and it is set aside accordingly.
The appeal is allowed with the aforementioned observations.
Appeal allowed.
