Commissioner of Central Excise, Pune v Coca-Cola India Private Limited
Supreme Court of India

25 April 2007
C.A. Nos. 6525-6526 of 2001
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  The Revenue has filed the present appeals against Order No. C-1/3873-74/00WZB, dated 13th October, 2000 in Appeal Nos. E/3926R/98-Bom & E/1042R/99-Bom. passed by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, West Zonal Bench, Mumbai [for short "the Tribunal"].
2.  The Tribunal by the impugned order has set aside the order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) and held that the "non-alcoholic beverage bases or concentrates" manufactured by the respondents are classifiable under sub-heading 10 of Chapter Heading 33.02, as has been claimed by the respondent-assessee.
3.  M/s. Britoo Food Company Limited was a wholly owned subsidiary of Coca Cola Company which has changed its name to Coca Cola India Limited. The assessee filed an application for such change in its name, which was allowed.
4.  Assessee is the manufacturers of, inter alia, their products, namely, 'Non-alcoholic beverages bases/concentrates', which the Assessee or their bottlers required for making beverages and aerated waters, and which, in turn, were sold by the bottlers under the name of Coca-Cola, Thumps Up, Gold Spot, Limca, Citra, etc.
The assessee in counter-affidavit has stated, as under:
"The present appeal has no Revenue implication. The dispute relates to classification of beverage bases/concentrates manufactured by the Respondent, which are supplied to bottlers, who in turn use the same as raw material in the manufacture of beverages. They duty payable in respect of beverage basis/concentrates is modvatable. Since the duty payable by the Respondent is modvatable, there is no revenue implication. The issue of classification is therefore, academic. No purpose would be served by entertaining the present appeal."
5.  It is stated by the learned counsel for the assessee that the excise duty paid and the Modvat credit availed under Notification No. 5/94-C.E.(N.T.), dt. 1-3-1994 were identical and therefore consequences of payment of excise duty after availing Modvat credit was revenue neutral.
6.  In view of the stand taken by the assessee in the counter-affidavit and the statement made by the learned counsel for the assessee, the appeals are dismissed leaving the question of law open. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
7.  If upon verification, the submission of the counsel for the assessee is found to be incorrect, liberty is granted to the appellant-Revenue to mention the matter before this Court.
Appeals Dismissed.
