Madras Credit and Investment Limited v State of Kerala
Supreme Court of India

30 April 2008
Appeal (Civil) 8335-8336 of 2002
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  The assesses has filed the present Appeals by special leave. The assesses is a financier, providing finance to the customers who wish to purchase of goods, such as equipments, machinery, vehicles, etc., both from within Kerla and from outside the State of Kerala, and delivery of the goods in the State of Kerala, under hire purchase agreement executed between the assesses and the customers/parties.
The modus operandi followed by the assesses is as under:
2. The intending customers would approach the supplier for purchasing equipment, machinery, etc. and obtain a Performa invoice from the supplier for the purchase of the goods. The customers then approach the assesses with an application in the prescribed form, stating the amount required to be financed for purchase of goods and enclosing therewith the Performa invoice obtained by the customer from the supplier. The assesses after being satisfied itself about the bona fides and credit worthiness of the customers, sanctions the amount of advance.
3.  Upon the terms of financing, viz., the extent of finance, rate of interest, period of hire purchase, etc. being settled between the assesses and the customers in Kerala, hire purchase agreement is executed. Under the Agreement, the purchase order is placed by the assesses to the supplier outside Kerala, directing the supplier to deliver the goods to the customer in Kerala. The invoice is raised in the name of the assesses and the payment thereof is made by the assesses to the supplier. The assesses thus retains the title of the goods until the last installment under the Hire Purchase Agreement is paid by the customer. The customer pays to the assesses the amount borrowed in installments as agreed upon and on payment of the last instalment, the goods become the property of the customer. The ownership is transferred to the customer thereafter. In case of breach in payment of installment under the agreement, the assesses was free to take back the possession of the goods and deal with it in the manner it likes.
4.  The dispute in the present case pertains to the purchase of goods made from outside the State of Kerala. So far as the goods purchased within the State of Kerala are concerned, no tax had been levied, as the assesses has been treated as the second seller of the goods. The goods purchased from outside the State was treated sale by the appellant to the customers within the State of Kerala. Therefore, the goods purchased from outside the State of Kerala and delivered in the State of Kerala was treated as "sale" of the goods by the assesses and, accordingly the same was taxed. The appellant, inter alia, contended that the sale of the goods took place outside Kerala and, at any rate, it was an inter-State sale not taxable in Kerala. Rejecting the contention of the appellant, the Assessing Officer levied the sales tax on the assesses in respect of the purchase made from outside the State of Kerala. The assesses challenged the assessment in appeal. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner vide orders dated 21.04.1999 dismissed the appeal. The appellant filed second appeal before the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, Kerala (for short "the Tribunal") which also dismissed the appeal. Aggrieved their against, the appellant thereafter filed Tax Revisions, as provided under the Act, in the High Court, (being TRC Nos. 318 and 319 of 2000).
5.  By the impugned judgment, the High Court while affirming the decision of the Tribunal, held that the assesses was liable to tax in respect of the hire purchase transaction which is independent of the inter-State purchase by the assesses. The assesses relied upon two judgments of this Court in extending the scope of "inter-State sale" falling u/s. 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act.
6.  The same are Builders' Association of India Vs. Union of India 1989 (73) STC 370 1989 Indlaw SC 557, and Ganon Bunkerley & Co. Vs. State of Rajasthan 1993 88 STC 204(SC 1992 Indlaw SC 743) and contended that sales are outside State sales u/s. 4 of the C.S.T. Act or inter-State sales from outside Kerala. It was contended that the sales being inter-State sales, sales tax could not be levied in the State of Kerala. Rejecting this contention the High Court held:
"We find that the above decisions have application only in respect of first of the two transactions, that is purchases of goods by the assesses from the outside State suppliers. Therefore, so far as the supplier's sales to the assesses are concerned, they are inter-State sales falling within S. 3(a) of the CST Act, and there is no dispute about the same by the department also. The question is with regard to second transaction between the assesses and the customer in Kerala, which gives rise to the liability for the disputed tax. We feel, as already observed by us above, there are two transactions, one is the inter-State purchase by the assesses, and the other is the delivery of goods under the hire purchase agreement by the assesses to the customer in Kerala, which is the deemed sale under Explanation 3A to S. 2(xxi) of the KGST Act. Therefore, the decisions referred to above do not affect the assessor's liability for tax in respect of the hire purchase transaction, which is independent of the inter-State purchase by the assesses."
7.  We entirely agree with the view taken by the High Court. Consequently, we find no merit in these appeals and the same are dismissed with no orders as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.
