Union Ofindia v Marmagoa Steel Limited
Supreme Court of India

31 July 2008
C.A. No. 4902 of 2008
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  In November, 1994 M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited imported three consignments, in all, amounting to 4426.796 MT of shredded scrap and cleared the same under three Bills of Entry on payment of duty. Out of the said 4426.796 MT M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited gave a loan of 3314.159 MT of scrap to the respondent herein. On receipt of the said goods the respondent took credit of Rs. 27,83,198/- (Rupees Twenty-seven lakhs, eighty-three thousand and one hundred ninety-eight only) for the countervailing duty paid by M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited on 3314.159 MT of scrap.
2.  For the sake of convenience we annexe hereinbelow the details of quantities imported by M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited and supplied to the respondent herein.
.
3.  On 23rd November, 1995, a show cause notice was issued to the assessee on the ground that it had taken credit of duty on the basis of only delivery Challan issued by M/s. Essar Steel, a Division of M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited. According to the Department MODVAT Credit could not have been taken under Rule 57G of Central Excise Rules merely on the basis of delivery Challans. By the said show cause notice the assessee was called upon to show cause as to why action should not be taken for wrongly availing MODVAT Credit on the basis of delivery Challans and in that connection the Department placed reliance on Rule 57G of the said Rules. The allegation made by the Department was denied. The assessee submitted that they had taken credit of duty in accordance with the provisions of Central Excise Act, 1944 and the Rules framed thereunder.
4.  Suffice it to state that the Commissioner of Customs, Goaconfirmed the demand and levied penalty.
5.  Aggrieved by the said Order dated 26th September, 1997, the assessee preferred an appeal before the Tribunal. By its Order dated 11th August, 2004 the Tribunal confirmed the duty but reduced the penalty/set aside the portion thereof.
6.  The assessee preferred Central Excise Appeal No. 117/2004 in the Bombay High Court. The appeal stood allowed. Hence, this Civil Appeal is filed by the Department.
7.  As can be seen from the Chart quoted hereinabove, the total consignment 4426.796 MT shredded scrap stood imported by M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited under three distinct Bills of Entry dated 30th May, 1994, 31st May, 1994 and 6th June, 1994. As regards the Bill of Entry dated 6th June, 1994 it may be mentioned that the Bill of Entry indicating payment of duty by the importer on the quantity, namely, 1325.296 MT was not produced. Only a Certificate of the Paper Book, as issued by the Superintendent, Central Excise, Surat, to the Superintendent, Central Excise, Goacame to be produced before the Adjudicating Authority.
8.  At this stage we may quote the provisions of Rule 52A and Rule 57G:
"RULE 52A. Goods to be delivered on an invoice.(1) No excisable goods shall be delivered from a factory or a warehouse except under an invoice signed by the owner of the factory, or his authorised agent."
"RULE 57G. Procedure to be observed by the manufacturer.
(1) Every manufacturer intending to take credit of the duty paid in inputs under rule 57A, shall file a declaration with the Assistant Collector of Central Excise having jurisdiction over his factory, indicating the description of the final products manufactured in his factory and the inputs intended to be used in each of the said final products and such other information as the said Assistant Collector may require, and obtain a dated acknowledgment of the said declaration.
(2)A manufacturer who has filed a declaration under sub-rule (1) may, after obtaining the acknowledgment aforesaid, take credit of the duty paid on the inputs received by him:
Provided that no credit shall be taken unless the inputs are received in the factory the cover of an invoice issued under Rule 52A, an AR-1, or Bill of Entry or any other document as may be prescribed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf evidencing the payment of duty on such inputs."
9.  On reading Rule 52A the position which emerges broadly is that the said Rule refers to eligibility for claiming MODVAT Credit, whereas Rule 57G refers to procedure to be observed by the manufacturer for taking credit for the duty paid on the inputs received by him. A bare reading of Rule 52A shows that no excisable goods shall be delivered from a factory or a warehouse except under an invoice signed by the owner of the factory or his authorised agent. Rule 52A, therefore, applies to a situation where goods are cleared from a factory or a warehouse to the place of assessee. For such a situation the proviso in Rule 57G stipulates that no credit shall be taken unless the inputs are received in the factory under the cover of an invoice issued under Rule 52A.  However, that situation does not arise in this case for the simple reasons that the importer M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited had loaned the goods to the assessee (which transaction is not doubted in the show cause notice). Further the goods were transferred directly by the importer to the Unit of the assessee from the Port. Therefore, the goods never went to the manufacturing Unit of M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited. For such a situation the proviso to sub-rule (2) of Rule 57G states that the relevant document indicating payment of duty would be Bill of Entry.
10.  Now in the present case, as far as Bills of Entry dated 30th May, 1994 and 31st May, 1994 are concerned, Bills of Entry were produced by the assessee which indicate that M/s. Essar Gujarat Limited had paid duty at the time of import and, therefore, the assessee was entitled to take MODVAT Credit for the duty paid on the imported goods.
11. However, when we come to the 3rd Bill of Entry dated 6th June, 1994, only the above Certificate of the Paper Book was relied upon and the triplicate copy of the Bill of Entry was not produced. In the circumstances, in our view, the respondent had wrongly availed of MODVAT Credit of Rs. 1,78,582/- on the quantity of 212.659 MT scrap referred to in the above Chart.
12.  In the circumstances, the Civil Appeal filed by the Department to that extent succeeds. The appeal is partly allowed with no order as to costs.
Appeal partly allowed.
