Pareena Swarup v Union of India
Supreme Court of India

30 September 2008
W.P. No. 634 of 2007
The Judgment was delivered by : P. Sathasivam, J.
1.   Ms. Pareena Swarup, member of the Bar, has filed this writ petition under Art. 32 of the Constitution of India by way of Public Interest Litigation seeking to declare various sections of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 such as S. 6 which deals with adjudicating authorities, composition, powers etc., S. 25 which deals with the establishment of Appellate Tribunal, S. 27 which deals with composition etc. of the Appellate Tribunal, S. 28 which deals with qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal, S. 32 which deals with resignation and removal, S. 40 which deals with members etc. as ultra vires of Arts. 14, 19 (1) (g), 21, 50, 323B of the Constitution of India. It is also pleaded that these provisions are in breach of scheme of the Constitutional provisions and power of judiciary.
Brief facts in a nutshell are:
2.  The Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act") was introduced for providing punishment for offence of Money Laundering. The Act also provides measures of prevention of money laundering. The object sought to be achieved is by provisional attachment of the proceeds of crime, which are likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of such proceeds under the Act. The Act also casts obligations on banking companies, financial institutions and intermediaries to maintain record of the transactions and to furnish information of such transactions within the prescribed time.
3.  In exercise of powers conferred by cl. (s) of sub-s. (2) of S. 73 read with S. 30 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003), the Central Government framed rules regulating the appointment and conditions of service of persons appointed as Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal. These rules are the Prevention of Money-Laundering (Appointment and Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal) Rules, 2007. The Central Government has also framed rules called the Prevention of Money Laundering (Appointment and Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authorities) Rules, 2007.
4.   It is highlighted that the provisions of the Act are so provided that there may not be independent judiciary to decide the cases under the Act but the Members and the Chairperson are to be selected by the Selection Committee headed by the Revenue Secretary. It is further pointed out that the Constitutional guarantee of a free and independent judiciary, and the Constitutional scheme of separation of powers can be easily and seriously undermined, if the legislatures were to divest the regular Courts of their jurisdiction in all matters, entrust the same to the newly created Tribunals.
"According to the petitioner, the statutory provisions of the Act and the Rules, more particularly, relating to constitution of Adjudicating Authority and Appellate Tribunal are violative of basic constitutional guarantee of free and independent judiciary, therefore, beyond the legislative competence of the Parliament.
The freedom from control and potential domination of the executive are necessary preconditions for the independence. With these and various other grounds, the petitioner has filed this public interest litigation seeking to issue a writ of certiorari for quashing the abovesaid provisions which are inconsistent with the separation of power and interference with the judicial functioning of the Tribunal as ultra vires of the Constitution of India."
5.   The respondent-Union of India has filed counter affidavit repudiating the claim of the petitioner. The Department highlighted that the impugned Act has not ousted the jurisdiction of any courts and sufficient safeguards are provided in the appointment of officers of the Adjudicating Authorities, Members and Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal.
6.   We have carefully verified the provisions of the Act and the Rules, particularly, relating to constitution and selection of Adjudicating Authorities, Members and Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal. Considering the stand taken by the petitioner with reference to those provisions, we requested Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel, to assist the Court. Pursuant to the suggestion made by the Court, Mr. K.K. Venugopal and Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, learned Additional Solicitor General, discussed the above issues and by consensus submitted certain proposals.
7.   The petitioner has highlighted the following defects in the Adjudicating Authority Rules, 2007 and the Appellate Tribunal Rules, 2007:-
"1. Rule 3(3) of Adjudicating Authority Rules, 2007 does not explicitly specify the qualifications of member from the field of finance or accountancy.
2. Rule 4 of Appellate Tribunal Rules, 2007 which provided for Method of Appointment of Chairperson do not give adequate control to Judiciary.
3. Rule 6(1) of Appellate Tribunal Rules, 2007 which defines the Selection Committee for recommending appointment of Members of the Tribunal, would undermine the Constitutional scheme of separation of powers between judiciary and executives.
4. Rule 32(2) of PMLA which provides for removal of Chairperson/Members of Tribunal under PMLA does not provide adequate safety to the tenure of the Chairperson/Members of the Tribunal.
5. Rule 6(2) of Appellate Tribunal Rules is vague to the extent that it provides for recommending names after "inviting applications thereof by advertisement or on the recommendations of the appropriate authorities."
6. S. 28(1) of PMLA, which allows a person who "is qualified to be a judge of the High Court" to be the Chairperson of the Tribunal, should be either deleted or the Rules may be amended to provide that the Chief Justice of India shall nominate a person for appointment as Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal under PMLA "who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court" failing which a person who "is qualified to be a judge of the High Court."
8.  The qualifications for Legal Member of the Adjudicating Authority should exclude "those who are qualified to be a District Judge" and only serving or retired District Judges should be appointed. The Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority should be the Legal member.
9.  As regards the above defects in the rules, as observed earlier, on the request of this Court, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel, Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, learned ASG as well as Ms. Pareena Swarup who has filed this PIL suggested certain amendments in the line of the Constitutional provisions as interpreted by this Court in various decisions.
10.  It is necessary that the Court may draw a line which the executive may not cross in their misguided desire to take over bit by bit and judicial functions and powers of the State exercised by the duly constituted Courts. While creating new avenue of judicial forums, it is the duty of the Government to see that they are not in breach of basic constitutional scheme of separation of powers and independence of the judicial function.
11.  We agree with the apprehension of the petitioner that the provisions of Prevention of the Money Laundering Act are so provided that there may not be independent judiciary to decide the cases under the Act but the Members and the Chairperson to be selected by the Selection Committee headed by Revenue Secretary. It is to be noted that this Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India and Ors., (1997) 3 SCC 261 1997 Indlaw SC 2816 has laid down that power of judicial review over legislative action vested in the High Courts u/art. 226 as well as in this Court u/art. 32 of the Constitution is an integral and essential feature of the Constitution constituting part of the its structure.
12.  The Constitution guarantees free and independent judiciary and the Constitutional scheme of separation of powers can be easily and seriously undermined, if the legislatures were to divest the regular courts of their jurisdiction in all matters, entrust the same to the newly created Tribunals which are not entitled to protection similar to the Constitutional protection afforded to the regular Courts. The independence and impartiality which are to be secured not only for the Court but also for Tribunals and their members, though they do not belong to the 'Judicial Service' are entrusted with judicial powers.
13.  The safeguards which ensure independence and impartiality are not for promoting personal prestige of the functionary but for preserving and protecting the rights of the citizens and other persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and for ensuring that such Tribunal will be able to command the confidence of the public. Freedom from control and potential domination of the executive are necessary pre-conditions for the independence and impartiality of judges. To make it clear that a judiciary free from control by the Executive and Legislature is essential if there is a right to have claims decided by Judges who are free from potential domination by other branches of Government. With this background, let us consider the defects pointed out by the petitioner and amended/proposed provisions of the Act and the Rules.
14.  Mr. Gopal Subramaniam has informed this Court that the suggested actions have been completed by amending the Rules. Even other wise, according to him, the proposed suggestions formulated by Mr. K.K. Venugopal would be incorporated on disposal of the above writ petition. For convenience, let us refer the doubts raised by the petitioner and amended/proposed provisions as well as the remarks of the department in complying with the same.
15.  Inasmuch as the amended/proposed provisions, as mentioned in para 9, are in tune with the scheme of the Constitution as well as the principles laid down by this Court, we approve the same and direct the respondent-Union of India to implement the above provisions, if not so far amended as suggested, as expeditiously as possible but not later than six months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
16.  The writ petition is disposed of accordingly. No costs. This Court records its appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered by Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned senior counsel and Mr. Gopal Subramaniam, learned Addl. Solicitor General.
Petition disposed of.
