Amit Gupta v U.O.I. and another
Supreme Court of India

2  May  2008
IA 17/2008 in W.P. (Civil) No(s). 157 of 2005
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2. As per the schedule approved for conducting the counselling for admissions to the post- graduates Medical/ Dental courses for the All India Quota as well as State Quota, we had fixed the 15th April as the last date for first round of counselling for the State Quota. It is submitted by the Learned Additional Solicitor General that in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Jharkhand, the first round of counselling for admission to the State Quota was not completed by 15.04.2008 and that the details are not available. Consequently DGH S is facing difficulty in completing the second round of counselling for All India Quota, for which the last date is 9th May. It is stated that unless the first round of counselling of State Quota is completed, it is not possible to complete the second round of counselling for reallocation of seats and allotment of seats from waiting list.
3. In the above circumstances, we direct the Director of Medical Education/Chief Secretary/Director of Entrance Examination in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Bihar and Jharkhand to send the particulars of the first round of counselling for admission to State Quota to the DGH S, Government of India, before 10th May, 2008. The admissions to All India Quota DGH S in respect of the reminder of the second round of counselling is permitted to be held between 24th May to 30th May, 2008.
Correspondingly, the second round of State counselling would stand extended for a period of ten days and they may complete the second round of counselling and admissions by 10th June, 200 8.
4. All students who are eligible to participate in the second round of counselling may be given an opportunity to participate in the extended period of second round of counselling.
5. Henceforth, Director of Health Services of the respective States shall ensure that the time schedule fixed by this Court for State quota is followed strictly and first round of counselling shall be completed within the time frame fixed and the details be furnished as fixed.
6. This order has been passed in peculiar facts and not to be treated as a precedent.
I.A is disposed of.
Application disposed of
