Dlf (Phase-Ii) R.W. Society v Union Of India
Supreme Court of India

22 January 2008
Writ Petition (civil) 459 of 2006
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Heard the parties.
2. This petition is filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India by eight individuals praying the following reliefs:
"(a) Direct Respondent No.9 to immediately cease all construction activity in and around X-Block in particular in DLF Phase-II and III and in particular, buildings identified as 2,4,9,10,11,12,13,17 and 18 to in the Map enclosed.
(b) Direct Respondent No.8 to seal all wells/ tube wells/bore wells and drillers in the buildings of Respondent No.9, which are illegally extracting ground water.
(c) Restrain Respondent No.9 from either letting or selling any of the properties or part of the property which are in violation of Environmental laws and have been identified in the map enclosed.
(d) Direct the Central Bureau of Investigation to investigate as to how the buildings shown in the map have come up in flagrant violations of the law.
(e) Direct Respondent No.1 to 8 to strictly enforce the law and further direct them to issue notices to the occupants of the building to vacate the premises and thereafter to seal the same.
(f) Direct various Authorities to reply to the pending application under the Right to Information Act
(g) Direct Respondent No.6 and 7 to produce original Master Plan, the present Master Plan and also the various amendments thereto and also the proof regarding the various Public notices given as required under Section 102 of the HUDA Act, 1977
(h) Direct Respondents 1 to 8 to initiate appropriate action against the their employees/officers who have illegally approved/sanctioned the building plans of Respondent No.9 in violation of various laws including Environmental laws."
3. On reading of the reliefs prayed for in this petition, we are afraid that this Court is not the appropriate authority to grant such relief. If the petitioner has any grievance he is at liberty to approach the appropriate authority. This petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
4. We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the merit of this case.
Petition dismissed
