Fasilathunissa v M. Vijayalakshmi
Supreme Court of India

1 October 2009
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s). 16977/2008
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal, by special leave, has been preferred against the judgment and order dated 31.3.2008 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras in C.R.P. No. 932 of 2008, whereby the High Court allowed the revision filed by the respondent and set aside the order of eviction dated 3.1.2008 passed by the Rent Control Appellate Authority.
2.  The appellant herein leased out the premises in question on rent to the respondent for residential purposes. Upon the respondent committing default in payment of rent, the appellant filed a petition for eviction before the Court of Small Causes at Chennai. The said petition for eviction was allowed and order of eviction of the respondent was passed on 18.8.2007. Against the said order of eviction, the respondent filed an appeal before the Rent Control Appellate Authority, who confirmed the order of eviction and dismissed the appeal of the respondent.
3.  The respondent moved before the High Court of Judicature at Madras by filing a civil revision. The High Court by its judgment and order dated 31.3.2008, while allowing the revision petition filed by the respondent, set aside the order of eviction passed by the Court of Rent Controller as confirmed by the Rent Control Appellate Authority.
4.  The appellant is thus before us aggrieved by judgment and order dated 31.3.2008 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Madras.
5.  We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. In our considered view, the High Court has committed an error in setting aside the concurrent findings of the two Courts without any material or any basis. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is, therefore, set aside and the appeal is allowed. However, as prayed for by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, the respondent is granted time to vacate the premises in question up to 30th September, 2010, subject to her furnishing usual undertaking in this Court within six weeks from today.
6.  This appeal is accordingly disposed of leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal disposed of.
