Bar Council of India v Bonnie FOI Law College and others
Supreme Court of India

29 June 2009
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s). 22337/2008
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  This petition filed by the Bar Council of India raises very serious questions regarding affiliation and recognition of Law Colleges by the Bar Council of India. It is a matter of common knowledge that before granting affiliation proper exercise is not carried out.
2.  No serious efforts have been made by the concerned authority to learn about the Infrastructure, Library, faculty before granting affiliation or recognition.
3.  It is also necessary for the concerned authority to know about the qualification of faculty members and whether they are paid salaries at least according to recommendation of 5th and 6th Pay Commission. And the present day it is also necessary to know whether the Law College is providing computer internet facility to law students.
4.  The entire future of the legal profession depends on ultimate product of these Law Colleges. Looking to the gravity and seriousness of the matter, we request the learned Solicitor General and President of the Bar Association and the Chairman, Bar Council of India to look into the matter seriously and submit a report to this Court as expeditiously as possible.
They would be at liberty to associate experts or any other person which they deem it appropriate.
5. All the necessary expenses will be borne by the Bar Council of India.
6.  Learned Solicitor General submits that a preliminary report of the Committee can be submitted to the Court within four weeks. List this matter after four weeks.
7.  Meanwhile, as far as the respondent-Institution is concerned, we direct that an inspection team, according to Rule 20 of the Rules of Legal Education, 2008 would be sent to this Institution which would consist of at least two members of the Bar Council and two experts one of them would be the Director of the National Judicial Academy and the other would be Prof. N.M. Mitra, former Director of the Law School, Bangalore. The Inspection Team would visit the Institution and submit a report before the next date of hearing.
Order Accordingly.
