Department of Income-tax (Investigation) v S. R. Batliboi and Company
Supreme Court of India

17 August 2009
C.A. No. 5645 of 2009, (Arising out of S.L.P. Civil No. 15043/2009)
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1. Leave granted.
2. By consent of learned counsel for the parties, it is directed that the two laptops in question be de-sealed and the data be examined by the Director General of the National Informatics Centre or his nominee/representative in the presence of the representatives of the I.T. Department, the appellants and the EMAAR-MGF Group. All the data on the laptops shall be available for inspection by the I.T. Department to verify whether the data pertains to the assessee in question.
3. It shall be open to the I.T. Department to copy the data relating to such folders/files in the said two laptops relating to the following entities/ clients:
"1. Boulder Hills Leisure (P.) Ltd.
2. Cyberabad Convention Centre (P.) Ltd.
3. Emaar Hills Township (P.) Ltd."
4. The Respondents shall provide authenticated hard copies of the data pertaining to EMAAR-MGF Group to the department. The Income-tax Department is permitted to inspect the data contained on other files/ folders relating to the 46 other parties but this data shall not be copied in any form.
If, according to the Assessing Officer, the files/folders pertaining to any of the 46 other parties are connected with the EMAAR-MGF Group and would be required by the Assessing Officer for making a proper assessment on the EMAAR-MGF Group, this may be pointed out in writing to the representative of S.R. Batliboi and Co. along with the material/reasons relied upon by the Income-tax Department for making its claim.
5. It shall then be open to S.R. Batliboi and Co. after considering the said material/reasons either to consent to the said claim made by the Income- tax Department or, alternatively, to challenge the same by adopting appropriate proceedings for this purpose.
In the event S.R. Batliboi giving its consent or alternatively, failing in its challenge to the said claim made by the Income-tax Department, S.R. Batliboi and Co. shall then make available a hard copy of the contents of the said connected files/folders.
6. The Civil Appeal is disposed of in the above-mentioned terms. However, the question of law sought to be raised in the appeal is kept open.
7. No order as to costs.
Appeal disposed of.
