Ghaziabad Development Authority v Subhash Chandra Sood
Supreme Court of India

19 November 2009
C.A. No. 7030 of 2002
(Non-Reportable)The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  Ghaziabad Development Authority, the appellant herein ('the Authority', for short) floated a housing scheme in Govindpuram. In the year 1989, the respondent applied for a 200 sq. mt. plot. The Authority issued a reservation letter. There were some delay in payment of some instalments. According to the respondent, all instalments have been paid with interest.
2.  The respondent filed a complaint before the District Forum in the year 1993 seeking
(i) delivery of the plot,
(ii) award of interest at 18% per annum on the deposited amount, and
(iii) compensation for the delay.
3. The Authority resisted the petition contending that in view of a stay order issued by the High Court in writ petitions filed by the land owners, the Authority could not deliver the plot. The District Forum, by order dated 31.7.1997, directed delivery of possession of plot within three months and also awarded interest at 18% per annum on the amount deposited. The appeal filed by the Authority was dismissed by the State Commission on 10.3.2000. The revision filed by the appellant was dismissed by a non-speaking order dated 14.3.2002 which is impugned in this appeal. The order merely states that in view of the decision in Haryana Urban Development Authority Vs. Darsh Kumar, where the Commission had upheld the interest at 18% per annum, the revision petition was being dismissed. The various contentions urged by the appellant were not considered. In particular, the contention that the plot could not be delivered for reasons beyond its control and that there was no deficiency in service and the further contention that where delivery of plot is directed, payment of interest at 18% per annum was not warranted. As the order is a non-speaking order which does not deal with the issues raised, in the normal course, we would have set aside the order and remitted the matter to the National Commission.
4.  But at this stage, the learned counsel for the respondent, however, stated that that would involve further delay and the respondent who has been waiting for the plot ever since 1989, should not be denied the benefit of the plot any further. He requested that the matter may be heard and disposed of finally by this Court. In the special circumstances, we propose to consider the matter on merits.
5.  However, at this stage, learned counsel for the Authority submitted that an alternative Plot No.E-3 in Swarn Jayanti Puram Scheme is allotted to the respondent on 21.6.2000, but respondent did not respond. She also submitted that on the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the plot will even now be offered to the respondent. She stated that instead of charging the present allotment rate of Rs.7800/- per sq. mt. the Authority will make the allotment at Rs.2300/- per sq.mt. which was the rate prevailing in 2000-2001 when the said Scheme was launched.
6. We are of the view that the offer made is fair and reasonable in the circumstances. The delay in offering the possession of the plot earlier in 1989 was for reasons beyond the control of the Authority in view of the stay order which was operating against the Authority. The plot that is now allotted is in a new layout. The Authority has to charge only the initial allotment rate of that new layout.
7.  In the circumstances, we allow this appeal, set aside the order of the National Commission and modify the order of the State Commission by directing the appellant Authority to allot the plot No.E-3, measuring 200 sq. mts., in the Swarn Jayanti Puram Scheme at the rate of Rs.2300/- per sq. mts. and deliver the same within three months against payment of balance amount due. The respondent will be entitled to adjustment of the amounts already paid by him with interest at the rate of 9% per annum thereon towards the price of the plot. It is needless to say that in the circumstances the question of Authority paying interest on the price deposited at the rate of 18% per annum does not arise.
Appeal allowed.
