J. E. George v Sheila George
Supreme Court of India

13 April 2009
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s). 679/2008
The Order of the Court was as follows:
Leave granted.
1.  This appeal is directed against order dated 4th January, 2008 passed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court of Karnataka at Bangalore in I.A.No.3/2007. By the impugned order, the learned Judge has declined to recall his order dated 19th December, 2007 whereby the writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed for non-prosecution on non-appearance of his counsel on the date of hearing.
Despite service, the sole respondent remains unrepresented.
Accordingly, we have heard learned counsel for the appellant.
2.  As noted above, the writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the learned Judge on account of the failure on the part of his counsel to appear before the Court at the time when the matter was called out for hearing. It appears that counsel for the appellant learnt about the dismissal order the same day, inasmuch as in the application filed by the counsel for recall of the said order, on the very next day of the dismissal of the writ petition, it was pleaded that on account of some confusion in noticing the number of case on the electronic display board, the counsel had somehow missed the hearing. It was also stated that at about 1.25 p.m., when the Court was about to rise for the lunch break, the counsel made a mention of the matter.  However, the Learned Judge has dismissed the application for recall of the order on the ground that the same has been filed by the counsel and not the appellant himself. The order reads thus:
"The application is accompanying by an affidavit sworn to by the learned counsel. It is not known as to how a learned counsel could maintain an application without the party filing necessary affidavit and application.
On this ground alone, this application deserves to be rejected and is accordingly rejected."
Hence this appeal by the writ petitioner.
3.  The short question for our consideration is whether the High Court was justified in dismissing the application for recall of the dismissal order on the ground that the party concerned has not filed the application and the affidavit.
4.  Having regard to the aforenoted peculiar circumstances in which the application was made by the counsel, we are of the opinion that the Learned Judge adopted a hyper technical approach in dismissing the application, particularly when the main order dismissing the writ petition was in exercise of his extra-ordinary jurisdiction. It is true that it cannot be laid as an absolute proposition that an ex-parte order or dismissal order has to be set on a bare plea of negligence of a counsel but it is equally well settled that an innocent litigant should not suffer for the inaction or omission on the part of his Advocate, which seems to be the case here.
5.  Having perused the application filed by the Advocate of the appellant supported by his detailed affidavit, we are convinced that it was not a case of deliberate omission or misdemeanour on the part of the Advocate as well and therefore, in the interest of justice a case for setting aside of the order of dismissal had been made out. In our view the learned Judge was not justified in rejecting the application, merely because it had been filed by the counsel himself.
6.  Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The application for recall of order dated 19th December, 2007 (IA.No.3/2007) is allowed and consequently order dated 19th December, 2007 dismissing the writ petition for non-prosecution is also set aside and the writ petition is restored to its original number for disposal on merits. No costs.
Appeal allowed.
