Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited v Rajamma and others
Supreme Court of India

3 September 2009
IA 2/2008 in C.A. No. 5025 of 2009
The Order of the Court was as follows:
1.  This Interlocutory Application 2 of 2008 has been filed in the appeal for bringing on record the legal representatives of the respondent No.2 who had died on 23.8.2000,long before the filing of the Special Leave Petition and during the pendency of the appeal being, MFA No.2014 of 1999, in the High Court.
2.  Learned counsel appearing in support of I.A. No.2 submits that although the names of the legal representatives of the respondent no.2 had not been brought on record of MFA No.2014 of 1999, out of which the present appeal arises, their names had been brought on record in connection with the another appeal, being MFA No.1442 of 1999, before the High Court. He has accordingly prayed that since the legal representatives of the respondent No.2 had been brought on record in the connected appeal, their names should also be brought on record in the present appeal.
3.  The submissions of learned counsel for the appellant is opposed by learned counsel appearing for the respondent on the ground that since the respondent No.2 had died during the pendency of the appeal in the High Court and his legal representatives were not brought on record, the said appeal had, in fact, abated as against the said respondent. The prayer made for bringing on record the legal representatives of the said respondent is, therefore, not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed.
4.  Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the respondent no.1, we agree with the submissions made by the learned counsel for the respondent and we are unable to grant the prayer made in the aforesaid application. On the other hand, since the appeal before the High Court had been disposed of against the respondent No.2, who was already dead, the instant appeal is also not maintainable as far as the said respondent no.2 is concerned.
Accordingly, while dismissing the application for bringing on record the legal representatives of the respondent No.2 Mohammed Ibrahim, we also indicate that the appeal has abated as far as the respondent no.2 is concerned.
Appeal dismissed.
