S.G.Rajgopalan Prabhu & Ors. v Veena & Anr.
Supreme Court of India

26 July 2010
TRANSFER PETITION(CRL.)NO.637 OF 2009
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1.  The matter was referred to the Supreme Court Mediation Centre. By the efforts of the Mediator, the matter has been settled. Parties have entered into a compromise. A Compromise Petition has been handed over to us in Court, which is taken on record. In terms of the compromise arrived at between the parties, the petitioners have agreed to pay a sum of Rs.40 lacs in full and final settlement of all claims of respondent-Mrs.Veena Rao. A Pay Order for a sum of Rs.40 lacs has been given to her in Court. Both the parties have prayed that following cases filed by them be quashed in view of the settlement. The details of cases pending in Courts are reproduced as under :-
(i) Criminal Case NO.54/2008 lodged by 1st Respondent accusing the petitioners - pending investigation at Vastrapur Police Station, Ahmedabad (Gujarat),
(ii) A petition filed by Respondent No.1 against the petitioners under the provisions of Domestic Violence Act, 2005, being Petition No.887 of 2008 pending before the 2nd Joint Judicial Magistrate Court, Ahmedabad Rural, Mirzapur, Ahmedabad (Gujarat),
(iii) A petition for maintenance u/s.125 Crl.P.C., being No.553 of 2009 pending before the 3rd Judicial Magistrate Court, Gandhinagar (Gujarat).
2.  In view of the compromise between the parties, we deem it appropriate to quash aforementioned cases pending inter se between the parties. In the facts and circumstances of this case, we deem it appropriate to pass a decree of divorce by mutual consent.
3.  In view of this order, the proceedings being HMOP No.111/2009 pending before the 2nd Joint Senior Civil Judge, Gandhinagar (Gujarat) also stand quashed.
4. Parties undertake to abide by the other terms and conditions which have been recorded in the Compromise Deed. No further directions are necessary.
The Transfer Petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
Petition disposed of
