Gian Chand Jain and another v State of NCT of Delhi through its Secretary
Supreme Court of India

5 July 2010
Criminal Appeal No. 1162 of 2010 (Arising out of S. L. P. (Crl.) No. 547 of 2010), Criminal Appeal No. 1163 of 2010 (Arising out of S. L. P. (Crl.) No. 1699 of 2010)
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Leave granted in both the Special Leave Petitions.
2. There is a single appellant in each of the two appeals that arise from a common judgment. Both the appellants stand convicted under sections 468/471 read with section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code; they are additionally convicted under section 427 of the Penal Code. Under section 468 they are sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs.10,000/-, and in default to rigorous imprisonment for three months. Section 120-B carries for the appellants the sentence of one year rigorous imprisonment. No separate sentence is awarded under section 471, but they are required to undergo six months' rigorous imprisonment under section 427. All the sentences are to run concurrently.
3. According to the prosecution case, Shop No.31-A, N.D.S.E. Part-II, New Delhi, was occupied, as tenant, by one Shri Shankar Sharma, the informant, who used it as kerosene depot and carried on his business from there. In order to get him evicted from the tenanted premises, the two appellants, along with a third accused, got the shop itself demolished in an over-night operation in the night between March 22 and 23, 1993. They also removed 14 drums of kerosene oil and some cash kept in the shop. Next morning, when the informant found the shop demolished and his movables stored there removed, he made a complaint before the Police. The accused took the stand that the informant (the tenant) had surrendered the shop premises in favour of the appellant Gian Chand Jain and in support of their stand relied upon an affidavit purportedly executed by the informant. The affidavit later turned out to be fake.
4. In a civil action instituted by the informant, the possession of the shop premises was restored to him. In the criminal trial, the trial court acquitted the appellants, but in appeal the High Court reversed the judgment of acquittal and convicted and sentenced the appellants, as noted above.
5. On hearing counsel for the parties at some length, we are satisfied that the High Court has properly appreciated the evidence and rightly held the appellants guilty of the various offences. Therefore, the High Court judgment recording their conviction does not call for any interference by us in appeal. Next, counsel for the two appellants made a fervent appeal to release the offenders in terms of section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure read with section 4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958.
The appeal is made, particularly strongly, on behalf of the appellant Arun Yadav who is a police constable and on whose behalf it is urged that unless let off on probation he might even lose his job. In support of the plea for release on probation learned counsel also relied upon a decision of this court in State of U.P. vs. Ranjit Singh, (1999) 2 SCC 617 1999 Indlaw SC 969.
6. Having regard to the nature of the offence we find ourselves unable to accede to the appellants' prayer for release on probation. The facts in the case of Ranjit Singh were indeed bad in as much as the respondent who was a High Court stenographer was accused of forging court order but in that case this court reversed the High Court order of acquittal and restored the judgment and order passed by the trial court. It was the trial court that after convicting the accused had directed for his release on probation. This court simply restored that order after setting aside the order of acquittal passed by the High Court in appeal. The decision in Ranjit Singh is, therefore, of no help to the appellants.
7. The only indulgence that can be allowed to the appellants is to consider their prayer to reduce their sentence of imprisonment to the respective periods already undergone by them. And there are good reasons for that. The occurrence took place in March 1993, that is, more than 17 years ago. The possession of the shop was restored to the informant, though after some litigation before the court.
The appellant Gian Chand Jain has suffered imprisonment for about 3 months and 14 days. He is sixty five years old, has a heart condition and suffers from other ailments. As a matter of fact earlier he was granted exemption from surrender but later on he surrendered following the order passed by this court. The other appellant Arun Yadav has remained in jail for a little less than five months.
8. In the facts and circumstances of this case, we are satisfied that the ends of justice would be served by reducing their sentence to the respective periods already undergone by them.
9. In the result, the two appeals are dismissed, subject to the modification in the sentence of the appellants.
Appeals dismissed
