Commissioner of Central Excise v Aditya Yarns P. Limited and another
Supreme Court of India

30 March 2011
C. A. No. 2379 of 2009, Appeal No. 1849 of 2009
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. It is evident from the impugned order that before the Tribunal it was conceded by learned counsel for the revenue that the issue raised in the appeal had already been decided against the revenue vide its earlier decision in the case of M/s Amitex Silk Mills Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Surat-I, 2006 (194) ELT 344 2005 Indlaw CESTAT 2135 (Tri.- Del.). The said decision had also been followed by the Tribunal in a number of cases. Mr. Harish Chander, learned senior counsel appearing for the revenue concedes that the appeal preferred by the revenue against the decision of the Tribunal in Amitex Silk Mills Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has been dismissed by this Court. He however, submits that the said decision is clearly distinguishable on facts.
2. We are unable to agree with learned counsel for the Revenue. Having conceded before the Tribunal that the issue raised in the present case stood concluded by an earlier decision, which attained finality on the dismissal of the appeal, the revenue cannot be permitted to re-open the same issue all over again before this Court on the ground that facts of the two cases were not similar.
3. Accordingly, following the decision of this Court in Amitex Silk Mills Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the appeal is dismissed.
4. Delay condoned.
5. It is evident from the impugned order that before the Tribunal it was conceded by learned counsel for the revenue that the issue raised in the appeal had already been decided against the revenue vide its earlier decision in the case of M/s Ginni International Ltd. The said decision had also been followed by the Tribunal in a number of caes. Mr. Harish Chander, learned senior counsel appearing for the revenue concedes that Civil Appeal bearing No. 1900 of 2002, preferred by the revenue against the decision of the Tribunal in the case of M/s Ginni International Ltd. (supra) was dismissed on 16th August, 2007. He, however, submits that the said decision is clearly distinguishable on facts, particularly when the period involved is different.
6. We are afraid that having conceded before the Tribunal that the issue raised in the present case stood concluded by the said earlier decision, which attained finality on the dismissal of the appeal in Ginni's case, the revenue cannot be permitted to re-agitate the same issue on the specious plea that on facts there was no similarity between the two cases.
7. Accordingly, following the decision of this Court in M/s Ginni International Ltd (supra), the appeal is dismissed.
Appeal allowed
