Sterlite Industries (I) Ltd. Etc. Etc v Union Of India & Ors. Etc. Etc.
Supreme Court of India

11 October 2011
Special Leave Pettion (C) Nos.28116-28123 Of 2010
(Non-Reportable)
The Judgment was delivered by : A. K. Patnaik, J.
1.  We have heard Mr. C.A. Sundram, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. Vaiko in-person for respondent no.1, Mr. V. Prakash, learned counsel for the respondent no.2, Mr. Guru Krishna Kumar, learned Additional A.G. for the Government of Tamil Nadu, Mr. Subramanium Prasad, learned counsel for the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, and Mr. Vijay Panjwani, learned counsel for the Central Pollution Control Board.
2.  The High Court has by the impugned judgment inter alia directed that the industrial unit of the petitioner be closedown immediately because of the environmental pollution caused by the industrial unit. On 01.10.2010, this Court directed that the matter be listed on 18.10.2010 and stayed the impugned judgment of the High Court till then. On 18.10.2010, the Court issued notice and continued the interim stay. The Court has continued the interim stay from time to time.
3.  When the matter was taken up on 25.02.2011, the Court after hearing learned counsel for the parties was of the view that an independent assessment of the present situation and condition of the industrial unit of the petitioners, and its effect with reference to environmental pollution by National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), after a joint inspection with the officials of Central Pollution Control Board, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board and the PIL petitioners before the High Court, will help the Court to arrive at a decision and accordingly directed NEERI to make a pollution and environmental impact assessment and submit its report. Accordingly, NEERI carried out the inspection during 6th to 8th April, 2011 and 19th to 22nd April, 2011 and submitted its report.
4.  On 18.07.2011, the Court directed the Tamil Nadu Government as also the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board to submit their comments/suggestions with reference to the NEERI report so that the Court can have a clear view about the existing position. On 25.08.2011, the Court after perusing the Status Report of the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board directed the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board to file a synopsis specifying the deficiencies with reference to the NEERI report and suggest control measures that should be taken by the petitioners so that the Court can consider the direction to be issued for remedial measures which can be monitored by the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board.
5.  The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board has filed along with an affidavit dated 30.08.2011, a Chart of deficiencies and measures to be implemented by the petitioners-industry which is to the following effect:-
6.  We direct the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board to issue directions, in exercise of its powers under the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, to the petitioners-industry to carry out the aforesaid measures and remove the aforesaid deficiencies within such time as it thinks reasonable and proper.
7. The directions will be issued by the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board within two weeks from today. The matter will be listed in the first week of January, 2012 and the interim stay of the impugned judgment will continue till then.
Order accordingly
