Sneha Kalita v Union of India and another
Supreme Court of India

27 October 2017
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 943/2017
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. The present writ petitions were filed to take immediate measures to ban/block all sites linked with the Blue Whale online game or any other form of violent and immoral games similar in nature. Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned senior counsel specifically emphasised on the Blue Whale online game by referring to various steps that the game suggests. According to Mr. Hansaria, it leads people in such a path, where they are brain-washed and dragged to commit suicide. We are not inclined to get into any further details of the various paths that have been enumerated in the petition. Suffice it to say that 50 steps that the Blue Whale game conceives of are dangerous to life and whatever endangers life has to be condemned and can never be allowed to be permitted.
2. Mr. P.S. Narsimha, learned Additional Solicitor General of India, on the basis of instructions obtained by him, submits that the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has set up CERT-In which is engaged in stopping the aforesaid games, so that unwarranted incidents do not occur. He would further submit that CERT-In has entered into various communications and correspondences with many an agency and is getting cooperation, and the Central Government is determined to stop such games as they have the potentiality to destroy the marrows of life.
He would pray for further three weeks' time to submit the final report and is optimistic that by that date, the investigation will be over, and in all likelihood, corrective steps shall be implemented. That apart, Mr. Narsimha submits that he will file an affidavit within the said period, indicating what steps have been taken by the Ministries of Home Affairs; Women & Child Development; and Electronics and Information Technology. Apart from this, we think it appropriate to direct as follows:
(a) Doordarshan may prepare a programme in consultation with the Ministries of Women & Child Development; and Human Resource Development to telecast educative messages/clips of appropriate duration at the relevant time about the evil impact of Blue Whale and such harming and life threatening games, so that the parents and the children get properly instructed that a child cannot be involved in those kinds of games, or, to put it differently, trapped in such games. Needless to say that the programme has to be conceived by Doordarshan in consultation with the aforesaid two departments as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a week. The competent authority may also explore the possibility to telecast the said messages/clips at the appropriate time in private channels.
(b) The competent authority may also consider spreading awareness through other mediums, so that awareness in this regard is spread.
3. Let the matter be listed on 20.11.2017.
Order accordingly
