1. Leave granted.
2. The Appellant applied for appointment to the posts of Subject Matter Specialist (Crop Protection & Crop Psychology) in Vivekananda Parvatiya Krishi Anusandhan Sansthan, Almora. The Appellant belongs to "Jaat" caste which was falling within the category of Other Backward Classes (OBCs) in the State of Uttar Pradesh. The Tesildar, Thakurdwara, Moradabad (U.P.) issued a certificate in favour of the Appellant stating that he belongs to Other Backward Classes on 22nd June, 2007. The Appellant was appointed on 2nd January, 2008 in a post reserved for OBCs. A show-cause notice was issued to the Appellant asking him to explain as to why his appointment should not be cancelled as the community to which he belongs is not found in the Central List of OBCs. The Appellant submitted his explanation on 6th November, 2010. An inquiry was conducted and on the basis of the recommendation of the Inquiry Committee, the services of the Appellant were terminated on 20th November, 2010. He approached the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital by filing Writ Petition challenging the order of termination. The Writ Petition was dismissed vide judgment dated 24th February, 2011, the legality of which is assailed in the above Appeal.
3. The National Commission for Backward Classes was constituted by the National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 1993 (Act 27 of 1993). Section 9 of the Act empowers the Commission to examine requests for inclusion of any class of citizens as a backward class in the lists and hear complaints of over-inclusion or under-inclusion of any backward class in such lists and tender such advice to the Central Government as it deems appropriate. Section 2(c) defines "Lists" as follows:
(c) "lists" means lists prepared by the Government of India from time to time for purposes of making provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of backward classes of citizens which, in the opinion of that Government, are not adequately represented in the services under the Government of India and any local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India
4. By a proceeding dated 10th September, 1993 the Government of India finalised the Central List of OBCs for each State. A common List for the State of Uttar Pradesh was annexed to the said proceedings in which the caste of "Jaat" was not included. The matter pertaining to the inclusion of "Jaat" in the Central List of OBCs for the States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan came up for consideration before the Commission in the year 1997. The National Commission for Backward Classes recommended inclusion of "Jaat" caste in the OBCs only for the State of Rajasthan and not the other three States. On the basis of the power of review that was conferred on the National Commission for Backward Classes, the matter was examined afresh. The National Commission for Backward Classes conducted hearings in Delhi to consider the request of "Jaat" caste in the Central List of OBCs for nine States including the State of Uttar Pradesh. The National Commission for Backward Classes advised the Central Government not to include the "Jaat" caste/ community in the Central List of OBCs. While rejecting the recommendation made by the National Commission for Backward Classes, the Central Government issued a notification including "Jaat" caste/ community in the Central List of OBCs for the States of Uttar Pradesh/ Uttarakhand and seven other States in 2014.
5. A perusal of the facts that are stated in the preceding paragraph on the basis of the counter affidavit filed by the National Commission for Backward Classes would show that "Jaat" caste/ community is in the Central List of OBCs for the State of Uttarakhand from 2014. The Central List of OBCs prepared for the States of Uttar Pradesh in 1993 did not include the "Jaat" caste/ community. The State of Uttarakhand was formed in 2000. By a Resolution passed in 2010, the National Commission for Backward Classes resolved that till the Central List for the State of Uttarakhand was finalized, the List that was in operation in the State of Uttar Pradesh will be followed for appointment to the Central posts reserved for OBCs. The advertisement and selection in this case was made in the year 2007 when the caste to which the Appellant belongs i.e. "Jaat" was not in the Central List for Uttar Pradesh.
6. We are not in agreement with the reasons given by the High Court while dismissing the Writ Petition. It was held in the impugned judgment that the List prepared by the State of Uttarakhand would be applicable for appointment to Central posts. We approve the final conclusion of the High Court that the Appellant was not entitled for appointment in the post reserved for OBCs, though for different reasons as stated supra.
7. The Appeal is dismissed accordingly. No costs.
Appeal dismissed
