1. Leave granted.
2. The appellant is before this Court, aggrieved by an interim order passed by the High Court wherein a direction was issued for deposit of certain amount. The High Court has also taken note of the fact that there were other connected writ petitions as well. When the matter came up before this Court, the following order was passed on 19.09.2016:-
"We are not issuing notice as the sole respondent, claiming as such, has already appeared on caveat. The matter requires some detailed consideration, hence let it be listed on a non-miscellaneous day in the third week of November, 2016.
Pleadings, if any, may be completed in the meantime.
Till the next date of hearing, no coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner."
3. The said interim order has been subsequently extended until further orders, by our order dated 4.5.2017.
4. Having regard to the fact that the appellant is before this Court only against an interim order and having regard also to the fact that there are other matters which the High Court has connected with the present case, we are of the view that it is only appropriate that the High Court takes a final call on all the matters.
5. Therefore, this appeal is disposed of with a request to the High Court to dispose of all the matters referred to in the impugned order and any other connected matter, expeditiously, preferably within a period of six months from the date of communication of a copy of this judgment by any of the parties. Till such time the writ petitions are disposed of, interim order passed by this Court will continue to operate.
6. However, we make it clear that in case the appellant enters into any transaction in respect of the property in dispute, the same shall be subject to the outcome of the writ petitions in the High Court and it shall be so made clear in the proceedings, though Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, submits that there is no property involved in the case.
7. Contempt Petition No.1519/2017 is taken on Board.
8. In view of the order passed above, no separate orders are required to be passed in the contempt petition, which is, accordingly, disposed of.
9. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
10. There shall be no orders as to costs.
Petition disposed of
