Prem Chand v State of Himachal Pradesh
Supreme Court of India

13 November 2017
Criminal Appeal No. 1920 of 2017, [Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 6079 of 2017]
The Order of the Court was as follows :
1. Leave granted.
2. The appellant was convicted by the Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class, Manali, District Kullu, Himachal Pradesh, and sentenced to undergo three months of simple imprisonment under Section 279, three months of simple imprisonment under Section 337 and six months of simple imprisonment under Section 337 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with default stipulations. In appeal filed by the appellant, the Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track, Kullu, Himachal Pradesh, confirmed the judgment of the Trial Court. This order was challenged by the accused-appellant by filing Criminal Revision No.63/2008 before the High Court of Himachal Pradesh. The High Court by order dated 31.3.2017 confirmed the conviction. However, the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon the appellant under Section 279 IPC was modified from three months simple imprisonment to two months simple imprisonment, under Section 337 IPC from three months simple imprisonment to two months simple imprisonment and under Section 338 IPC from six months simple imprisonment to two months simple imprisonment. The High Court further directed that all the sentences shall run concurrently.
3. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the appellant is a first-time offender. He does not have any criminal background and, therefore, he may be dealt with under Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
4. It is evident from the materials placed on record that the appellant is a first-time offender. He does not have any criminal antecedents of offender. There is also no complaint with regard to his behavior during the pendency of the proceedings. Having regard to the facts and circumstance of the case, we are of the view that the High Court ought to have granted the benefit of probation to the appellant. Therefore, the appeal is allowed in part and while upholding the conviction, the sentence of imprisonment awarded against him is set aside. The trial court is directed to deal the appellant under the provisions of Section 360 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
Appeal allowed
