(Non-Reportable)
1. The application(s) for impleadment/intervention is/are allowed.
2. Leave granted.
3. In all these cases, the Panchayat teachers are sought to be removed from service on the ground that they have failed to clear the evaluation test conducted by the State.
4. According to the learned counsel appearing for the appellants, as per the Bihar Panchayat Primary Teacher (Employment and Service Conditions) Rules, 2006 under which they were appointed, the evaluation test was intended only for the purpose of increment and there was no provision to terminate them from service in case they failed to secure the minimum prescribed marks in the evaluation test. However, as rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the State, after the introduction of the Right to Education Act, 2009, the whole scheme of education, particularly at the primary level, has undergone a sea change. Post amendment, only a candidate who has passed the Teachers' Eligibility Test alone can be appointed, whereas under the 2006 Rules, even untrained candidates could be appointed as teachers. It is in that background that an evaluation test was made compulsory and the State also amended the rules for weeding out the dead wood, after giving three chances.
5. No doubt, the evaluation test was originally intended for the purpose of increment, but we find from the rules that the teachers who were appointed prior to the introduction of the new Scheme are to be given training. It is not clear as to whether the appellants herein, who have been appointed prior to the introduction of the Right to Education Act, have been given the training before subjecting them to the evaluation test.
6. In L. Muthu Kumar and Another Vs. State of Tamil Nadu and Others reported in (2000) 7 SCC 618 2000 Indlaw SC 479, this Court has referred to the need for appointment of qualified and trained teachers, in particular, at the primary stage. This Court, in many cases, has addressed the need for adequate training. The operative portion of the Judgment is reproduced as under :-
"14...........We are of the considered opinion that before teachers are allowed to teach innocent children, they must receive appropriate and adequate training in a recognised training institute satisfying the prescribed norms, otherwise the standard of education and careers of children will be jeopardised. In most civilised and advanced counties, the job of a teacher in a primary school is considered an important and crucial one because moulding of young minds begins in primary schools. Allowing ill-trained teachers coming out of derecognised or unrecognised institutes or licensing them to teach children of an impressionable age, contrary to the norms prescribed, will be detrimental to the interest of the nation itself in the sense that in the process of building a great nation, teachers, and educational institutions also play a vital role. In cases like these, interest of individuals cannot be placed above or preferred to the larger public interest........"
7. Having heard both the parties, we are of the view that in order to give a quietus to the whole issue, it is only appropriate that the State is directed to subject the teachers, who have failed in the evaluation test for the third time, to a further training of six months. At the end of such six months, they shall be subjected to an appropriate evaluation test, prescribing minimum marks. Passing the evaluation test thus conducted, on completion of the training, would mean the successful completion of the training.
8. It is made clear that if any of the candidates fail to successfully complete the training as above, it will be open to the State to remove them from the service.
9. In view of the above, these appeals are disposed of.
No costs.
Appeals disposed of
