Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Live-stock Importation Act, 1898 . BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Live-stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of July, 2001.
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> In the preamble of the Live-stock Importation Act, 1898 (9 of 1898),(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the word "live-stock", the words "and live-stock products" shall be inserted.
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> In section 2 of the principal Act, after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(d) "live-stock products" include meat and meat products of all kinds including fresh, chilled and frozen meat, tissue, organs of poultry, pig, sheep, goat; egg and egg powder, milk and milk products; bovine, ovine and caprine, embryos, ova, semen; pet ood products of animal origin and any other animal product which may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.'.
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 4--> In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(2) A notification issued under sub-section (1) or under section 3A shall operate as if it has been issued under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the officers of the customs at every port, airport, Inland Container Depot and Land Cu toms Station shall have the same powers in respect of any live-stock or live-stock product or thing with regard to the importation of which such a notification has been issued and the vessel, aircraft, vehicle and other mode of conveyance containing the ame, as they have for the time being in respect of any article the importation of which is regulated, restricted or prohibited by the law relating to customs and the vessel, aircraft, vehicle and other mode of conveyance containing the same; and the enac ments for the time being in force relating to customs or any such article or vessel, aircraft, vehicle and other mode of conveyance shall apply accordingly.".
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 5--> After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "3A. Power to regulate Importation of live-stock products.-The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit in such manner and to such extent as it may think fit, the import into the territories to which this Act extends, of any live-stock product, which may be liable to affect human or animal health.".
Live-Stock Importation (Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 6--> (1) The Live-stock Importation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 (Ord. 5 of 2001) is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
