Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Customs Act, 1962, the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, the Central Excise Act, 1944, the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, the Finance Act, 2001 and the Finance Act, 2005 and to repeal certain enactments. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that provision.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> In the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Act), in section 2, in clause (11), after the words "the area of a Customs station", the words "or a warehouse" shall be inserted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> In the Customs Act, after section 108, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "108A. Obligation to furnish information. - (1) Any person, being- (a) a local authority or other public body or association; or (b) any authority of the State Government responsible for the collection of value added tax or sales tax or any other tax relating to the goods or services; or (c) an income-tax authority appointed under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961; (d) a Banking company within the meaning of clause (a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or (e) a co-operative bank within the meaning of clause (dd) of section 2 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act,1961; or (f) a financial institution within the meaning of clause (c), or a non-banking financial company within the meaning of clause (f), of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act,1934; or (g) a State Electricity Board; or an electricity distribution or transmission licensee under the Electricity Act, 2003, or any other entity entrusted, as the case may be, with such functions by the Central Government or the State Government; or (h) the Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908; or (i) a Registrar within the meaning of the Companies Act, 2013; or (j) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under Chapter IV of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; or (k) the Collector referred to in clause (c) of section 3 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013; or (l) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956; or (m) a depository referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996; or (n) the Post Master General within the meaning of clause (j) of section 2 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898; or (o) the Director General of Foreign Trade within the meaning of clause (d) of section 2 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act,1992; or (p) the General Manager of a Zonal Railway within the meaning of clause (18) of section 2 of the Railways Act,1989; or (q) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, who is responsible for maintaining record of registration or statement of accounts or holding any other information under any of the Acts specified above or under any other law for the time being in force, which is considered relevant for the purposes of this Act, shall furnish such information to the proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act. (2) Where the proper officer considers that the information furnished under sub-section (1) is defective, he may intimate the defect to the person who has furnished such information and give him an opportunity of rectifying the defect within a period of seven days from the date of such intimation or within such further period which, on an application made in this behalf, the proper officer may allow and if the defect is not rectified within the said period of seven days or, further period, as the case may be, so allowed, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, such information shall be deemed as not furnished and the provisions of this Act shall apply. (3) Where a person who is required to furnish information has not furnished the same within the time specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the proper officer may serve upon him a notice requiring him to furnish such information within a period not exceeding thirty days from the date of service of the notice and such person shall furnish such information. 108B. Penalty for failure to furnish information return. - Where the person who is required to furnish information under section 108A fails to do so within the period specified in the notice issued under sub-section (3) thereof, the proper officer may direct such person to pay, by way of penalty, a sum of one hundred rupees for each day of the period during which the failure to furnish such information continues.".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 4--> In the Customs Tariff Act, 1975, in section 3,- (a) in sub-section (2),- (i) in clause (ii), for item (a), the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) the duty referred to in sub-sections (1), (3), (5), (7) and (9);"; (ii) in the proviso, in sub-clause (b), item (ii) shall be omitted; (b) in sub-section (6), in clause (ii), for item (a), the following item shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) the duty referred to in sub-sections (5), (7) and (9);"; (c) for sub-sections (7) and (8), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:- "(7) Any article which is imported into India shall, in addition, be liable to integrated tax at such rate, not exceeding forty per cent. as is leviable under section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 on a like article on its supply in India, on the value of the imported article as determined under sub-section (8). (8) For the purposes of calculating the integrated tax under sub-section (7) on any imported article where such tax is leviable at any percentage of its value, the value of the imported article shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962, be the aggregate of- (a) the value of the imported article determined under sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 or the tariff value of such article fixed under sub-section (2) of that section, as the case may be; and (b) any duty of customs chargeable on that article under section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962, and any sum chargeable on that article under any law for the time being in force as an addition to, and in the same manner as, a duty of customs, but does not include the tax referred to in sub-section (7) or the cess referred to in sub-section (9). (9) Any article which is imported into India shall, in addition, be liable to the goods and services tax compensation cess at such rate, as is leviable under section 8 of the Goods and Services Tax (Compensation to States) Cess Act, 2017 on a like article on its supply in India, on the value of the imported article as determined under sub-section (10). (10) For the purposes of calculating the goods and services tax compensation cess under sub-section (9) on any imported article where such cess is leviable at any percentage of its value, the value of the imported article shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962, be the aggregate of- (a) the value of the imported article determined under sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Customs Act, 1962 or the tariff value of such article fixed under sub-section (2) of that section, as the case may be; and (b) any duty of customs chargeable on that article under section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962, and any sum chargeable on that article under any law for the time being in force as an addition to, and in the same manner as, a duty of customs, but does not include the tax referred to in sub-section (7) or the cess referred to in sub-section (9). (11) The duty or tax or cess, as the case may be, chargeable under this section shall be in addition to any other duty or tax or cess, as the case may be, imposed under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force. (12) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and regulations made thereunder, including those relating to drawbacks, refunds and exemption from duties shall, so far as may be, apply to the duty or tax or cess, as the case may be, chargeable under this section as they apply in relation to the duties leviable under that Act.".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 5--> In the Central Excise Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Excise Act), in section 2,- (a) in clause (d), for the words and figures "the First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985", the words "the Fourth Schedule" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (e) the words "other than salt" shall be omitted; (c) in clause (f), in sub-clause (ii), for the words and figures "the First Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985", the words "the Fourth Schedule" shall be substituted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 6--> In the Central Excise Act, for section 3, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "3. Duty specified in the Fourth Schedule to be levied. - (1) There shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be prescribed a duty of excise to be called the Central Value Added Tax (CENVAT) on all excisable goods (excluding goods produced or manufactured in special economic zones) which are produced or manufactured in India as, and at the rates, set forth in the Fourth Schedule: Provided that the duty of excise which shall be levied and collected on any excisable goods which are produced or manufactured by a hundred per cent. export-oriented undertaking and brought to any other place in India, shall be an amount equal to the aggregate of the duties of customs which would be leviable under the Customs Act, 1962 or any other law for the time being in force, on like goods produced or manufactured outside India if imported into India, and where the said duties of customs are chargeable by reference to their value, the value of such excisable goods shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, be determined in accordance with the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the Customs Tariff Act, 1975. Explanation 1. - Where in respect of any such like goods, any duty of customs leviable for the time being in force is leviable at different rates, then, such duty shall, for the purposes of this proviso, be deemed to be leviable at the highest of those rates. Explanation 2. - For the purposes of this sub-section,- (i) "hundred per cent. export-oriented undertaking" means an undertaking which has been approved as a hundred per cent. export-oriented undertaking by the Board appointed in this behalf by the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by section 14 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, and the rules made under that Act; (ii) "Special Economic Zone" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (za) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005. (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply in respect of all excisable goods which are produced or manufactured in India by or on behalf of the Government, as they apply in respect of goods which are not produced or manufactured by the Government. (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix, for the purposes of levying the said duty, tariff values of any articles enumerated, either specifically or under general headings, in the Fourth Schedule as chargeable with duty ad valorem and may alter any tariff values for the time being in force. (4) The Central Government may fix different tariff values- (a) for different classes or descriptions of the same excisable goods; or (b) for excisable goods of the same class or description- (i) produced or manufactured by different classes of producers or manufacturers; or (ii) sold to different classes of buyers: Provided that in fixing different tariff values in respect of excisable goods falling under sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), regard shall be had to the sale prices charged by the different classes of producers or manufacturers or, as the case may be, the normal practice of the wholesale trade in such goods.".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 7--> In the Central Excise Act, in section 3A, in Explanation 1, for the words and figures, "First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985", the words "Fourth Schedule" shall be substituted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 8--> In the Central Excise Act, after section 3A, the following sections shall be inserted, namely:- "3B. Emergency power of Central Government to increase duty of excise. - (1) Where, in respect of any goods, the Central Government is satisfied that the duty leviable thereon under section 3 should be increased and that circumstances exist which render it necessary to take immediate action, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule to substitute the rate of duty specified therein in respect of such goods in the following manner, namely:- (a) in a case where the rate of duty as specified in the Fourth Schedule as in force immediately before the issue of such notification is nil, a rate of duty not exceeding fifty per cent. ad valorem expressed in any form or method; (b) in any other case, a rate of duty which shall not be more than twice the rate of duty specified in respect of such goods in the Fourth Schedule as in force immediately before the issue of the said notification: Provided that the Central Government shall not issue any notification under this sub-section for substituting the rate of duty in respect of any goods as specified by an earlier notification issued under this sub-section by that Government before such earlier notification has been approved with or without modifications under sub-section (2). Explanation. - For the purposes of this sub-section, the term "form or method", in relation to a rate of duty of excise, means the basis, including valuation, weight, number, length, area, volume or any other measure, on which the duty may be levied. (2) Every notification under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if it is in session, as soon as may be after the issue of the notification, and, if it is not in session, within seven days of its re-assembly, and the Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the notification is so laid before the House of the People and if Parliament makes any modification in the notification or directs that the notification should cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder. (3) Any notification issued under sub-section (1), including a notification approved or modified under sub-section (2), may be rescinded by the Central Government at any time by issuing notification in the Official Gazette. 3C. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule. - (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule: Provided that such amendment shall not alter or affect in any manner the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule at which the duties of excise shall be leviable on the goods specified therein.".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 9--> In the Central Excise Act, in section 38, after the word, figure and letter "section 3A", the word, figure and letter "section 3C" shall be inserted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 10--> In the Central Excise Act, after section 38A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "38B. Savings of references to Chapter, heading, sub-heading and tariff item in Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985. - Notwithstanding the repeal of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 by sub-section (1) of section 174 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, any reference to the Chapter, heading, sub-heading or tariff item, as the case may be, in the First Schedule to the said Act or in any rules or regulations made thereunder, or in any notification, circular, order or instruction issued thereunder, shall mean a reference to the Chapter, heading, sub-heading or tariff item, as the case may be, in the Fourth Schedule.".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 11--> In the Central Excise Act, for the Third Schedule, the Schedule specified in the First Schedule shall be substituted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 12--> In the Central Excise Act, after the Third Schedule, the Schedule specified in the Second Schedule shall be inserted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 13--> In the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Sales Tax Act), in section 2,- (a) clause (c) shall be omitted; (b) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- '(d) "goods" means- (i) petroleum crude; (ii) high speed diesel; (iii) motor spirit (commonly known as petrol); (iv) natural gas; (v) aviation turbine fuel; and (vi) alcoholic liquor for human consumption;'.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 14--> In the Central Sales Tax Act, section 14 shall be omitted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 15--> In the Central Sales Tax Act, section 15 shall be omitted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 16--> In the Finance Act, 2001, in the Seventh Schedule,- (a) except tariff items 2402 20 10, 2402 20 20, 2402 20 30, 2402 20 40, 2402 20 50, 2402 20 90, 2402 90 10, 2403 11 10, 2403 19 10, 2403 19 21, 2403 19 29, 2403 19 90, 2403 91 00, 2403 99 10, 2403 99 20, 2403 99 30, 2403 99 40, 2403 99 50, 2403 99 60, 2403 99 90 and 2709 00 00 and the entries relating thereto, all other heading, sub-heading, tariff items and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; (b) for tariff item 2709 00 00 and the entries relating thereto, the following tariff item and entries shall be substituted, namely:- (1) (2) (3) (4) "2709 20 00 Petroleum Crude Kg. Rs. 50 per tonne".
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 17--> In the Finance Act, 2005, in the Seventh Schedule, tariff item 2106 90 20 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 18--> (1) The enactments specified in the third column of the Third Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the fourth column thereof. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal under sub-section (1), such repeal shall not- (a) affect any other law in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to; (b) affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done or suffered or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing under the repealed enactment; (c) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed; (d) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force. (2) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 19--> Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments specified in the Third Schedule, the proceeds of duties levied under the said enactments immediately preceding the date appointed under sub-section (2) of section 1,- (i) if collected by the collecting agencies but not paid into the Reserve Bank of India; or (ii) if not collected by the collecting agencies, shall be paid or as the case may be, collected and paid into the Reserve Bank of India for being credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Sch.-->  Schedules (Dr. G. Narayanaraju) Secretary to the Government of India. 
