Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> The Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the Government of the Republic of India,ANIMATED by the desire to develop and strengthen the trade between the two countries and to promote closer economic relations,HAVE agreed as follows :
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> The two Contracting Parties shall accord to the commerce of each other, treatment no less favourable than that accorded to the commerce of any third country. This provision shall not, however, apply to the grant or continuance of any : (a) advantages accorded by either of the Contracting Parties to contiguous countries which in so far as the Sudan is concerned will include her border countries in Africa and so far as India is concerned Afghanistan. I (b) advantages resulting from any Customs union or free trade area to which either of the Contracting Parties is or may become a Party. (c) preferences and advantages accorded by India or the Sudan to any country existing on the date of this Agreement or in replacement thereof. (d) advantages accorded by virtue of a multilateral economic agreement designed to liberalise conditions of international commerce
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> Subject to their respective import, export, foreign exchange and other regulations, the two Contracting Parties shall give the maximum possible facilities and take all appropriate measures to promote trade between the two countries in all possible ways, in particular with regard to the items mentioned in Schedules 'I' and 'S' attached to this Agreement. Nothing in this Agreement shall preclude trade in goods and commodities not mentioned in the said Schedules
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> All payments for current transactions under this Agreement shall be effected in Pounds Sterling unless otherwise agreed to between the two Parties.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> The two Contracting Parties agree to grant each other, subject to their respective laws and regulations, reasonable facilities for holding trade fairs and exhibitions, in their respective territories.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> Nationals of either Contracting Party shall be permitted to enter, sojourn, travel or reside in the territory of the other party for the purpose of promoting trade between the two countries, provided that the enjoyment of the above rights shall be subject to the laws and regulations of such other party which are generally applicable to all foreigners alike.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> The two Contracting Parties undertake to cooperate for mutual benefit with a view to strengthening economic relations between the two countries, and to furthering the interchange and use of scientific and technical knowledge particularly by affording opportunities for technical training and assistance wherever possible.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> Merchant ships of either Contracting Party entering, staying in or leaving the ports of the other country shall be accorded most-favoured-nation treatment in respect of all facilities and charges provided under its laws, rules and regulations to merchant ships of any third party. This principle, however, shall not be applied to ships engaged in coastal traffic.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble--> The two Contracting Parties agree to set up a Joint Committee that shall meet at the request of either party to review the implementation of this Agreement and to ensure proper fulfilment of its provisions.
Trade Agreement Between The Government of India and The Government of The Republic of Sudan_Section Preamble-->  This Agreement will come into force as from 1st November 1965 and shall remain in force till 31st October, 1966 and shall thereafter be renewable from year to year by tacit consent of the two Parties unless rescinded on giving three months' notice in writing by either Party before its expiry. IN WITNESS THEREOF, the undersigned duly authorised thereto have signed the Agreement in two original copies both of which shall be equally authentic. DONE at New Delhi on the 22nd Day of October, 1965. Sd /- HUSSAIN EL SHERIF EL HINDI For the Government of the Republic of Sudan Sd /- MANUBHAI SHAH For the Government of the Republic of India. SCHEDULE 'I' COMMODITIES FOR EXPORT FROM INDIA TO THE SUDAN I. Agricultural Products 1. Cigars and cigarettes 2. Hemp 3. Palmyra fibre 4. Fruit products 5. Plywood (Commercial and tea-chests) 6. Henna powder 7. Cashewnuts and other dry fruits-almond, walnuts, resins, figs, pistachio nuts etc, dry ginger and apricots. 8. Coir and coir products 9. Tobacco 10. Salad oil II. Drugs Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals and Allied Products 1. Calcined Magnesite 2. Bichromates 3. 3. Alumina ferric 4. Ferro Manganese 5. Pigments, paints and varnishes 6. Fountain pen ink 7. Printing inks other than black 8. Myrabolam and extract 9. Vomica Alkaloids and preparations 10. Soaps, toiletries, Hair oil and perfumes 11. Glycerine 12. Hydraulic Brake Fluid 13. l3. Pharmaceuticals, drugs, medicines, vaccines, serums, etc. 14. Safety matches and fireworks 15. l5. Fire extinguishers 16. Crockery 17. Magnesium Chloride 18. Ethyl Alcohol and Industrial alcohol 19. Rubber products including bicycle tyres and tubes other than those types of tyres and tubes export of which is banned. 20. Asbestos products 21. Liquid Glucose 22. Benzene 23. Surgical cotton 24. Strychine 25. Morphine 26. Bromides (Sodium and Potassium and Calcium) 27. Liquid Bromine 28. All antibiotics 29. All Alkaloids 30. Synthetic drugs 31. Tetracyclins 32. Hamycin 33. Anti tubercular drugs (P.A.S. and Salts) 34. Anti Dysentery drugs (Idochlaro and di-iodoquinolin) 35. Bleaching powder 36. Hydro-chloric acid 37. Hydrogen peroxide 38. Sodium perborate 39. Liquid chlorine 40. Anti-leprotic drugs (D.S.S. and derivatives) 41. Amodiaquin 42. Vitamins 'A' 43. Vitamins 'C' 44. Emetine 45. Santoninen 46. Quinnine 47. Brucine 48. Synthetic hormones 49. Detergents 50. Calcium Gluconate and other calcium salts 51. Ferro gluconate 52. Nikethamide 53. Insecticides pesticides, fungicides (Formulations only) 54. Dentifrices ! 55. PVC/Leather cloth. III. Engineering products 1. Aluminium and ACSR conductors 2. Insulators 3. Distribution transformers 4. Transmission line poles and towers 5. Air conditioners, water coolers and refrigerators 6.. Public address equipment 7. Radio receivers 8. Electric lamps (GIS) 9. Fluorescent lamps 10. Rubber and plastic insulated house wiring cable 11. Electric motors 12. Bicycles 13., Storage batteries 14. Electricity House service meters 15. Agricultural implements if tractor drawn 16. Cotton and hair belting 17. Pressure lamps and stoves 18. Stationery 19. Coated abrasives 21. Duplicators 22. Zip fasteners 23. Buckles 24. Eyelets 25. Vacuum bottles and flasks 26. Collapsible tubes 27. Pumps (coupled with prime movers or not) (Centrifugal pumps) 28. Pumps driven by diesel engines and electric motors 29. Railway materials 30. Precision and scientific instruments; survey instruments 31. Paper and pulp making machinery. 32. Grey iron castings, forgings and cast iron pipes 33. Rolled steel caproducts 34. Steel castings and forgings 35. Foundry castings for machine parts 36. Crown corks 37. Cutlery 38. Nuts, bolts etc. 39. Sewing machines 40. Electric fans 41. Steel furniture 42. Tin plate containers 43. Household utensils of iron and steel, brass and aluminium 44. Kerosene stoves 45. Sewing Machines 46. Scientific instrument of all types 47. G.I. Buckets 48. Welding electrodes (arc welding electrodes) 49. Enamelled copper wire 50. Sand paper 5l. Locks 52. Steel structurals and fabrication 53. Conduit pipes and fittings 54. Commercial Vehicles and Trucks. IV. Textiles, Cotton and Woollen such as 1. Cotton piecegoods 2. Cotton dhoties and sarees 3. Hosiery and knitted garments-cotton and rayon 5. Silk, art silk and rayon fabrics 6. Cotton twist and yarn other than cotton, woollen and silk manufactures; 7. Jute manufactures 8. Handloom fabrics. V. Plastics and Sports Goods 1. Spectacle frames 2. Fountain pens 3. Plastic and moulded goods, including umbrella handles 4. Linoleum 5. Leather cloth 6. Bangles 7. Decorate lamina 8. Sports goods. VI. Food 1. Tea 2. Coffee 3. Spices including pepper 4. Preserved fruits and vegetable products 5. Processed food. VII. Mining Products VIII. Others 1. Biscuits 2. Confectionery and chocolates 3. Potable spirits and beer 4. Agarbathies . 5. Pencils 6. Carbon Paper and typewriter ribbons 7. Books (printed and others) 8. Brass artware and other handicrafts 9. Paraffinwax 9. opium, raw 10. Exposed cinematographic films. 11. Records 12. Clocks and watches 13. Umbrellas and umbrella parts 14. Handicrafts and cottage industry products 15. 16. Artificial dentures 16. 17. Stationery articles 17. 18. Ballpoint pencils 18. 19. Sandalwood chips 19. 20. Cigarette paper 20. 21. Cycle rims 21. 22. Printing inks 22. 23. Rubber tread materials. SCHEDULE 'S' COMMODITIES FOR EXPORT FROM SUDAN TO INDIA 1. Raw cotton 2. Gum Arabic 3. Don Nuts 4. Hides and skins (Heavy) 5. Ivory 6. Others. PROTOCOL PROTOCOL TO THE TRADE AGREEMENT OF 22 OCTOBER, l965 1. During the course of discussions between the representatives of the Governments of Sudan and India the possibilities of technical and economic cooperation between the two countries were reviewed with a view of strengthening further the existing relations between them and in pursuance of Article 6 of the Trade Agreement signed in New Delhi today between the Government of Sudan and the Government of India. The scope of the review included inter alia the establishment of joint industrial ventures in either country with the help and cooperation of the other and provision of facilities for building up technical cadres. 2. It was agreed by the two representatives that possibilities were open in the following fields which if required could be further discussed and examined by experts from the two countries. (i) Indo-Sudan Joint Industrial Ventures in the following fields : (a) manufacture of (i) textiles, (ii) sugar, (iii) cement, (iv) sewing machines, (v) electric fans, (vi) razor blades, (vii) pencils, (viii) plastics, (ix) jute goods, (x) soap, (xi) bicycles and (xii) light engineering products like air conditioners, water coolers and steel furniture. (b) setting up of (i) flour mills, (ii) vegetable oil mills, (iii) solvant extraction plants etc., and (c) such other fields in respect of which the two Governments may agree. (iii) Building up of Technical cadres The Indian representatives agreed to provide facilities for training of Sudanese nationals in technical institutions and factories in India. (iii) Providing Technicians and Specialists from India for specific projects in Sudan such as irrigation, power projects, roads and bridges construction, scientific research and meteorology. 3. In addition to the exploration of the possibilities of technical and economic collaboration between the two countries the two representatives agreed that their respective Governments would provide assistance in Government projects such as municipal works, electrification schemes and water exploitation and filtration plants. 4. The two representatives agreed to further examine the possibility of financing the proposals referred to under para 2(i) under the Rs. 50 million credit facilities offered by the Government of Sudan for purchase of capital goods. The details of this credit will be decided later between the two Governments and for this purpose it was agreed that the representatives of the two Governments shall meet as soon as possible. DONE at New Delhi in two originals this the 22nd day of October, 1965. Sd /-- HUSSAIN EL SHERIF EL HINDI For the Government of the Republic of Sudan. Sd /- MANUBHAI SHAH For the Government of the Republic of India. 
