Maharashtra Lokayuktas and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa- Lokayuktas Act, 1971. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which render it necessary for him to take immediate action to establish the Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa- Lokayuktas Act, 1971 (Mah. XLVI of 1971), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. VIII of 2011), on the 10th March, 2011; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Lokayuktas and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Lokayuktas and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10th March 2011.
Maharashtra Lokayuktas and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa- Lokayuktas Act, 1971 (Mah. XLVI of 1971) (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act "), in clause (k), in sub-clause (iii),- (a) in paragraph (a),- (i) for the words" every President and Vice-President of a Zilla Parishad" the words" every President, Vice-President and Councillor of a Zilla Parishad" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words" Chairman and Deputy Chairman of a Panchayat Samiti " the words" Chairman, Deputy Chairman and member of a Panchayat Samiti" shall be substituted; (b) in paragraph (b),- (i) for the words "every President and Vice-President of Municipal Council" the words" every President, Vice-President and Councillor of a Municipal' Council" shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "Maharashtra Municipalities" the words "Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships" shall be substituted; (c) after paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be added, namely:- "(c) every Mayor, Deputy Mayor and Councillor of all Municipal Corporations and Chairman of Standing or any Subject Committee, constituted under the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act (Bom. Ill of 1888), the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 (C.P. and Berar II of 1950) and the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (Bom. LIX of 1949);".
Maharashtra Lokayuktas and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Lokayukta and Upa-Lokayuktas (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the - corresponding provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
