Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An act further to amend the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 on the 15th December, 2001; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It shall be deemed to have came into force on the 15th December, 2001.
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 51A of the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as "the Municipal Councils Act"), the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "51A. Election of Vice-President:-(1) Every Council shall have a Vice-President, who shall be elected by the elected Councillors from amongst themselves in the first general meeting convened under sub-section (9) of section 51. (2) The meeting to elect the Vice-President shall be presided over by the President and if there is no President then by the Collector or such officer as the Collector may nominate specially in this behalf, but the Collector or such other officer shall have no right to vote : Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or the rules made thereunder, for regulating the procedure at meetings (including the quorum thereat), the President or, as the case may be, the officer, presiding over such meeting may, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to adjourn such meeting. (3) If, in the election of the Vice-President, there is equality of votes, the result of the election shall be decided by the President or the officer presiding over such meeting by drawing lots. (4) The name of the Vice-President so elected shall be notified by the Collector, in the Official Gazette, within fifteen days from such election. (5) Any dispute regarding the election of the Vice-President shall be referred to the State Government, whose decision thereon shall be final. (6) Subject to the provisions of section 55A and other provisions of this Act, the Vice-President shall hold the office, for a term of one year from the date of his election. (7) If there is any vacancy in the office of the Vice-President for any reason whatsoever, the vacancy shall be filled up following the procedure laid down in sub-sections (1) to (3) and the Vice-President so elected shall hold his office for a period of one year or for the remainder of his term as a Councillor, whichever is earlier.".
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 55 of the Municipal Councils Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "55-1A. Removal of Vice-President by Councillors:-(1) A Vice-President shall cease to be the Vice-President, if the Council by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the total number of the Councillors, at a special meeting, so decides : Provided that, no such resolution shall be moved within a period of six months from the date of election of the Vice-President. (2) The requisition for such special meeting shall be signed by not less than one-half of the total number of Councillors and shall be sent to the President, and the President shall, within ten days of the receipt of such requisition, convene a special meeting of the Council, where the nominated Councillors shall have no right to vote. (3) If the resolution seeking removal of the Vice-President is not moved or as the case may be, rejected, in the special meeting convened for the purpose under sub-section (2), no fresh resolution for such removal shall be brought during the tenure of such Vice-President."
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 55A of the Municipal Councils Act, for the figures and letter "section 51A", the figures and letter "55-1A"shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 58 of the Municipal Councils Act, in sub-section (1), clause (bb) shall be deleted.
Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 2001, is hereby repealed; (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Municipal Councils Act, as amended by this Act. 
