Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Public Trusts Act. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Maharashtra Public Trusts Act, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 41C of the Maharashtra Public Trusts Act (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "41C. Persons (other than public trust) collecting money, subscription or donation, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no person (other than public trust) shall, after the commencement of the Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017, collect or cause to be collected any money, contribution, subscription or donation, in cash or kind, for religious or charitable purposes, without seeking prior permission of the Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner upon a written application in such form as may be prescribed, either online or directly to the Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner: Provided that, in the exigencies for aiding, assisting or giving relief to the persons affected by natural disaster, war, riots, accidents or similar cause, the collection may be made by giving intimation in the form prescribed to the Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner. (2) The Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner shall, after making an enquiry as deemed fit, decide the application and may issue a certificate in form prescribed, subject to such terms and conditions as he deems fit, within seven days from the date of receipt of application, for an application received online; and within fifteen days from the date of receipt of application, for an application received in writing: Provided that, if the permission is not granted to the applicant within the stipulated period, the permission shall be deemed to have been granted under this section for the purpose for which the application is made. (3) In case the intimation as specified under the first proviso to sub-section (1) is given, the Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner shall satisfy that the collection is done for valid reason and purpose and may issue a certificate in form prescribed, subject to such terms and conditions as he deems fit, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of intimation. If the Assistant Charity Commissioner or the Deputy Charity Commissioner has reason to believe that there is a possibility of fraud, misappropriation or other abuse, he shall direct such person to stop making such collection forthwith and require such person to render an account of the collections made by him and deposit the amount so collected in the Public Trusts Administration Fund. (4) The certificate issued under sub-section (2) or (3) shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of its issue; and shall not be renewable. The applicant or the person to whom the certificate is issued under sub-section (2) or (3) shall submit the audited accounts of such collections or receipt of contribution and remaining amount, if any, within a period of two months next after expiry of the said period. (5) The remaining amount so collected shall be credited in the Public Trusts Administration Fund.".
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 41E of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "41F. Attachment of property in certain cases. - (1) Wherein it is brought to the notice of the Charity Commissioner by any Assistant Charity Commissioner or Deputy Charity Commissioner or two or more persons having interest in the trust property that disobedience of any of the orders passed under any of the sections in the Chapter VI is committed, the Charity Commissioner may after hearing the parties concerned, order the property of such person guilty of such disobedience or breach, to be attached and may also order such person to be detained in jail for a term not exceeding six months. No attachment under this sub-section shall remain in force for more than one year, at the end of which time, if the disobedience or breach continues, the property attached may be sold, and out of the proceeds, the Charity Commissioner may award such compensation as he thinks fit, and shall pay the balance, if any, to the person entitled thereto, and thereupon, any order passed by the Charity Commissioner, under this section, if in force shall stand vacated, or as the case may be, cancelled. (2) A trustee or a person against whom the order under this section is passed, may, within ninety days of the date of communication of each order, appeal to the High Court against such order.".
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 66B of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "66C. Punishment for contravention of section 41C. - Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 41C shall, on conviction, be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to one and half times the amount or contribution collected without seeking prior permission under sub-section (1) of section 41C or intimation under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 41C, as the case may be, or with both.".
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 70 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(c-1) the order under section 41C;".
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 72 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1), the figures, letter and word ", 41C and" shall be deleted; (b) in the marginal note, the figures, letter and word ", 41C and" shall be deleted.
Maharashtra Public Trusts (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In the Schedule B appended to the principal Act, in column (1) regarding 'Section',- (a) in entry relating to section 70 (1), in column (2), for the words "or order" the words, figures and letter "or order under section 41C or order" shall be substituted; (b) in entry relating to section 72 (1), in column (2), the figures and letter, "41C" shall be deleted. 
