Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Medical Council Act, 1965. WHEREAS, it is expedient further to amend the Maharashtra Medical Council Act, 1965, for the purposes hereinafter appearing ; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India, as follows :-
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 16 of the Maharashtra Medical Council Act, 1965 Mah. (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act"), in sub-section (3), for of the words " a fee of rupees one hundred and fifty " the words " such fees 1965. as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words " a fee of rupees one hundred and fifty " the words " such fees as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 19oftheprincipalAct,insub-section (1), for the words of " a fee of rupees ten " the words " such fees as the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, specify " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be . substituted, namely :- " 23. Renewal of Registration- Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 16, 17 and 21,- (a) Every registered practitioner who is holding a certificate of registration prior to such date, as the Council, by order published in the Official Gazette specifies, shall within a period of four months from the specified date, apply in the prescribed form, with a renewal fee of rupees five hundred, to the Registrar for the renewal of the registration ; (b) The registered practitioner who fails to apply for the renewal of his registration within the specified period may apply in the prescribed form alongwith late fee of rupees one hundred per month or part thereof, for renewal of the registration ; (c) Every registered practitioner who has obtained the renewed certificate of registration under clause (a) or clause (b), shall be required to get the same renewed every five years thereafter, on payment of such renewal fees or late fees, as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify : Provided that, such person shall, not less than two months prior to the date on which the registration period of five years from the renewal of the registration under clause (a) or clause (b) expires, make an application in the prescribed form with the requisite fees as specified under this clause, for the renewal of his certificate of registration ; (d) The Registrar shall on registration or ' renewal of the registration certificate also issue to such practitioner an identity card in such form containing such particulars, as may be prescribed. ".
Maharashtra Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 29 of the principal Act, for the words " five hundred rupees " the words " five thousand rupees " shall be substituted. 
