Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 and the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 and the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, on the 16th September, 2000; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th September, 2000.
Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 207A of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "liable to pay" the words, "per annum", shall be inserted.
Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 73 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949,- (a) in clause (c),- (i) for the words "three lakh rupees" the words "ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted; (ii) in the proviso, the words "for the purposes of Chapters XII and XIII" shall be deleted; (b) in clause (d), for the words "three lakh rupees" the words "ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 64 of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "64. Tenders to be invited for contracts involving expenditure exceeding fifty thousand rupees:-(1) The Commissioner shall invite tenders for contracts involving expenditure exceeding fifty thousand rupees. (2) The mode of executing contracts under this Act shall be prescribed by the bye-laws made under this Act. (3) No contract which is not made in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder shall be binding on the Corporation.".
Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Municipal Corporations (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 and the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the said Acts, as amended by this Act. 
