Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib Act, 1956. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib Act, 1956, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 on the 18th February 2015; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature, it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 18th February 2015.
Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (2), (3) or (4), the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute the Board, if, at-least fifty per cent. of the members, under sub-section (1) are duly nominated or elected, as the case may be. The Board so constituted shall be deemed to be validly constituted Board for the purposes of this Act.".
Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 11 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(1) The President of the Board shall be nominated by the Government from amongst the members of the Board.".
Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 61 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (ii) shall be deleted.
Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Nanded Sikh Gurudwara Sachkhand Shri Hazur Apchalnagar Sahib (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
