Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Police Act. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Maharashtra Police Act, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 on 16th February 2015 ; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature ; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th February 2015.
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Police Act (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"),- (a) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(4A-1) "Constabulary" means Police Constable, Police Naik, Police Head Constable and Assistant Sub-Inspector ; " ; (b) in clause (6A), for the words "after completion of normal tenure of two years" the words "after completion of normal tenure as mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 22N" shall be substitued ; (c) in clause (10A),- (i) for the words "and Police Establishment Board at Commissionerate Level" the words", " Police Establishment Board at Commissionerate Level", "Police Establishment Board at District Level" and "Police Establishment Board at the Levels of Specialized Agencies" shall be substituted; (ii) for the word, figures and letter "and 221" the figures, letters and word ", 221, 22J-1 and 22J-3" shall be" substituted ; (d) after clause (14A), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(14A-1) "Specialized Agencies" means Crime Investigation Department, State Intelligence Department, Protection of Civil Rights, Anti-Corruption Bureau, State Reserve Police Force, Anti-Terrorist Squad, Highway Traffic and Training Directorate ;".
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 22D of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the words "Police Officers" the words "and the State Government shall give due weight to its recommendations" shall be added.
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 22J of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- " 22J-1. Police Establishment Board at District Level - (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Police Establishment Board at District Level. (2) The Police Establishment Board at District Level shall consist of the following members, namely :- (a) District Superintendent of Police Chairperson; (b) Senior most Additional Superintendent of Police. Member ; (c) Deputy Superintendent of Police (Head Quarter) Member-Secretary: Provided that, if none of the aforesaid members is from the Backward Class, then the District Superintendent of Police shall appoint an additional member of the rank of the Deputy Superintendent of Police belonging to such class. Explanation - For the purpose of this sub-section, the expression "Backward Class" means the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, De-notified Tribes (Vimukta Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Special Backward Category and Other Backward Classes. 22J-2. Functions of Police Establishment Board at District Level - The Police Establishment Board at District Level shall perform the following functions, namely :- (a) The Board shall decide all transfers, postings of Police Personnel to the rank of Police Inspector within the District Police Force. (b) The Board shall be authorized to make appropriate recommendations to the Police Establishment Board No. 2 regarding the postings and transfers out of the District. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the expression "Police Personnel" means a Police Personnel to the rank of Police Inspector. 22J-3. Police Establishment Board at Levels of Specialized Agencies - (1) The State Government shall, by notification :n the Official Gazette, constitute for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Police Establishment Board at the Levels of Specialized Agencies, namely Crime Investigation Department, State Intelligence Department, Protection of Civil Rights, Anti-Corruption Bureau, State Reserve Police Force, Anti-Terrorist Squad, Highway Traffic and Training Directorate. (2) The Police Establishment Board at the Level of Specialized Agencies shall consist of a Chairperson, as the Head of the concerned Specialized Agency and three senior-most Police Officers of that Specialized Agency : Provided that, if none of the aforesaid members is f'vom the Backward Class, then the concerned Head of the Specialized Agency shall appoint an additional member of any senior most Police Officer belonging to such class. Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "Backward Class" means the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, De-notified Tribes (Vimukta Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Special Backward Category and Othe: Backward Classes. 22J-4. Functions of Police Establishment Board at Levels of Specialized Agencies - The Police Establishment Board at the Levels of Specialized Agencies shall perform the following functions, namely :- (a) The respective Board shall decide all transfers and postings of all Police Personnel to the rank of Police Inspector within the Specialized Agencies. (b) The respective Board shall be authorized to make appropriate recommendations to the Police Establishment Board No. 2, regarding the postings and transfers out of the Specialized Agency, of the Police Personnel to the rank of Police Inspector. Explanation - For the purposes of this section, the expression "Police Personnel" means a Police Personnel to the rank of Police Inspector.".
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 22K of the principal Act, for the words "and Police Establishment Board at Commissionerate Level" the words ", Police Establishment Board at Commissionerate Level, Police Establishment Board at District Level and Police Establishment Board at the Levels of Specialized Agencies" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 22N of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1),- (i) for the words "Any Police Personnel in the Police Force shall have a normal tenure of two years on one post or office, subject to the promotion or superannuation." the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) Police Officers in the police force shall have a normal tenure as mentioned below, subject to the promotion or superannuation :- (a) for Police Personnel of and above the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police or Assistant Commissioner of Police a normal tenure shall be of two years at one place of posting ; (b) for Police Constabulary a normal tenure shall be of five years at one place of posting ; (c) for Police Officers of the rank of Police Sub-Inspector, Assistant Police Inspector and Police Inspector a normal tenure shall be of two years at a Police Station or Branch, four years in a District and eight years in a Range, however, for the Local Crime Branch and Special Branch in a District and the Crime Branch and Special Branch in a Commissionerate, a normal tenure shall be of three years ; (d) for Police Officers of the rank of Police Sub-Inspector, Assistant Police Inspector and Police Inspector a normal tenure shall be of six years at Commissionerates other than Mumbai, and eight years at Mumbai Commissionerate ; (e) for Police Officers of the rank of Police Sub-Inspector, Assistant Police Inspector and Police Inspector in Specialized Agencies a normal tenure shall be of three years."; (ii) in entry (c), relating to "Officers upto Police Inspectors", in the column under the heading "Competent Authority" , after entry (c), the following entries shall be added, namely :- "(d) Police Establishment Board at District Level. (e) Police Establishment Board at the Level of Specialized Agency."; (b) in sub-section (2),- (i) the proviso shall be deleted ; (ii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely :- "Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression "Competent Authority" shall mean :- Police Personnel Competent Authority (a) Officers of the Indian Police Service Chief Minister ; (b) Maharashtra Police Service Officers of and above the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police. Home Minister ; (c) Police Personnel upto the rank of Police Inspector for transfsr out of the respective Range or Commissionerate or Specialized Agency. Police Establishment Board No. 2 ; (d) Police Personnel upto the rank of Police Inspector for transfer within the respective Range, Commissionerate or Specialized Agency. Police Establishment Boards at the Level of Range, Commissionerate or Specialized Agency, as the case may be; (e) Police Personnel upto the rank of Police Inspector for transfer within the District. Police Establishment Board at District Level: Provided that, in case of any serious complaint, irregularity, law and order problem the highest Competent Authority can make the transfer of any Police Personnel without any recommendation of the concerned Police Establishment Board.".
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 22N of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- " 22N-1. Maximum percentage of transfer in a year - Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 22N or any other provisions of this Act, to ensure that the Government work is not adversely affected on account of large scale transfers of Police Personnel from one single Department or office, not more than one-third of the Police Personnel shall be transferred from any office or Department at a time, in a year.".
Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Act, 2015_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Police (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or, as the case may be, issued under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
