Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017, on the 30th October 2017; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature, it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th October 2017.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), for clause (s), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(s) "member" means a member of the Committee and includes the Chairman and Co-Chairman appointed under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 21;".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (a) in clause (a), for the words "including the Chairman" the words "including the Chairman and Co-Chairman" shall be substituted; (b) to clause (a), the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that, the Co-Chairman shall perform such of the functions and discharge such of the duties of the Chairman as may be prescribed;".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 24 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided further that, the term of the first Co-Chairman appointed after the commencement of the Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017, shall be co-terminus with the term of the members of the Committee appointed vide Government Notification, Law and Judiciary Department, No. PTA. 2014/C.R.07/ D.16, dated the 3rd July 2017.".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 25 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "25.Resignation of members, Co-Chairman and Chairman.-(1) Any member appointed by the State Government may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman. (2) The Co-Chairman and the Chairman may resign his office by giving similar notice to the State Government. (3) The notice shall be delivered in the prescribed manner. (4) The office of the member shall become vacant from the date of acceptance of the resignation by the Chairman and the office of the Co-Chairman or, as the case may be, the Chairman shall become vacant from the date of acceptance of the resignation by the State Government.".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "a Chairman or member" the words "the Chairman, the Co-Chairman or member" shall be substituted.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 30 of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "(5) Every meeting of the Committee shall be presided over by the Chairman, and in his absence, by the Co-Chairman and in the absence of both the Chairman and the Co-Chairman, by a member chosen by the members present to preside for the occasion.".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 31 of the principal Act, for the words "the Chairman or", at both the places where they occur, the words "the Chairman, the Co-Chairman or" shall be substituted.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973, as amended by this Act, the State Government may, as occasion arises, by an order published in the Official Gazette, give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act, as amended by this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that, no such order shall be made after expiry of the period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2017_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Ordinance, 2017, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
