Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Prohibition Act. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Maharashtra Prohibition Act, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force in such areas and on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different areas of the State.
Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Prohibition Act (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), after clause (17), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(17A) "Gram Rakshak Dal" means Gram Rakshak Dal established under section 134A;".
Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 134 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "134 A. Establishment of Gram Rakshak Dal. - (1) The Village Panchayat constituted under the Maharashtra Village Panchayats Act may, by resolution, or an application signed by not less than 25 per cent. of the Women voters of the Gram Sabha, may request the Sub-Divisional Magistrate of the area, for convening a special Gram Sabha, for the purpose of establishment of Gram Rakshak Dal. (2) (a) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate of the area on receipt or request under sub-section (1), shall call such special meeting of Gram Sabha. (b) The form of application, the mode of submitting the application and manner of verification of authenticity of the applicants, under sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed. (c) The meeting of such Gram Sabha shall be conducted in the presence of the Tahsildar of the area. (d) The Gram Sabha may recommend the persons to be appointed as members of Gram Rakshak Dal. (e) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate shall on recommendation of Gram Sabha establish a Gram Rakshak Dal. (f) The term of the members of such Gram Rakshak Dal shall be of two years. (3) The Gram Rakshak Dal shall consist of as many members as there are members in a Village Panchayat but it shall not be more than eleven. (4) The eligibility for the appointment as a member of the Gram Rakshak Dal shall be such as may be prescribed. (5) The Gram Rakshak Dal shall have adequate representation of Women and persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. (6) Every member of the Gram Rakshak Dal shall be bound to give immediate information at the nearest Police Station or to any other Officer or person authorised in this behalf of the commission of any offence and of the intention or preparation to commit any offence under this Act which may come to his knowledge. (7) The duties and responsibilities of the members of Gram Rakshak Dal shall be such as may be prescribed.
Maharashtra Prohibition (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 143 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (w), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(x) prescribing the form of application, the mode of submitting the application and manner of verification of authenticity of the applicants under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 134A; (y) prescribing the eligibility for the appointment as a member of the Gram Rakshak Dal under sub-section (4) of section 134A; (z) prescribing the duties and responsibilities of the members of Gram Rakshak Dal under sub-section (7) of section 134A.". 
