Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, on the 23rd January 2018; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd January 2018.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Pandharpur Temples Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(f-1) "Council" or "Advisory Council" means the Advisory Council constituted under section 32A;".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (a) for the words "twelve members" the words "fifteen members" shall be substituted; (b) for the words "eleven members" the words "fourteen members" shall be substituted.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In CHAPTER III of the principal Act, in the heading, after the words "THE COMMITTEE" the words "AND THE ADVISORY COUNCIL" shall be added.
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 32 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "32A. Advisory Council. - (1) The State Government may, by an order, constitute the Advisory Council to advise the Committee. (2) The Advisory Council shall consist of the following, namely:- (i) Chairman of the Committee, ex officio-Chairman. (ii) Collector, Solapur District, ex officio-Member. (iii) Not more than seven other members to be nominated by the State Government. (3) The Executive Officer of the Committee shall act as the Secretary of the Advisory Council. (4) The functions and duties of the Advisory Council shall be such as may be specified by the Government, by general or special order. The Advisory Council shall observe such procedure in regard to transaction of business in meetings (including quorum) thereof, as it may, from time to time, decide.".
Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Act, 2018_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Pandharpur Temples (Amendment) Ordinance, 2018, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act: Provided that, no such order shall be made after expiry of the period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
