Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (Mah. XXXVII of 1966) for the purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extraordinary, Part VIII, dated 27th December, 2010
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 124B of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966 (Mah. XXXVII of 1966) (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"),- (1) for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(2) On and from the date of commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010 (Mah. XXXIV of 2010), development charge shall be levied and collected by the Authority at the rates specified in column (4) of the Second Schedule; and the Authority may, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, enhance, from time to time, the rate specified in column (4) of the Second Schedule and levy the development charge at such enhanced rate: Provided that, the Authority may, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, reduce, from time to time, the enhanced rate and levy development charge at such reduced rate, so however that in no case the rate shall be reduced below the rate specified in column (4) of the Second Schedule."; (2) in sub-section (2A), the word '"minimum" shall be deleted.
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra For Second Schedule to the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, namely:- Second Schedule (See section I24B) Part I Serial No. (1) Areas (2) Nature and particulars of development (3) Rate at which development charge to be levied (in rupees per square metres) (4) 1. Areas under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporations constituted or deemed to have been constituted under the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act (Bom. Ill of 1888), the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (Bom. 1.IX of 1949) and the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 (C P. and Berar II of 1950), the Municipal Councils constituted under the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (Mah. XL of 1965); and Special Planning Authorities and New Town Development Authorities constituted under this Act. (a) Development of land for residential or institutional use. not involving any building or construction operations. 0.5 per cent, of the rates developed land mentioned in the Annual Statement of Rates prepared under the Bombay Stamp (Determination of True Market Value of Property) Rules, 1995 made under the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 (Bom. LX of 1958) (hereinafter, in this Schedule, referred to as "the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner").  (b) Development of land for residential for institutional use, involving only building or construction operations,-  (i) where development charge under clause (a) has been paid; 2.00 per cent, of the rates developed land mentioned in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner; 2.00 per cent, of the rates of developed land mentioned in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner.  (ii) where development charge under clause (a) is not required to be paid as the development before the commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (Amendment) Act, 1992 (Mah. XVI of 1992).  (c) Development of land for residential or institutional use, also involving building or construction operations,-  (i) for development; 0.5 per cent, of the rates of developed land mentioned in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckkoner; 2.00 per cent, of the rates developed land mentioned in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner.  (ii) for construction. Part II (1) The rates of development charge for different nature or category of development of land and buildings for industrial and commercial users shall be one and a half times and two times of the rates of development charges, respectively, specified in column (4) for different corresponding nature or category of development of lands and buildings described in clauses (a), (b) and (c) in column (3) in Part-I of this Schedule for residential or institutional users. (2) In the area under the jurisdiction of the respective municipal corporations the development charge shall be levied for reconstruction or for the making of any material change in a building, at the rates specified in Part-I of the Schedule for the purpose of development of land involving only building or construction operations in such area.". 
