Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. WHEREAS, both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS, the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (See page 6 supra.), on the 23rd June, 1982, and the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (See page 8 supra.), on the 26th June, 1982; AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to replace the said Ordinances by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of July, 1982.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 13A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "13AA. Purchase tax payable on goods in Schedule C, Part I, when manufactured goods are transferred to outside branches. - Where a dealer, who is liable to pay tax under this Act, purchases any goods specified in Part I of Schedule C, directly or through commission agent, from a person who is or is not a registered dealer and uses such goods in the manufacture of taxable goods and dispatches the goods, so manufactured, to his own place of business or to his agent's place of business situated outside the State within India, then such dealer shall be liable to pay, in addition to the sales tax paid or payable, or as the case may be, the purchase tax levied or leviable, under the other provisions of this Act in respect of purchases of such goods, a purchase tax at the rate of two paise in the rupee on the purchase price of the goods so used in the manufacture, and accordingly the dealer shall include purchase price of such goods in his turnover of purchases in his return under section 32, which he is to furnish next thereafter."
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the first proviso, for the words "five paise", the words "six paise" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule C to the principal Act, in Part II, - (a) in entry 9, after sub-entry (iii), the following sub-entry shall be added, namely :- "(iv) Wall paper Twelve paise Twelve paise in the rupee. in the rupee."; (b) after entry 46, the following entries shall be inserted, namely :- "46A Heat resistant cookware and Do Do serveware, that is, kitchenware coated with heat-resistant coatings and used for cooking as well as serving. 46B Non-stick cookware, that is, Do Do."; utensils and other kitchenware made of aluminium or other non-ferrous metals and treated with stick-resistant coatings. (c) in entry 52, in column 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Fifteen paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (d) in entry 59, after the words "every description", the following shall be inserted, namely :- "(other than those specified elsewhere in this schedule)"; (e) after entry 59 the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "59A All kinds of greeting cards, Do. Do."; invitation cards, humour post-cards and picture post-cards and cards for special occasions, visiting cards, photo albums, stamp albums, diaries and calendars. (f) in entry 63, in sub-entry (a), in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Fifteen paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (g) in entry 66, - (i) for the words "and electricity operated gramophones", the brackets and words "(other than those specified in sub-entry (c) of entry 97) and "shall be substituted; (ii) in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Fifteen paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (h) in entry 67, in sub-entry (a), in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Twelve paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (i) after entry 69, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "69A All kinds of weighing machines, Do Do."; appliances, instruments, scales, tubes and systems used for weighing, except ordinary weighting scales locally known as taraju or tagadi. (j) in entry 70, - (A) the existing entry shall be renumbered as sub-entry (i) of that entry, and in sub-entry (i) so renumbered, - (i) after the word "loud-speakers", the following shall be inserted, namely :- "(other than those specified in sub-entry (c) of entry 97)"; (ii) in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Fifteen paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (B) after sub-entry (i) so renumbered, the following sub-entry shall be added, namely :- "(ii) Radios and transistors having Ten paise in Ten paise in bands not exceeding two. the rupee. the rupee."; (k) in entry 97, after sub-entry (b), the following sub-entry shall be added, namely :- "(c) Stereo or Hi-fi amplifiers, speakers Do. Do." and speakers systems housed in acoustically designed enclosures, which are ordinarily used with stereo or Hi-fi musical systems or with wireless reception instruments and apparatuses, radio gramophones, gramophones, record players, record changers and other equipments specified in sub-entry (iii) of entry 93 of this schedule.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (See page 6 supra.), and the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (See page 8 supra.), are hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or any tax levied under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinances, shall be deemed to have been done, or taken or levied, as the case may be, under the said Act, as amended by this Act. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Bill (L.A. Bill No. XXI of 1982) (Maharashtra Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Part V, dated 9th August, 1982, page 175) runs as follows :- "The Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, was amended by the Maharashtra Act No. XXXII of 1981 (See (1981) 48 STC Statutes 52), and the amending Act was brought into force with effect from the 1st July, 1981. Under the provisions of the Act so amended certain concessions were provided to the manufactures in this State. However, it was noticed that such concessions in actual operation resulted in an unintended loss of revenue and with a view to avoiding such loss and also to augment the revenue, certain amendments were required to be made immediately in the Act. It was also considered necessary to amend Part II of Schedule C to the Act immediately to augment the revenue realisable by levy of tax on certain goods. 2. Accordingly, the necessary amendments in the Act were made by the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Mah. Ord. VII of 1982) (See page 6 supra.), and the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Mah. Ord. VIII of 1982) (See page 8 supra.), which are being put together and converted into a single Act by this Bill. The following notes on clause explain the provisions of this Bill :- Clause 2. - By this clause, a new section 13AA is being inserted in the principal Act. The manufacturers in the State are treated on a special footing for the purposes of levy of sales tax, in that irrespective of the tax rates on various commodities, the manufacturers are permitted to purchase all their inputs at a concessional rate of four per cent at present on a declaration. Most of the important industrial raw material are placed in Schedule C, Part I, and bear a tax of only four per cent, which is also the concessional rate for purchase of inputs for manufacturers, and also the rate of tax on the inter-State transactions. The first proviso to section 14(1) provides for an additional tax at one per cent, on inputs that go into branch transfers but it is restricted to the goods specified in Part II of Schedule C. Since certain manufacturers who transfer most of the goods by branch transfers, use all the facilities of infrastructure provided by this State, it is felt that it is no more necessary to give th em concession in respect of inputs, falling in Part I of Schedule C, for manufacture. Accordingly, it is proposed to levy two per cent purchase tax even on purchase of inputs covered by Part I of Schedule C, in addition to the sales/purchase tax paid or payable, as the case may be. Clause 3. - First proviso to section 14(1) provides that where a recognised dealer, who purchased goods mentioned in Part II of Schedule C, directly or through commission agent under a declaration given by him under section 12 and uses them in the manufacture of taxable goods and contrary to such declaration dispatches the goods so manufactured to his own place of business or to his agent's place of business situated outside the State within India, where he or, his agent as the case may be, is registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, then the rate of purchase tax shall be five paise in the rupee, as against the rate mentioned in Part II of Schedule C. It is proposed to raise the tax rate from five per cent to six per cent, in view of extremely high proportion of branch-transfers as observed in the trend of the trade, and also in the interest of protecting State revenues. For that purpose, the first proviso to section 14 is amended suitably. Clause 4. - It is proposed to amend Part II of Schedule C to the Act, with a view to inserting new entries therein and restructuring some of the existing entries, for the purpose of increasing the rate of tax to augment the revenue reliable by levy of tax on certain goods. 3. As both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session and it was necessary to take immediate action further to amend the principal Act for the purposes aforesaid, the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Mah. Ord. VII of 1982) (See page 6 supra.), and the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (Mah. Ord. VIII of 1982) (See page 8 supra.), were promulgated by the Governor of Maharashtra on the 23rd June, 1982, and the 26th June, 1982, respectively. The Bill, as stated above, in intended to replace the two Ordinances by an Act of the State Legislate." 
