Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. WHEREAS, both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 1982 (See page 14 supra.), on the 26th November, 1982; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of December, 1982.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 15A-I of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "15A-I. Levy of additional tax in the case of dealers whose turnover exceeds Rs. 10,00,000 a year. - (1) Where the turnover of either of all sales or of all purchases by any dealer liable to pay tax under section 3 has exceeded ten lakhs of rupees in any year, the tax payable by him shall be increased by the levy of an additional tax at the rate of 12 per cent of the tax payable by him for that year under the other provisions of this Act. Such additional tax shall be paid by the dealer in addition to the tax levied and payable by him under the other provisions of the Act : Provided that, in calculating the additional tax payable by the dealer, the tax payable under the other provisions of this Act in respect of sales or purchases of declared goods, betelnuts, safety matches (excluding matches ordinarily used as fire-works), agricultural machinery and implements and components, etc., to which entry 18 in Schedule C, Part I, applies, kerosene, footwear to which entry 42(a) in Schedule C, Part II, applies, hydrogenated vegetable oils including vanaspati to which entry 30 in Schedule C, Part II, applies, and vegetable non-essential oils, etc., to which entry 35 in Schedule C, Part I, applies, shall not be taken into consideration. (2) The additional tax shall be paid by the dealer before furnishing the return for the period in which the turnover either of all sales or of all purchases as computed from the commencement of the year first exceeds ten lakhs of rupees. The tax so payable shall be for the period from the commencement of the year to the end of the period covered by such return and the dealer shall continue to be liable to pay the additional tax for that year for all the subsequent periods till the end of that year. (3) Out of the total additional tax so collected, an amount equal to 50 per cent thereof shall be utilised for the purpose of raising the resources for implementing the Employment Guarantee Scheme under the Maharashtra Employment Guarantee Act, 1977. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no dealer shall be entitled to collect any sum by way of additional tax payable by him under this section."
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), - (a) in clause (a), in sub-clause (ii-a), for the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (2) of section 15A-I", the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (4) of section 15A-I" shall be substituted; (b) in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), for the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (2) of section 15A-I", the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (4) of section 15A-I", shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (10), in clause (a), for the words, brackets, figures and letters "sub-section (2) of section 15A-I", the words, brackets, figures, and letters "sub-section (4) of section 15A-I" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule C to the principal Act, in Part II, - (a) in entry 3, in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Eight paise in a rupee." shall be substituted; (b) in entry 4(i), in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Six paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (c) in entry 6, in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Eight paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (d) in entry 7, in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Six paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (e) in entry 20(1)(ii) and 20(2), in columns 3 and 4, for the words "Twelve paise in the rupee.", the words "Fifteen paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (f) for entry 32, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "32. Oil engines (other than those covered by entry 62 in this schedule) and components, parts and accessories thereof - (a) where the engine is Eight paise in Eight paise in of capacity not the rupee. the rupee. exceeding 5 horse power. (b) where the engine is Ten paise in Ten paise in of capacity exceeding the rupee. the rupee."; 5 horse power. (g) in entry 33, in columns 3 and 4, for the word "Do.", the words "Eight paise in the rupee." shall be substituted; (h) for entry 42(b), the following shall be substituted, under columns 2, 3 and 4, respectively, namely :- "(b) when sold at a price Twelve paise in Twelve paise in exceeding Rs. 30, but the rupee. the rupee. not exceeding Rs. 50 per pair. (c) when sold at a price Fifteen paise in Fifteen paise exceeding Rs. 50 the rupee. in the rupee."; per pair. (i) in entry 102, in columns 3 and 4, for the words "Eight paise in the rupee.", the words "Ten paise in the rupee." shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 1982_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Sales Tax (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 1982, (Maharashtra Government Gazette, Part IV, dated 20th January, 1983, page 36.), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or any tax levied and collected under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken or, levied and collected, as the case may be, under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
