Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 An Act further to amend the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) Act, 2004. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session: And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) Act, 2004 (Mah. XIV of 2004), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. XIV of 2011), on the 4th June 2011; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :- The following Act of the Maharashtra Legislature, received the assent of the Governor on 18th August, 2011 and was published in the Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extraordinary, Part VIII, dated 18th August, 2011.
Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th June 2011.
Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 21 of the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) Act. 2004 (Mah. XIV of 2004) (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act "),- (a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Trust may. with the previous sanction of the State Government, and subject to such maximum limit and such terms and conditions, as may be specified by the State Government by an order published in the Official Gazette, give grant-in-aid to the Government Departments, Government Corporations, Government Companies or Government undertakings for providing or augmenting infrastructural facilities such as bus terminals, railway station, airport and similar infrastructural facilities, for the convenience of the devotees."; (b) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figure " sub-section (1) " the words, brackets, figures and letter" sub-sections (1) and (1A)" shall be substituted.
Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. XIV of 2011), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including an) notification or order issued) under the principal Act. as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or, as the case may be. issued under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
