Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend certain tax laws in operation in the State of Maharashtra. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend certain tax laws in operation in the State of Maharashtra, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions. Received the assent of the Governor in the "Maharashtra Government Gazette", on the 20th April 2013
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 30 of the Maharashtra Stamp Act (LX of 1958) (hereinafter, in Chapter, referred to as "the Stamp Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "30A. Duties payable by financial institution - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 30, where any instrument referred to in clauses (a) to (g) of section 30, is executed on or after the date of commencement of the Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013 (Mah. VIII of 2013), in favour of or by any financial institution such as Bank, Non-Banking Finance Company, Housing Finance Company or alike, which creates any right in favour of any such financial institution, the liability to pay proper stamp duty shall be on such financial institution concerned without affecting their right, if any, to collect it from the other party. (2) In respect of any such instrument executed before the date of commencement of the Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013 (Mah. VIII of 2013), and are effective and where proper stamp duty is not paid, then the financial institution shall impound such instrument on or before the 30th September 2013 and forward the same to the Collector for recovery. (3) Where the financial institution fails to impound such instrument as provided in subsection (2), then the concerned financial institution shall be liable to pay a penalty equal to the stamp duty payable on such instrument.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra Section 70 of the Stamp Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be added, namely:- "(2) In determining the amount of duty payable, or of the allowances to be made, under this Act, in case of instrument in respect of which duty payable is more than one hundred rupees, any fraction of one hundred rupees equal to or exceeding fifty rupees shall be rounded off to the next one hundred rupees, and fractions of less than fifty rupees shall be disregarded.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In SCHEDULE I appended to the Stamp Act,- (a) in article 25, in Explanation I, after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided also that, where proper stamp duty is paid on a registered agreement to sell an immovable property, treating it as a deemed conveyance and subsequently a conveyance deed is executed without any modification then such a conveyance shall be treated as other instrument under section 4 and the duty of one hundred rupees shall be charged."; (b) in article 36A, for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:- "(a) Where the leave and licence agreement 0.25 per cent. of the total sum of,- purports to be for a term not exceeding sixty months with or without renewal (i) the licence fees or rent payable under the agreement; plus clause. (ii) the amount of non-refundable deposit or money advanced or to be advanced or premium, by whatever name called; plus  (iii) the interest calculated at the rate of 10 per cent. per annum on the refundable security deposit or money advanced or to be advanced, by whatever name called". 
