Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra further to amend certain tax laws in operation in the State of Maharashtra. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend certain tax laws in operation in the State of Maharashtra, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra 1. This Act may be called the Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002. 2. a. Sections 1 to 8, 10 to 12, 14, 15, 17, 18, 20 to 27 shall come into force on the 1st May 2002. b. Sections 9, 16, 19 and 28 shall come into force on the dates expressly mentioned in those sections. c. Section 13 shall come into force on such date, as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Chapter II Amendments to the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred to as "the Entertainments Duty Act"),- a. in clause (a), after the words "cable television" the words, brackets and letters" or Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service" shall be inserted; b. in clause (b),- i. in clause (iii-a), the word "and" shall be deleted; ii. in entry (vi), the word "and" shall be added at end; iii. after entry (vi), the following entry shall be added, namely :- "(vii) any payment made by a person to the proprietor of a Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service by way of contribution, subscription, installation or connection charges, or any other charges collected in any manner whatsoever for Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service with the aid of any type of set top box or any other instrument of like nature which connects television set at a residential or non-residential place of a connection holder directly to the Satellite;"; c. in clause (c),- i. in entry (viii), the world "or" shall be deleted; ii. in entry (ix), the word "or " shall be added at the end; and iii. after entry (ix), the following entries shall be added, namely :- "(x) or a partnership firm, body corporate or a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956, responsible for or for the time-being in charge of, the management of any Go-carting centre; (xi) or a partnership firm, body corporate or a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956, having ownership of a tourist bus with a video facility; (xii) or a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956, having licence to provide Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service by the Government of India under section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933."; d. in clause (d), after the words "cable television" the words, brackets and letters "or Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service" shall be added; e. after clause (e-e), the following shall be inserted namely:- "(e-e 1) " Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service" means a system of distribution of multi channel television programmes in Ku Band by using a Satellite system, by providing television signals direct to the subscriber's premises without passing through an intermediary such as cable operator; Explanation.- For the purposes of this clause and clause (g-1A) "Ku Band" ordinarily means the 11.7-12.7 Ghz (Gigahertz) frequency band which splits into two segments, viz. the first having the frequency of 11.7-12.2 Ghz. known as FSS (Fixed Satellite Service) and the other having the frequency of 12.2-12.7 Ghz. known as BSS (Broadcasting Satellite Service), or it may have such other band width as may be approved by the Government of India from time to time;"; f. in clause (g), in paragraph (ii), after the words "cable television" the words, brackets and letters "or pertaining to the management of providing Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service" shall be inserted; g. after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(g-1A) "set top box" means an apparatus connected to a television set at a residential or non-residential place which receives encrypted television signals through dish antenna from satellite directly and provides decrypted television signals to the television set, which enables to viewers to tune into multi channel television programmes in Ku Band, on payment, by the connection-holder, of the charges collected in any manner whatsoever by the proprietor;"; h. after clause (g-2), the following clause shall be added, namely :- "(g-3) "sponsorship amount" means an amount paid to the organisor of an entertainment programme by the sponsorer in lieu of advertisement of sponsorer's product or his brand name, etc.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra a. in sub-section (1), - i. for the words "except in the case of video games and exhibition by means of any type of antenna or cable television", the following portion shall be substituted, namely :- "except in the case of video games, exhibition by means of any type of antenna or cable television, or exhibition by means of Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, bowling alley, Go-carting, dance bar, discotheque, amusement park, water sports activity, pool game"; ii. in clause (b), in the first proviso, the words "or discotheque" shall be deleted; b. in sub-section (12), the words "where the payment for admission to such performance or show exceeds rupees one hundred" shall be deleted; c. after sub-section (13), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely :- "(14) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) or in any other provisions of this Act, there shall be levied and paid, in advance, by the tenth day of the every calendar month, by the proprietor of every Go-carting centre to the State Government, the entertainment duty in respect of each car at the rate of Rs. 2,000 per car per month. (15) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) or in any other provisions of this Act, there shall be levied and paid, by the tenth day of every calendar month, by the proprietor of every Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, to the State Government, the entertainments duty, per television set which receives radio frequency signals for exhibition of films or moving pictures or series of pictures with the aid of a set top box or any other apparatus attached to it for securing transmission through Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service at the rates specified for the area in the Table below :- Area Amount of entertainment duty per television set per month (Rupees) i. Within the limits of Municipal Corporations and Cantonments 90 ii. Within the limits of 'A' and 'B' class Municipal Councils 60 iii. Any other areas not covered by entries 1 and 2 above. 30 (16) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) or in any other provisions of this Act, there shall be levied and paid, in advance, by the fifteenth day of January of every calendar year, by the proprietor of every tourist bus with video facility, to the State Government, the entertainment duty in respect of such bus at the rate of Rs. 1,000 per bus, per annum. (17) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or in any other provisions of this Act, there shall be levied and paid, in advance, by the tenth day of every calendar month, by the proprietor of every discotheque in the State, to the State Government, the entertainment duty in respect of such discotheque, at the rate and as per the category, as specified in the Table below :- Category Amount of entertainment duty to be paid in advance per month (Rupees) i. Discotheques situated in the Five Star Hotels within the limits of Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai : 50,000 ii. Discotheques situated in the Five Star Hotels outside the limits of Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai : 40,000 iii. Discotheques (other than those situated in the Five Star Hotels) situated within the limits of Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai : 25,000 iv. Discotheques (other than those situated in the Five Star Hotels) situated out side the limits of Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai : 15,000
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3AA of the Entertainments Duty Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "cable television" the words, brackets and letters "and Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service" shall be inserted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 4 of the Entertainments Duty Act, - a. in sub-section (2), for the main clause beginning with the words "The State Government may" and ending with the words "to pay the amount of duty due -" the following shall be substituted, namely :- "Every proprietor of any entertainment in respect of which the entertainment duty is payable under section 3, shall apply to the prescribed officer by the fifteenth day of January of every calendar year, to allow him to pay the entertainment duty due and payable, and the prescribed officer may, on receipt of such application, allow the proprietor, on such conditions as the State Government may specify by general or special order issued in that behalf, to pay the amount of entertainment duty due-"; b. after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided further that, the prescribed officer may, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of the application as aforesaid, reject the application after giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant and recording reasons for such rejection.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 4C of the Entertainments Duty Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "4D. Remission or refund in respect of a car in Go-carting centre, remaining inoperative and unproductive. 1. Where any entertainment duty is payable in respect of Go-carting at the rate of rupees 2,000 per car, per month, on the total number of cars operated in a Go-carting centre and if any car has remained inoperative and unproductive of any entertainment throughout a month or a portion of the month for which such duty is payable, the prescribed officer shall remit or refund the proportionate duty for the period for which the car has so remained inoperative and unproductive: Provided that, no such remission or refund shall be granted unless notice in writing of any car having remained so inoperative and unproductive during a month or part thereof has been given to the prescribed officer either in person and an acknowledgement therefor has been obtained or by post under certificate of posting, and that no such remission or refund shall be admissible for any period previous to the date of acknowledgement or the date of posting under such certificate with details of such inoperativeness or unproductiveness. 2. The burden of proving inoperativeness or unpoductiveness of any car, entitling any person to claim such relief under this section shall be upon such person. 4E. Collection of duty on cable television through public auction or agent. 1. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, it shall be lawful for the State Government to lease by public auction, the collection of entertainment duty on cable television including entertainment duty leviable on Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, for any period not exceeding three years at a time or to appoint an agent for the collection thereof. 2. Where the collection of entertainment duty on cable television (including entertainment duty leviable on Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcating service, has been so leased or where an agent is so appointed, any person employed by the lessee or the agent shall, subject to the conditions of the lease or, as the case may be, the agreement of agency, exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred on and imposed upon the officers and employees of the State Government authorised to collect the entertainment duty on cable television including entertainment duty leviable in Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service under this Act or the rules made thereunder, after they are duly authorised by the prescribed officer, in that behalf. 3. Subject to the directions, if any, issued from time to time, by the State Government, by any general or special order in this behalf, the prescribed officer shall regulate the collection of entertainment duty on cable television including entertainments duty leviable on Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, either through such lessee or agent, in such manner and by such procedure as may be prescribed.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 7 of the Entertainments Duty Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (i), the following clause shall be added, namely :- "(j) collection of entertainment duty on cable television including Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcating service by public auction.". Chapter-III Amendments to the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra In the Schedule I appended to the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958,- (a) in Article 6,- (i) for clauses (1) and (2), the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) The deposit of title deeds or instrument constituting or being evidence of the title to any property whatever (other than a marketable security), where such deposit has been made by way of security for the repayment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan or an existing or future debt; The same duty as is leviable on a mortgage deed under clause (b) of Article 40. (2) The pawn, pledge or hypothecation of movable property, where such pawn, pledge or hypothecation has been made by way of security for the repayment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan or an existing or future debt; The same duty as is leviable on a mortgage deed under clause (b) of Article 40."; (ii) the existing Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I and after the Explanation I as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be added, namely :- "Explanation II. - For the purposes of this Article, the maximum duty of ten lakh rupees shall beleviable for a single instrument involved in a one time transaction. Instrument of other or subsequent transaction in respect of the same property or of renewal clause in the same instrument shall be treated as a fresh instrument;"; (b) in Article 13, in column 2, for the words "Twenty rupees" the words "Five rupees" shall be substituted; (c) in Article 33, in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), in column 2, for the portion beginning with the words "Ten rupees" and ending with the words and figures "maximum of 2,00,000 rupees", the following shall be substituted, namely :- "The same duty as is leviable under clause (b) of Article 40 for the amount of further charge secured by such instrument."; (d) in Article 34, in column 2, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that, if the property is gifted to a family member being the husband, wife, brother or sister of the donor or any lineal ascendant or descendant of the donor, then the amount of duty chargeable shall be at the same rate as specified in this article or at the rate of rupees ten for every rupees five hundred or part thereof on the market value of the property which is the subject-matter of the gift, whichever is less."; (e) for Article 36A, the following shall be substituted, namely :- "36A. Live and Licence Agreement - (a) Where the leave and licence agreement purports to be for more than one term of eleven months but not exceeding three such terms, - (i) where the amount of average annual rent plus the amount of security deposit, or money advanced or to be advanced does not exceed rupees two lakh fifty thousand; Five hundred rupees; (ii) where the amount of average annual rent plus the amount of security deposit or money advanced or to be advanced exceeds rupees two lakh fifty thousand but does not exceed rupees five lakhs; One thousand rupees; (iii) where the amount of average annual rent plus the amount of security deposit or money advanced or to be advanced exceeds rupees five lakhs; Two thousand rupees; (b) where such leave and licence agrrement purports to be for a period exceeding three terms as described in clause (a) with or without renewal clause; The same duty as is leviable on lease, under clause (a), (b) or (c), as the case may be, of Article 36."; (f) in Article 40, - (i) the words "Deposit of title deeds, Pawn or Plegde or Hypothecation (Article 6)," shall be deleted; (ii) in clause (b), in column 2, for the portion beginning with the words "Ten rupees" and ending with the words and figures "maximum of 2,00,000 rupees.", the following shall be substituted, namely :- "Five rupees for every five hundred or part thereof for the amount secured by such deed, subject to the minimum of one hundred rupees and the maximum of ten lakh rupees."; (g) in Article 54, in clause (ii), in column 2, for the portion beginning with the words "Ten rupees" and ending with the words" duty payable under this Article.", the following shall be substituted, namely :- "The same duty as is leviable under clause (b) of Article 40 : Provided that, where on an instrument executed by a person, for whom a person stands surety and executes security bond or a mortgage deed, duty has been paid under Article 6 or 40, then the duty payable shall be one hundred rupees."; (h) for Article 58, the following shall be substituted, namely :- "58. Surrender of Lease including an agreement for surrender of lease - (a) without any consideration. : Two hundred rupees; (b) with consideration. : The same duty as is leviable under clause (a), (b), (c) or (d) of Article 25 on the amount of consideration.". Explanation. - For the purposes of this Article, return of money paid as advance, on security deposit by lessee to the lessor shall not be treated as considereation for the surrender. Chapter-IV Amendments to the Bombay Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1958.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 5 of the Bombay Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1958, - to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be added and shall be deemed to have been added with effect from the 11th May, 2001, namely :- "Provided that, on the sale of Aviation Turbine Fuel sold for use in the Turbo-Prop Aircraft, as specified in clause (iid) of section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, tax shall be levied at the rate of four per cent."; after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be added, namely :- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or (2), there shall be levied a surcharge, in addition to the tax leviable in accordance with sub-section (2), on the sale of motor spirit, other than the Aviation Turbine Fuel sold for use in Turbo-Prop Aircraft, at such rate per litre of motor spirit sold as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify and different rates may be specified for different classes of motor spirits: Provided that, the rate so specified for any class of motor spirit shall not exceed rupees two per litre."; in the marginal note, for the word "tax" the words "tax and surcharge" shall be substituted. Chapter-V Amendments to the Maharashtra Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred to as "the Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act"), clauses (f-a), (f-b) and (g-a) shall be deleted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 3 of the Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "3. Levy of purchase tax. (1) There shall be levied and collected a tax on the purchase of sugarcane being purchased for use in the manufacture or production of sugar in a factory or a unit. (2) The tax under sub-section (1) shall be levied at such rate per kilogram of sugarcane purchased for the purpose aforesaid, as may be specified by the State government, by notification in the Official Gazette, and different rates may be specified for the sugarcane purchased for the manufacture or production of sugar in a factory and of Khandsari sugar in a unit: Provided that, different rates may also be specified for sugarcane purchased for the manufacture or production of Khandsari sugar in units situated in areas, which are declared by the State Government, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, as developed areas or undeveloped areas, so however that the rate or rates so specified shall not exceed four paise per kilogram of sugarcane so purchased. (3) For the purpose of the levy of tax, as provided in sub-section (2), there shall be deducted from the gross weight of sugarcane so purchased, such portion thereof representing the average weight of the top of the sugarcane plant consisting of pith devoid of any sugar content and leaves and other trash usually present in the sugarcane, as may be prescribed; and the tax shall be levied only on the remaining weight of the sugarcane after such deduction has been made. (4) The tax levied under the foregoing sub-sections shall be paid by the occupier of the factory or of the unit, as the case may be, at such intervals and in such manner, as is hereinafter provided.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "the turnover of purchases of" the words "in kilograms the total quantity of" shall be substituted. Chapter-VI Amendments to the Bombay Sales Tax Act Act, 1959.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 7 of the Bombay Sales Tax, 1959 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred to as "the Bombay Sales Tax Act"),- (a) in sub-section (1),- i. in clause (i), after the words "resale of goods", the following shall be inserted, namely :- "other than those covered by entry 6 of Schedule B,"; ii. in clause (ii), after the words "resale of goods", the following shall be inserted, namely :- "other than these covered by entry 6 of Schedule B,"; iii. in clause (iii), after the words "resale of goods", the following shall be inserted, namely:- "other than those covered by entry 6 of Schedule B,"; (b)sub-section (2) shall be deleted; (c) in the marginal note, for the worlds "single point levy" the words "Levy" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 9 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, after clause (d), the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that, where in respect of any period starting on or after the 1st day of May 2002, the tax liability of any dealer,- (a) has exceeded rupees one crore in the immediately previous year, or (b) exceeds rupees one crore in the said period, then the turnover tax shall be levied at the rate of one and half per cent.; from the first day of the said period or, as the case may be, from the day the tax liability exceeds rupees one crore. Explanation.- For the purpose of this section, the expression "tax liability" shall mean the sales tax and purchase tax levied or leviable, without adjustment of any draw-back, set-off, or as the case may be, refund, granted in accordance with the provisions of section 42 or the rules.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 10 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the following section shall be substituted with effect from the 1st May 2002, namely :- "10. Levy of resale tax on goods specified in Schedule 'C'. There shall be levied a resale tax at the rate of 0.5 per cent., on the turnover of resale of gods specified in Schedule 'C' where the goods resold were purchased from a registered dealer, after deducting from such turnover, - i. the turnover of sales of goods covered by any notification issued under section 8A; ii. the turnover of sales of goods against whom the rate of sales tax specified in column (3) of the said Schedule is less than four per cent.; iii. the turnover of sales of goods which are liable for payment of sales tax at a rate less than four per cent; by virtue of the notification issued under section 41 and which goods are specified in Group A of the said notification; iv. the resale of goods covered by entry 37 in Part II of Schedule 'C'; v. the turnover of sales of goods, as may be notified, from time to time, by the State Government in the Official Gazette,- a. against whom the rate of sales tax specified in column (3) of the said Schedule is four per cent., or b. (which are liable for payment of sales tax at the rate of 4 per cent., by virtue of the notification issued under section 41 and which are specified in Group A of the said notification.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 33B of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the following section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st July 1981, namely :- "33C. Amalgamation of companies. 1. When two or more companies are to be amalgamated by the Order of a court or of the Central Government and the oOrder is to take effect from a date anterior to the date of the said Order and any two or more of such companies have sold or purchased any goods to or from each other during the period commencing on the date from which the Order is to take effect and ending on the date of the Order, then notwithstanding anything contained in the said amalgamation Order, such transactions of sale and purchase shall be included in the turnover of sales or, as the case may be, purchases of the respective companies and shall be assessed to tax accordingly, and for the purposes of this Act, the said two or more companies shall be treated as distinct companies and shall be treated as such for the entire period up to the date of the said Order, and the registration certificates of the said companies shall be cancelled, or amended, where necessary, with effect from the date of the said amalgamation Order. 2. Words and expressions used in this section, but not defined, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 17--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 38 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, in sub-section (4), for the fourth proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely :- "Provided also that, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Act or in the rules or in any of the Package Scheme of Incentives or in the Power Generation promotion Policy 1998, the Eligible Unit to whom an Entitlement Certificate has been granted for availing of the incentives by way of deferment of sales tax, purchase tax, additional tax, turnover tax or surcharge, as the case may be, may, in respect of any of the periods during which the said certificate is valid, at its option, prematurely pay in place of the amount of tax deferred by it an amount, equal to the net present value of the deferred tax as may be prescribed, and on making such payments, in the public interest, the deferred tax shall be deemed to have been paid.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 18--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule 'A' appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, in entry 4, in column (3), after Exception (1), the following shall be added, namely :- "Exception (2). - Except when sold under a registered trade mark.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 19--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule 'B' appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, in entry 6, in sub-entry (i), for the words "pig iron and" the words "pig iron, sponge iron and" shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 11th May 2001.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 20--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule 'C' appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - a. in part I, after entry 3, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "3A. Bread in loaf or roll or slices, 4% 4%; toasted or otherwise when sold under a registered trade mark b. in Part II, - i. in entry 32, in column (2), the words "whether medicated or not" shall be deleted; ii. in entry 34, in column (2), the words "whether medicated or otherwise" shall be deleted; iii. in entry 37, - 1. in column (2), clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall be deleted; 2. in columns (3) and (4), for the figure "8%", the figure "9%" shall be substituted. Chapter VII Amendments to the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 21--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 5 of the Maharashtra State Tax on professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred as "the Profession Tax Act"),- a. in sub-section (5), for the words "penalty not exceeding rupees twenty for each day of delay in case of an employer and not exceeding rupees five for each day of delay in case of others" the words "penalty of rupees five for each day of delay in case of such employer and rupees two for each day of delay in case of such person" shall be substituted; b. in sub-section (6), for the words "penalty not exceeding rupees one thousand" the words "penalty equal to three times the tax payable under the Act" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 22--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the Profession Tax Act, in sub-section (3), for the words "a penalty not exceeding rupees five for each day of delay" the words "a penalty of rupees three hundred per return" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 23--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 10 of the Profession Tax Act, for the words "a penalty not exceeding fifty per cent., of the amount of tax due" the words "a penalty equal to ten per cent., of the amount of tax due" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 24--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule I of the Profession Tax Act, for entry 16, the following entry shall be substituted; namely :- "16. Co-operative Societies registered or deemed to be registered under the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960, and engaged in any professions, trades or callings - (i) State level Societies ... Rs. 2,500 per annum; (ii) Co-operative sugar factories and spinning Mills.... Rs. 2,500 per annum; (iii) District level Societies societies not covered by clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above... Rs. 500 per annum; (iv) All other co-operative societies not covered by clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above..... Rs. 500 per annum." Chapter VIII Amendments to the Maharashtra Tax on Luxuries Act, 1987.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 25--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Tax on Luxuries Act, 1987 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred to as "the Luxuries Tax Act"),- a. in clause (g), in sub-clause (1), for the words "per person or per member" the words "per residential accomodation" shall be substituted; b. in clause (b-1), in the Explanation, after clause (b), the following shall be added, namely :- "(c) unmanufactured and manufactured tobacco does not include Jarda sold at a price not exceeding Rs. 200 per kilgram;".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 26--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the Luxuries Tax Act, in sub-section (2), - a. in clauses (a), (b) and (c), for the words "per person", wherever they occur, the words "per residential accomodation" shall be substituted; b. for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely :- "Provided that, where the charges are levied otherwise than on daily basis, then the charges for determining the tax liability under this section shall be computed proportionately for a day per residential accomodation, based on the total period of such accommodation for which the charges are made.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 27--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3B of the Luxuries Tax Act, in sub-section (2), in the TABLE, entry 3 shall be deleted. Chapter-IX Amendments to the Maharashtra Sales Tax on the transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of Works Contracts (Re-enacted) Act, 1989.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 28--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6A of the Maharashtra Sales Tax on the Transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of Works Contracts (Re-enacted) Act, 1989 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred as "the Works Contracts Act"),- a. for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st April 2001, namely :- "(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) of sub-section (1) but subject to the provision of sub-section (8), the amount payable by way of composition in respect of any type of contracts awarded,- i. on or after the 1st April 2000 till the 31st March 2001 shall be equal to three per cent., of the total contract value; and ii. on or after the 1st April, 2001, shall be equal to four per cent., of the total contract value."; (b) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st April 2001, namely :- "(8) Nothing in this section shall apply to any contract awarded on or after the 1st April 2001, involving transfer of property in ready-mix-concrete excluding ready-mix-concrete on which tax leviable under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, has been paid, whether as goods or in some other form in the execution of works contract: Provided that, in respect of contract or sub-contract which is being executed by a dealer who is a manufacturer-cum-works contractor of ready-mix-concrete, and who himself desires to pay amount of tax payable on ready-mix-concrete under the provisions of this Act, may, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2) of section 5A, in lieu of such amount of tax payable, pay lumpsum tax by way of composition equal to fifteen per cent., of the total contract value of the works contract after deducting from such value the turnover of purchases of corresponding goods from- i. a dealer registered under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, and whose registration certificate is in force on the date of such purchases; or ii. a person not registered under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, but the tax under the said Act has been paid on the goods so purchased, and if he makes such payment, all the other provisions of this section shall apply accordingly."
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 29--> State(s): Maharashtra In the Schedule appended to the Works Contracts Act, in entry 2, for the word "Floor" the words "Ready-mix-concrete, Floor" shall be substituted. Statement of objects and reasons With a view to give effect to the proposals for levy of taxes under the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958, the Bombay Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1958, the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, the Maharashtra Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962, the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975, the Maharashtra Tax on Luxuries Act, 1987 and the Maharashtra Sales Tax on Transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of Works Contracts (Re-enacted) Act, 1989, to which reference has been made in the Budget Speech by the Hon'ble Finance Minister, it is proposed to amend these Acts. Certain other provisions, which are found necessary for effective implementation of these tax laws are also required to be made. 2. Some of the important provisions proposed to be made are explained broadly as follows :- a. The Bombay Entertainment duty Act, 1923, is being amended to, - i. levy entertainment duty on the Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, sport of Go-carting, tourist buses with video facility; ii. revise the rate of entertainment duty leviable on Discotheques and include sponsorship amount of fashion shows and other events in the tax base; and ii. make provisions for collection of entertainment duty on cable television including Direct to Home Broadcasting Service, by giving the right of collection, by public auction, to the lessee or agent, with a view to reduce expenditure on recovery of the duty and to increase the revenue. b. The Bombay Stamp Act, 1958, is being amended to provide for a uniform rate of stamp duty in respect of the instruments relating to mortgage; and to revise the existing rates of stamp duty in respect of the leave and licence documents. c. The Bombay Sales of Motor Ppirit Taxation Act, 1958, is being amended to reduce the tax on sale of Aviation Turbine Fuel for use in the Turbo-Prop Aircraft to 4 per cent., as a consequential amendment in view of the amendment carried out to the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, and to provide for levy of surcharge on the motor spirits with reference to the volume of the motor spirit sold. d. The Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, is being amended,- i. to increase the rate of resale tax from 0.2 per cent., to 0.5 per cent.; ii. to introduce the multi point tax on Iron and Steel; iii. to increase the rate of turnover tax from 1 per cent., to 1.5 per cent., in respect of dealers whose annual tax liability is more than Rs. 1 crore; iv. to levy tax on Branded Bread sold under a registered trade mark; v. to increase the rate of tax on medicines from 8 per cent., to 9 per cent., and also to remove the levy of resale tax on medicines; vi. to treat the merged companies as separate entities till the date of High Court Order, for the purpose of levy and collection of sales tax; vii. to provide for an option to dealers holding Certificate of Entitlement to pay the deferred tax in the current period at discounted net present value. e. The Maharashtra Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962, is being amended to replace the ad-valorem duty on purchase of sugarcane by a specific duty. f. The Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975, is being amended, - i. to remove the discretionary powers of the Assessing Officers, in respect of levy of penalty and to provide for specific amount of penalty; and ii. to bring the Co-operative Societies in tax net. g. The Maharashtra Tax on Luxuries Tax Act, 1987, is being amended,- i. to exempt Luxury Tax on Tobacco costing less than Rs. 200 per Kilogram; ii. to provide for levy of tax on the per room per day basis. h. The Maharashtra Sales Tax on Transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of Works Contracts (Re-enacted) Act, 1989, is being amended,- i. to clarify that the composition rates introduced in the last year shall apply only to the contracts entered into after the 1st April 2001; ii. to provide for levy of tax at the rate of twenty seven per cent., on goods involved in the transfer of property in respect of works contracts involving ready-mix-concrete; iii. to provide an option to pay by way of composition and amount in lieu of tax in respect of works contacts involving transfer of property in ready-mix-concrete. 3. Hence this Bill. Mumbai, Jayant Patil, Dated 2nd April 2002. Minister for Finance. Memorandum Regarding Delegated Legislation The Bill involves the following proposals for delegation of legislative power, namely :- Clause 1 (2)(C).- Under this clause, power is taken to the State Government to bring into force the provisions of section 13 of the Act on such date, as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Clause 6.- Under this clause, which seeks to insert a new section 4E in the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, power is taken to the State Government to prescribe the manner and procedure, to be followed by the prescribed officer, for regulating the collection of entertainments duty on cable television (including entertainments duty leviable on Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service), either through lessee or agent. Clause 9. - Under this clause, which seeks to add sub-section (3) in section 5 of the Bombay Sales of Motor Spirit Taxation Act, 1958, power is taken to the State Government to specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, the rate of surcharge on the sale of motor spirit per litre, and to specify different rates for different classes of motor spirit, which shall not exceed rupees two per litre. Clause 11.- Under this clause, which seeks to substitute section 3 of the Maharashta Purchase Tax on Sugarcane Act, 1962, power is taken to the State Government,- a. under sub-section (2), to specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, the rate of tax per kilogram of sugarcane purchased for use in the manufacture or production of sugar in a factory or an unit, as also to specify different rates for the sugarcane purchased for the manufacture or production of sugar in a factory and of Khandsari sugar in a unit; b. under the proviso to sub-section (2), to declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, the areas as a developed and under developed areas in which different rates may be specified for the sugarcane purchased for the manufacture or production of Khandsari sugar in a unit; c. under sub-section (3), to prescribe the top of the sugarcane plant consisting of pith devoid of sugar content and leaves and other trash usually present in the sugarcane, which shall be deducted from the gross weight of sugarcane while levying the tax under sub-section (2) thereof. Clause 15.- Under this clause, which seeks to substitute section 10 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, power is taken, under clause (v), to the State Government to notify, in the Official Gazette, the turnover of sales of goods on which, - i. the rate of sales tax is 4 per cent., in column (3) of the Schedule C; or ii. are liable for payment of sales tax at rate of 4 per cent., by virtue of notification issued under section 41 of the Act and specified in Group A of the said notification, to be deducted from turnover of resale of goods, for levy of resale tax under section 10. Clause 17. - Under this clause, which seeks to substitute fourth proviso in sub-section (4) of section 38 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, power is taken to the State Government to prescribe the net present value of the deferred tax, which may be paid by the Eligible Unit, to whom a Certificate of Entitlement has been granted to avail of the incentive by way of deferrement of tax, in lieu of the deferred tax; 2. The above-mentioned proposals for delegation of legislative power are of a normal character. 
