Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electircity Act, 1963. WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra had promulgated the Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 on the 5th April 2004; AND WHEREAS upon the re-assembly of the State Legislature on the 24th May 2004, the said Ordinance was laid before both Houses of the State Legislature and the Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2004 (L. A. Bill No. X of 2004), for replacing the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature was also introduced in the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly on the 28th May 2004, however, the said Bill could not be passed as the said session of the State Legislature was prorogued on the 11th June 2004 ; AND WHEREAS as proided by article 213(2)(a) of the Constitution of India, the said Ordinance would ha-e ceased to operate on the expiration of six weeks from the date of re-assembly of the State Legislature, that is, on the 4th July 2004 ; AND WHEREAS it was considered expedient to continue the operation of the proisions of the said Ordinance ; AND WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session and the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action to continue the operation of the provisions of the said Ordinance, for the purposes hereinafter appearing ; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment and Continuance) Ordinance, 2004, on the 3rd July 2004 ; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature with certain modifications ; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004. (2) It shall be deemed to ha-e come into force on the 5th April 2004.
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 2 of Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity Act, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act"), the following section shall be substituted, namely :- " 2. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (a) " Board " means the State Electricity Board constituted under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and functioning as such at the commencement of the Electricity Act; (b) " Electricity Act" means the Electricity Act, 2003 ; (c) " power utility " shall include the Board, a generating company, a licensee and a person generating electricity primarily for his own use and for the use of his associates ; (d) " prescribed " means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (e) " tax " means a tax imposed under this Act; (f) words and expressions used but not defined herein shall ha-e their respective meanings as assigned to them under the Electricity Act.".
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the principal Act,- (a) for the words " on every unit of energy sold by a generating licensee. " the words " in respect of all its sales of electricity to a consumer by a power utility." shall be substituted ; (6) the following pro is shall be added, namly :- " Pro-ided that, no tax shall be le-ied and collected or paid on the electricity sold by one power utility to another power utility. ".
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 4 of the principal Act, for the words " generating licensee " the words " power utility " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- " 5.Transfer of proceeds of tax to State Electricity fund etc.-(1) The proceeds of the tax (together with any interest payable under section 9) recovered under this Act, shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State, and under appropriation duly made by law in this behalf,- (a) an amount of tax equivalent to four paise per unit paid by power utility to the State Government in respect of sale of electricity to commercial and industrial consumers shall be transferred to the Maharashtra Energy Development Agency established under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or its successor, for executing schemes of generation of renewable and non-conventioned sources of energy; and (b) the remaining amount be entered in, and transferred to a separate fund called the State Electricity Fund. (2) Any amount transferred to the Maharashtra Energy Development Agency and the State Electricity Fund under sub-section (2) shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State.".
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 5A of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- " 5A.Purposes for which fund may be expended.-The Fund may be expended for executing schemes for development and improvement of power supply in the State and for operating rural electrification schemes therein, and in furtherance of this purpose, the State Government shall, from and out of the Fund, give subsidies or loans or ways and means advances to power utility and the Board.".
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the principal Act, for the words " generating licensee " the words " power utility " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words " to any class of licensees or consumers " the words " by any class of power utility or to consumers " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 10 of the principal Act, for the words " generating licensee " the words " power utility " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2004_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Tax on Sale of Electricity (Amendment and Continuance) Ordinance, 2004, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued), under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to ha-e been done, taken or issued under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
