Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to give effect to the financial proposals of the State Government for the financial year 1999-2000. WHEREAS it is expedient to give effect to the financial proposals of the State Government for the financial year 1999-2000; It is hereby enacted in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Maharashtra Tax Laws (levy and Amendment) Act, 1999.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter, in this chapter, referred to as "the Bombay Sales Tax Act"), - (a) in clause (26), - (i) for the figures and letter "8A and 12" the figures and letter "8A, 9 and 12", shall be substituted; (ii) the following Explanation shall be added, namely :- "Explanation. - For the purpose of clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sections 8 and 9, a sale of purchased goods other than that declared goods, shall not be deemed to be a resale - (i) if the seller holds a trade mark or a patent in respect of the goods, or if the seller holds a patent in respect of the method or process of manufacturing the goods sold; or (ii) if the seller is entitled to use a trade mark or a patent in respect of the goods sold, or if the seller is entitled to use a patent in respect of the method or process of manufacturing the goods sold.". (b) in clause (32), for the words "or purchase tax" the words "purchase tax, turnover tax or surcharge", shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 8 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) in sub-section (1), in clause (ii), after the words "resales of goods" the following shall be inserted, namely :- ", except those covered by entry 22 of Part II of Schedule C,"; (b) in the marginal note, for the words "Levy of value added" the words "single point levy of" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 8C of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "9. Levy of turnover tax on goods specified in Schedule C. - There shall be levied a turnover tax on the turnover of sales of goods specified in Schedule "C" at the rate of one per cent but after deducting from such turnover, - (a) resales of goods on the purchase of which the dealer is liable to pay purchase tax under section 14; (b) resales of goods purchased by the dealer from a registered dealer, otherwise than on a declaration furnished under section 11 or 12, if the requirements of section 12A are satisfied; (c) resales of goods purchased by the dealer from a dealer liable to pay tax under section 4, if a certificate as provided in sub-section (2) of section 12A is furnished; and (d) sales or resales of goods, in respect of which a notification under section 8A is issued, to a registered dealer furnishing a declaration under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 8A.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 10A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) for the figures and word "7 and 8", the figures and word "7, 8 and 9" shall be substituted; (b) in the marginal note, for the figures and word "7 and 8", the figures and word "7, 8 and 9", shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 12A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) in sub-section (1), for the figures and word "7 and 8", the figures and word "7, 8 and 9" shall be substituted; (b) in sub-section (2), for the figures and word "7 and 8", the figures and word "7, 8 and 9", shall be substituted; (c) for sub-sections (3), (3A) and (4) the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 8 and 9, no deduction from the turnover of sales as provided in that section shall be allowed to any dealer in respect of the supply, by way of or as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever of goods, being food or any other article for human consumption or any non-alcoholic drink, covered by entry 15, in Part II of Schedule 'C', where such supply is made or given for cash, deferred payment or other valuable considerations.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 15 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "15-IA. Levy of surcharge - (1) Where the aggregate of taxes payable by a dealer has exceeded rupees one lakh in any year, the tax levied on sales and purchases made by him at the rates of sales tax or purchase tax, as the case may be, shall be increased by the levy of surcharge at the rate of ten per cent of the tax so levied. Such surcharge shall be paid by the dealer in addition to the tax levied and payable by him under the other provisions of this Act : Provided that, in calculating the surcharge payable by the dealer, the tax payable under the other provisions of this Act in respect of sales or purchases of declared goods shall not be taken into consideration. (2) The surcharge shall be paid by the dealer before furnishing the return for the period in which the aggregate of the taxes payable by the dealer as computed from the commencement of the year, first exceeds rupees one lakh. The tax so payable shall be for the period from the commencement of the year, to the end of the period covered by such return and the dealer shall continue to be liable to pay the surcharge for that year for all the subsequent periods till the end of that year. Explanation . - For the purpose of this section 'the aggregate of taxes payable" means the aggregate of the followings :- (a) in the case of sales or purchases of goods exempted from the payment of any tax under section 41, the tax paid or payable; (b) in any other case, the sales tax and purchase tax levied or leviable, without adjustment of any draw-back, set-off, or as the case may be, refund granted in accordance with the provisions of section 42 or the rules; and (c) the taxes payable under Central Sales Tax Act, 1956.".
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 17-A of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) after the word and figure "section 8" the words, brackets, letters and figures "and in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 9" shall be inserted; (b) in the marginal note, for the word and figure "section 8" the words and figures "sections 8 and 9" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 19 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, in sub-section (6), in the proviso, for the words and figures "section 7 or 8" the words and figures "section 7, 8 or 9", shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule "A" appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) in entry 3, - (i) in sub-entry (1), in column (2), the words "but excluding those almanacs and Panchangs which are capable of being used as display calendars" shall be deleted and shall be deemed to have been deleted with effect from the 1st May, 1998; (ii) in sub-entry (2), in column (2), the words "excluding those capable of being used as display calendars" shall be deleted and shall be deemed to have been deleted with effect from the 1st May, 1998; (b) in entry 25A, in sub-entry (1), in column (2), after the words "Imitation jewellery" the words "when sold at a price not exceeding rupees fifty per piece" shall be inserted; (c) entry 46 shall be deleted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule "C" appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, - (a) In Part I, - (i) after entry 17, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "17A. Woollen blankets 4% 4%"; (ii) entry 21 shall be deleted; (b) in Part II, - (i) for entry 83, the following entry shall be substituted, namely :- "83. Chemicals other than those covered 8% 8%"; elsewhere. (ii) after entry 99, the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "99A. Imitation jewellery other than that covered 4% 4%". by entry 25A of Schedule A.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 8 of the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975 (hereinafter, in this chapter, referred to as "the Profession Tax Act"), in sub-section (3), - (i) in clause (a), for the figures "1500" the figures and words "1500, 2000 or as the case may be, 2400" shall be substituted; (ii) in clause (b), for the figures "90 " the figures "120" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Tax Laws (Levy and Amendment) Act, 1999_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra For Schedule I appended to the Profession Tax Act, the following Schedule I shall be substituted, and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 1st April, 1999 namely :- SCHEDULE 
