Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983. And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983 (Mah. XLI of 1983), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 (Mah. Ord. X of 2013), on the 1st July, 2013 ; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013.1 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st July, 2013. Received the assent of the Governor on 1st August, 2013 and was published in the Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extra-ordinary, Part VIII, dated 1st August, 2013.
Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In the Schedule to the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983 (Mah. XLI of 1983 (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act"), in entry 3, in column (2), for the words "The Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth." the words "The Vasantrao Naik Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth." shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra On commencement of this Act, any reference to "The Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth" in any other enactment, or rules, regulations, by-laws, notifications or orders issued under any enactment or in any instrument, document or proceedings under its original name shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be deemed and construed to be the reference to "The Vasantrao Naik Marathwada Krishi Vidyapeeth".
Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Act, 2013_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) (Amendment) Ordinance, 2013 (Mah. Ord. X of 2013), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or, as the case may be, issued under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
