Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to provide for the establishment and incorporation of the Animal and Fishery Sciences University in the State of Maharashtra and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. WHEREAS it is expedient to establish and incorporate a separate University exclusively for providing facilities for the study of Animal and Fishery Sciences and for conduct of research in, and extension and development of these Sciences and for co-ordination thereof and to provide for matters connected therewith or supplemental or incidental thereto; it is hereby enacted in the Forty-ninth year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Maharashtra. (3) This section shall come into force at once. The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that all or any of the remaining provisions of this Act shall come in to force on such dates as may be specified therein.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- (1) "animal" includes birds, fish, wildlife and reptiles; (2) "appointed day" means the date appointed under sub-section (3) of section 1; (3) "constituent college" means a College, specified in the First Schedule and is under the direct management of University; (4) "Dairy technology" means the science of processing of milk or manufacturing of milk products and marketing thereof; (5) "Department" means a department, established and designated as such by the Statute with reference to a subject or group of subjects; (6) "extension education" means the educational activities concerned with the training of livestock farmers, home makers and other groups concerned with animal health or welfare or improved animal husbandry practices and various phases of scientific technology related to animal demonstration to carry the new technology and innovation to livestock farms and farm homes through the Government Departments of Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries and the like including various continuing education programmes; (7) "Fishery Sciences" means aquaculture, pisciculture, marine biology fish biology, study of fish diseases or management of technology relating to development of under water resources; (8) "Krishi" Vidyapiths" means the Krishi Vidhyapiths constituted under the Maharashtra Agriculture Universities (Krishi Vidyapiths) Act, 1983; (9) "Other Backward Class" means such classes or parts of or groups within such classes as are declared, from time to time by the State Government to be the other Backward Classes and Vimukta Jatis and Nomadic Tribes; (10) "prescribed" means prescribed by Statutes made under this Act; (11) "recognised institution" means an institution for research or specialised studies other than a constitutent college, recognised or deemed to be recognized as such by the University and includes any institution for imparting training and education in the sciences of Veterinary, Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries and in service Diploma training, Livestock Supervisors training or any other such training; which is under the direct management of the University or which is recognised or deemed to be recognized as such by the University; (12) "Schedule" means the Schedule to this Act; (13) "Scheduled Castes" means such castes, races or tribes or part of or groups within, such castes, races or tribes as are deemed to be Scheduled Caste in relation to the State of Maharashtra under article 341 of the Constitution of India, and for the purposes of this Act includes Nav-Buddhas; (14) "Scheduled Tribes" means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within, such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Maharashtra under Article 342 of the Constitution of India residing in any part of the State of Maharashtra; (15) "statutes" and "Regulations" means, respectively the Statutes and the Regulations of the University made or deemed to be made under this Act; (16) "University" means the University constituted under this Act; (17) "Animal and Fishery Sciences" means,- (a) the sciences and technology of dignosis, treatment (surgery and medicine) and control of daseises of damestica animals and includes, basic veterinary sciences and applied veterinary sciences; or (b) Animal husbandry, breeding, dairying, fisheries, marine biology, basic and applied sciences relating to livestock, dairy and fisheries, management technology including bio-technology and practices relating thereto.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Chancellor, the Pro-Chancellor, the first Vice-Chancellor and the First Members of the Executive Council and the Academic Council of the University and all persons, who may hereafter becomes such executives, officers and members so long as they continue to hold office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate, by the name of the Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University, and such body corporate shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and may sue and be sued by that name. (2) The University shall be competent to acquire and hold property, both moveable and immoveable to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any moveable or immoveable property which may vest in or be acquired by it for the purposes of the University, and to contract and to do all other things necessary for the purpose of this Act. (3) The headquarter of the University shall be located at such places, as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the State Government may, at any time, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the University shall have its headquarter at the place other than that appointed under sub-section (3).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The University shall have the following objects, namely:- (i) to impart and co-ordinate education in Animal and Fishery Sciences including the post graduate education; (ii) to further advancement of learning and prosecution of research in Animal Sciences and Fishery Sciences with special emphasis on need-based research relevant to filed problems of the State and aspirations of the farmers; (iii) to impart lower education in the field of Veterinary, Animal and Fishery Sciences; (iv) to organise and impart continued education, refresher's training courses and summer institutes, hold technical symposiums, seminars and workshops to bring about professional development and skill, improvement of the technical personnel in the field; (v) to hold examinations and confer such Degrees, Diplomas, Certificates and other academic distinctions as deemed fit; (vi) to undertake lab to land transfer or technology, to effectively deliver benefits of research, to the rural masses, industries and other related beneficiaries in the sector in the State through appropriate extension agencies; (vii) to integrate teaching research and extension training with an ultimate aim to promote productivity in Animal Husbandry, Dairy, Poultry and Fishery Sectors; (viii) to promote marine and inland fisheries, to preserve and upgrade wild life and zoo animals in the State; (ix) to develop brackish water and fresh water acquaculture; (x) to develop marketing infrastructure; (xi) to formulate welfare schemes for fishermen and livestock farmers; (xii) to develop by-products technology in livestock, fisheries and dairy; (xiii) to liaise and establish vital linkages with the concerned Departments of Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries Development of the State and Union and national and international research institutes specialised in the field of Animal and Fishery Sciences with a view to keep abreast of the latest technology. (2) The University shall endeavour to promote the use of Marathi as the medium of instruction and examination: Provided that, English may be the medium of instruction and examination in such subjects, and for such period or periods, as may from time to time, be prescribed.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra The University shall be open to all persons, who or whose parents have resided in the State of Maharashtra for not less than three years, during the period of ten years immediately preceding the date on which admission is sought and no person shall be excluded from admission to any degree, diploma, certificate or other academic distinction or course of study on the ground only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth or political or other opinion: Provided that, the University may, subject to the previous sanction of the State Government, reserve certain seats for the purpose of admission are students, in any college or institution maintained or controlled by the University for the following classes of persons, namely:- (i) the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes; (ii) the other Backward Classes; (iii) persons who and whose parents have not resided in the State at least for three years during the period of ten years immediately preceding the date on which admission is sought; (iv) children of freedom fighters; (v) affected persons as defined in the Maharashtra Projects Affected Persons Rehabilitation Act, 19861 and their children; (vi) children of defence personnel: Provided further that, the University may, subject to like sanction also grant to the persons falling under all or any of the categories (i), (ii), (iv) and (v) in the last preceding proviso, exemptions from payment of such fees or boarding, lodging or other charges, or from all fees and charges, or provide for such special scholarships as it may deem fit: Provided also that, nothing in this section shall require the University to admt to any course of study any person who does not meet the prescribed academic qualifications or other qualifications or academic standards for admission to such course or to retain on the rolls of the University persons whose academic records are below the minimum standards required for the award of a degree or whose personal conduct is such as to be prejudicial to the purposes of the University or to the rights and privileges of other students and academic staff members: Provided also that, nothing in this section shall require the University to admit to any course of study, students larger in number than, or with academic or other qualification lower than, those prescribed. See the Maharashtra Projects Affected Persons Rehabilitation Act, 1999 (Mah XI of 2001).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of the this Act, the University shall have the following powers and functions, namely:- (i) to provide for instructions in Animal and Fisheries Sciences and in such other branches of learning as the University may deem fit; (ii) to make provisions for conduct of research and dissemination of the findings of research and technical information, through extension education programmes; (iii) to institute courses of study and to hold examinations for and to confer degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions on persons who have,- (a) pursued a course of study as prescribed; or (b) carried out research in the University or in an institution recognized in this behalf, by the University; (iv) to institute degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions; (v) to confer honorary degrees and other distinctions as may be prescribed; (vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, farmers and other persons not enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as may be prescribed; (vii) to establish and maintain laboratories, libraries, research stations, institutions, demonstration centres, museums and aquariums for teaching, research and extension education and such other facilities as may be deemed appropriate for university students and employees; (viii) to institute and maintain colleges, centres, workshop wings and other institutions relating to Animal and Fishery Sciences and allied sciences and hostels thereof; (ix) to supervise and control the residence, conduct and discipline of the student of the University and to make arrangement for promoting their health and welfare; (x) to institute teaching, research and extension education posts required by the University and to appoint persons to such posts; (xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other post and to appoint persons to such posts; (xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships and prizes in accordance with the Statutes; (xiii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may be prescribed; (xiv) to co-operate with other Universities and Government departments in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine; (xv) to make provision for consumers co-operative societies to serve the needs of students and staff of the University and of the colleges and institutions under its controls; (xvi) to establish diagnostic centres for fish and livestock; (xvii) to do all such acts and things, whether incidental to the powers and functions or not, as may be requisite in order to further the objects of the university.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra It shall be the duty of the University to carry out or undertake as the Pro- Chancellor under intimation to the Chancellor may, from time to time, direct within such period as may be specified in the direction, production of such breeds of animals and foundation stock of animals at its research forms as have been provided in the Livestock Breeding Policy and the Fisheries Breeding Policy of the State, to carry out survey for estimating cost of production of such breeds and the productivity therefrom, and such other schemes and activities such as the fodder development schemes and the fresh water prawn seeds and other variety of fish seed, their productivity cost to help and support the Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries Programme of Government.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra The State Government may, if in its opinion, the University has failed to utilize lands and farms vested in it, properly in accordance with the directions issued under section 7, by notice, call upon the University to show cause, within a specified period, why the lands or farms vested in it as specified in the notice should not be resumed by the State Government. After considering the cause, if any, shown by the University, the State Government may, by order, resume all or any of the land or farms specified in the notice from the University and carry out or undertake its development programmes or activities thereon, whether by itself or through any agency specified by it in this behalf.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in any Act relating to the establishment of any non-agricultural or Krishi Vidyapeeths, in the State, no such University shall be competent to award degrees, diplomas, certificates or other academic distinctions in Animal Sciences and Fisheries Sciences.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra The University may, if in its opinion, any college, research institution, schools, centre, activity or other institutions transferred to and vesting in it is surplus to its requirements, it may request the State Government to take over the same. Upon such request, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that such institution shall, from, such date and subject to such terms and conditions (including those relating to the employees serving therein or thereunder) as may be specified in the notification, cease to vest in the University and passed to, and be maintained by, the State Government; and thereupon all the properties and assets and liabilities of the University in relation to such institution shall stand transferred to, and vest in the State Government. However, the conditions of service of the employees, if any, transferred to the State Government alongwith the institution shall not be less favourable than those applicable to them immediately before such transfer.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Chancellor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons or body of persons, as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, farms, libraries, museum, workshops and equipment of any college, institution or hostel maintained, administered or recognised by the University and of the teaching and other works conducted by or on behalf of the University or under its auspices of, and of the conduct of examinations or other functions of the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner regarding any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall, in every case, give due notice to the University of his intention to cause an inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and to be heard at the inspection or inquiry. (3) After an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made, the Chancellor may address the Vice-Chancellor on the result of such inspection or inquiry and the Vice-Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive Council the views of the Chancellor and call upon the Executive Council to communicate to the Chancellor through him its opinion thereon within such time as may have been specified by the Chancellor. If the Executive Council communicates its opinion within the specified time limit, after taking into consideration that opinion or where the Executive Council fails to communicate its opinion in time, after the specified time limit is over, the Chancellor may proceed and advise the Executive Council upon the action to be taken by it, and fix a time limit for taking such action. (4) The Executive Council shall, within the time limit so fixed, report to the Chancellor through the Vice-Chancellor the action which has been taken or is proposed to be taken on the advice tendered by him. (5) The Chancellor may, where action has not been taken by the Executive Council to his satisfaction within the time the limit fixed, and after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Executive Council, issue such directions, as the Chancellor may think fit, and the Executive Council and other authority concerned shall comply with such directions. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding sub-sections, if at any time the Chancellor is of the opinion that in any matter the affairs of the University are not managed in furtherance of the objects of the University or in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Regulations or that special measures are desirable to maintain the standards of University teaching, examinations, research, extension education, administration or finances, the Chancellor may indicate to the Executive Council through the Vice-Chancellor any matter in regard to which he desires an explanation and call upon the Executive Council to offer such explanation within such time as may be specified by him. If the Executive Council fails to offer any explanation within the time specified or offers an explanation which in the opinion of the Chancellor, is not satisfactory, the Chancellor may issue such directions as appear to him to be necessary, and the Executive Council and any other authority concerned shall comply with such directions. (7) The Executive Council shall furnish such information relating to the administration and finances of the University as the Chancellor may, from time to time, require. (8) The Executive Council shall furnish to the State Government such returns or other information with respect to the property or activities of the University as the State Government may, from time to time, require.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra The Personnel of the University shall be classified under one of the following categories - (a) Executives, Academic Officers and other Officers, who have the administrative authority and who are designated as such by or under this Act. (b) Academic staff members who have duties of an academic nature, such as teaching, research and extension education and who hold professors, rank of Professor, Associate Professor, Research Officer, Assistant Professors, Research Assistant, Lecturer or Demonstrator or the like, as may be designated by or under this Act. (c) Ministerial staff members who are in the service of the University and not included in the categories (a) and (b) above.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra The following shall be the Executives, Academic Officers, other Officers, and officers declared by Statutes of the University, namely:- (a) Executives,- (i) The Chancellor; (ii) The Pro-Chancellor; (iii) The Vice-Chancellor. (b) Academic Officers,- (i) The Director of the University; (ii) The Deans of Faculties; (iii) The Associate Deans. (c) Other Officers,- (i) The Registrar; (ii) The Comptroller; (iii) The Librarian. (d) Officers declared by Statutes - Such other persons as may be declared by the Statutes to be the Academic Officers or other Officers of the University; Provided that, the same person may be appointed to more than one post in the category of Academic officers or other officers or Officers declared by Statutes: Provided further that, in the category of Academic Officer or other Officers or Officers declared by Statutes, any of the posts may be filled or may not be filled at any time.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Governor of Maharashtra shall be the Chancellor of the University. (2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University and shall, when present, preside at any convocation of the University. (3) The Chancellor may call for his information any papers relating to the administration of the affairs of the University and such requisition shall be complied with by the University. (4) Every proposal to confer any honorary degree shall be subject to confirmation by the Chancellor. (5) The Chancellor may, by order in writing, annul any proceeding of any officer or authority of the University, which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or the Regulations, or which is prejudicial to the interest of the University: Provided that, before making any such order, he shall call upon the officer or authority to show cause why such an order should not be made, and if any cause is shown within the time specified by him in this behalf, he shall consider the same. (6) The Chancellor shall exercise such powers and perform such other duties as are laid down by this Act.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Minister for Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries, Maharashtra State, shall be the Pro-Chancellor of the University and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside over the convocation of the University. (2) The Pro-Chancellor may call for his information any papers relating to the administration of the affairs of the University and such requisition shall be complied with by the University. (3) The annual programme of the work of the University shall be referred to the Pro-Chancellor for his information and any suggestion made by him shall be considered by the Executive Council. (4) He shall also exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Chancellor as the Chancellor may, by order in writing, delegate to him and such delegation may be subject to such restrictions and conditions as may be specified in such order.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Chancellor in the manner stated hereunder- (a) There shall be a Committee consisting of the following members to recommend suitable names to the Chancellor for appointment of the Vice-Chancellor, namely:- (i) a member nominated by the Chancellor, who shall be a retired Judge of the Supreme Court or retired Chief Justice of a High Court or an eminent scientist of national repute in the field of Animal Husbandry or Dairy Technology or Fisheries or a recipient of Padma Award in the field of Agriculture or related field; (ii) a member nominated jointly by the Executive Council and the Academic Council of the University in the manner specified by the State Government by an order published in the Official Gazette, who shall be the Director or Head of a National Institute or Organisation of repute in the area of a Veterinary Science or Dairy Technology or Fishery Science such as Indian Veterinary Research Institute (IVRI), Izzatnagar, National Dairy Research Institute (NDRI), Karnal or Central Institute of Fisheries Education (CIFE), Mumbai; (iii) the Secretary (ADF), in the Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Dairy Development and Fisheries Department of the Government of Maharashtra or any officer not below the rank of the Secretary to the Government, nominated by the Government; (b) The member nominated by the Chancellor shall be the Chairman of the Committee; (c) The members nominated shall be the persons not connected with the University or any college or any recognised institution of the University; (d) No meeting of the Committee shall be held unless all the three members of the Committee are present.] 2 [(2) The process of preparing a panel shall begin at least three months before the probable date of occurrence of the vacancy of the Vice-Chancellor and shall be completed within the time limit fixed by the Chancellor. The Chancellor, however, may extend such time limit if in the exigency of the circumstances, it is necessary so to do, so however, that the period so extended shall not exceed three months in the aggregate. (2A) The Committee shall recommend a panel of not less than five suitable persons for the consideration of the Chancellor for being appointed as the Vice-Chancellor. The names so recommended shall be in alphabetical order without any preferenc being indicated. The report shall be accompanied by a detailed write-up on suitability of each person included in the panel. (2B) The Chancellor may select one of the said persons from such panel for the post of the Vice-Chancellor and appoint the person to such post. If the Chancellor does not approve any of the person in the panel or if the person selected by the Chancellor for the post of Vice-Chancellor is not willing to accept the office of the Vice-Chancellor, the Chancellor may call for a fresh panel, either from the same Committee or after constitution of a new Committee for the purpose, from such new Committee. (2C) A person recommended by the Committee for the appointment as a Vice- Chancellor shall, - (a) be an eminent academician or an administrator of high calibre; (b) be able to provide leadership by his own example; (c) be able to provide vision and have ability to translate the same into reality in the interest of students and society; and (d) possess such educational qualifications and experience as may be specified by the State Government by an order published in the Official Gazette, in consultation with the Chancellor. (2D) The eligibility conditions and the process for recommendation of names for appointment as a Vice-Chancellor shall be given wide publicity to ensure the recommendation of most suitable candidates.] (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the whole-time salaried officer of the university. 3 [(4) The Chancellor may appoint a person for the post of Vice-Chancellor, from amongst the persons recommended by above-mentioned Committee. The Vice-Chancellor so appointed shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for re-appointment.] (5) The Vice-Chancellor may, after giving three months! notice, resign his office by tendering his resignation in writing to the Chancellor. The resignation shall take effect on its-acceptance by the Chancellor. (6) (a) The Chancellor may, on the recommendation of the Pro-Chancellor on the ground that the Vice-Chancellor has neglected or without reasonable excuse has failed to carry out his responsibility of implementing the directions issued by the Pro-Chancellor under section 7, by order, remove the Vice-Chancellor at any time from office. (b) If the Vice-Chancellor, in the opinion of the Chancellor, omits or refuses to carry out the provisions of this Act, or abuses the powers vested in him and if it appears to the Chancellor that, the continuance of the Vice-Chancellor in office is detrimental to the interests of the University, the Chancellor may, after consultation with the Executive Council, by order, remove the Vice-Chancellor at any time from office. (c) No order under clause (a) or (b) shall be made, unless the Vice- Chancellor has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the action proposed to be taken against him; (7) (a) The Vice-Chancellor shall draw such emoluments as the State Government may, from time to time, whether prospectively or respectively determine; (b) The other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor shall be such as may be determined by the Statutes and accepted by the Vice-Chancellor at the time of his appointment: Provided that, the emoluments and other conditions of service shall not be varied to the disadvantage of the Vice-Chancellor during his tenure as Vice-Chancellor. (8) In the event of the occurrence of vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor, by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the Chancellor may nominate the Director or a Dean of the University or any other person to act as Vice-Chancellor, until a regular appointment of Vice-Chancellor is made in accordance with sub-section (1) of this section: Provided that, the period of such interim arrangement 4 [shall not exceed twelve months]. (9) Where any temporary vacancy in the office of the Vice-Chancellor occurs by reason of leave, illness or other cause, the Pro-Chancellor shall make such arrangements for carrying on the duties of the office of the Vice-Chancellor, as he may think fit. Until such arrangements are made, the Director or Dean or any other person nominated by the Pro-Chancellor for that purpose shall carry on the current duties of the office of the Vice-Chancellor: Provided that, in the case of a temporary vacancy of less than two months, the Vice-Chancellor may, by order in writing, entrust his duties to the Director or Dean or, in their absence to the Registrar, as a measure of emergency. Sub-section (1) was substituted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 2(a), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). These sub-section were substituted for sub-section (2) by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 2(b), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Sub-section (4) was substituted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 2(c), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). These words were substituted for the words "shall not exceed six months" by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 2(d), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 17--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Principal Executive of the University and shall co-ordinate, monitor and guide the various activities with the help of Director of the University and Deans of the faculties. He shall in the absence of the Chancellor and Pro-Chancellor preside at any convocation of the University. He shall be also an ex officio member and Chairman of the Executive Council and the Academic Council. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise general control over the affairs "of the University and shall be responsible for the due maintenance of discipline in the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall have power to convene meeting of the Executive Council and the Academic Council. (4) It shall be the duty of the Vice-Chanceilor to ensure that the provisions of the Act and the Statutes and the Regulations are faithfully observed, and he shall have all powers necessary for this purpose. (5) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for this proper administration of the University including financial administration and for close co-ordination and integration of teaching, research and extension education programmes. (6) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for prompt and proper implementation, by the University and its authorities and officers, of the directions issued by the Pro- Chancellor under section 7, from time to time, and he shall have and exercise all the power necessary for this purpose, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Statutes and Regulations made under this Act. (7) The Vice-Chancellor shall manage, through appropriate officers and staff members, the colleges, departments, institutions of specialized studies, laboratories libraries, museums, hostels and schools maintained by the university, both at the headquarter and outside. (8) The Vice-Chancellor may call for reports from the colleges, recognized institutions and hostels on all activities of the University, as he deems necessary for the proper functioning of the University. (9) The Vice-Chancellor shall supervise and control the residence, conduct and discipline of the students of the University. He shall also make arrangements for promoting their health and general welfare, in consultation with such committee as may be prescribed. (10) The Vice-Chancellor shall have powers to appoint such employees of the University as provided in this Act or in the Statutes. (11) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for the presentation of the annual accounts and the balance-sheet in time to the Executive Council. (12) The Vice-Chancellor shall hold, control and administer the property and funds of the University. (13) The Vice-Chancellor shall administer the funds placed at the disposal of the University for specific purposes. (14) The Vice-Chancellor shall, make provision, within means available to him and in accordance with the financial estimates made under section 44 for carrying on the work of the University. (15) The Vice-Chancellor shall, with the occurrence of the Executive Council enter into, vary, carry out, or cancel contracts on behalf of the University, in exercise of performance of the powers and duties assigned to it by or under this Act and Statutes, on the advice of the Legal Committee to be appointed by the Executive Council for this purpose. (16) In any emergency which, in the opinion of the Vice-Chancellor, requires that immediate action should be taken, he shall, subject to the control of the pro-Chancellor, take such action which he deems necessary and shall at the earliest opportunity thereafter report his action to the Executive Council and to such other authority or officer as would have in the ordinary course, dealt with the matter. (17) Where any action taken by the Vice-Chancellor under the last preceding sub-section affects any person in the service of the University to his disadvantage such person may prefer an appeal to the Executive Council within thirty days from the date on which such person has received notice of the action taken, and the Executive Council shall consider the appeal at its next meeting and shall give its decision within three months from the date of appeal. (18) Any person aggrieved by the appellate order of the Executive Council may, within thirty days from the date of communication of such order, appeal to the Chancellor, and the decision of the Chancellor on such appeal shall be final. (19) Subject to the provisions of the preceding sub-sections, the Vice-Chancellor shall give effect to the orders of the Executive Council regarding the appointment, suspension, removal or dismissal of any of the employees of the University. (20) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are laid down under this Act and may be conferred or imposed on him by the Statutes.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 18--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1) The Registrar of the University shall be a whole time salaried officer of the University. He shall be an officer of the State Government not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government or Additional Collector to the Government, appointed by the State Government on deputation, for such period as the State Government may, from time to time, fix. The terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as the State Government may determine.] 2 [(2) * * * *] 3 [(3) * * * *] 4 [(4) The Registrar of the University shall be the custodian of the records including common seal of the University and such other property of the University as the Academic Council may, commit to his charge, from time to time, and it shall be the responsibility of the Registrar to keep up-to-date all land records of the University, and its upkeep, care and maintenance. He shall be ex-offico Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and Selection Committees for the academic staff and employees of the University other than the officers of the rank of Assistant Registrar and other officers holding posts equivalent thereto or above, and shall be bound to place before them all available information of the business. He shall receive applications for entrance to the University and shall keep a permanent record of all courses, curricula and other information as may be necessary.]] 5 [(5)[...] (6) In the temporary absence of the Registrar on leave for whatever reasons or until the vacancy caused in any other manner is filled, the Vice-Chancellor shall appoint any suitable person temporarily for a period not exceeding three months to act as the Registrar. (7) The Registrar shall be responsible for maintaining a permanent record of the academic performance of students of the University including the courses taken, grades obtained, degrees awarded, prizes or other distinctions won and any other items pertaining to the academic performance of the students. (8) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are laid down under this Act or may be conferred or imposed on him by the Statues or by the Vice-Chancellor. 6 [(9) The Registrar shall be under the superintendence and control of the Vice- Chancellor. The Registrar shall be the appointing and the disciplinary authority of the employee of the University, other than the academic staff and officers of the rank of Assistant Registrar and other officers holding posts equivalent thereto or above. An appeal by a person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar, may be prepared, within thirty days from the date of communication of such decision, to the Vice-Chancellor. (10) The Registrar shall be responsible for reporting to the Vice-Chancellor the consequences of any decision or action taken by any authority of the University, which he feels is in contravention of the provisions of this Act or the Statutes, Regulations, under intimation to the State Government.] Sub-section (1) was substituted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(a), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Substituted portion read as under:- The Registrar of the University shall be a whole-time salaried office of the university and shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a committee for the purpose. Sub-section (2) was deleted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(b), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Deleted portion read as under :- (2) The Registrar shall be,- (a) an academician in the field of Animal and Fishery Sciences, not lower In rank than that of Professor, or (b) an Officer of the State Government not lower In rank than that of a Deputy Secretary to the Government. Sub-section (3) was deleted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(b), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Deleted portion read as under :- (3) The Registrar shall hold office for a period of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for a further period of three years: Provided that, a person appointed as Registrar shall retire from office, if during the terms of his office, he competes the age of fifty-eight years. Sub-section (4) was substituted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(c), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Substituted portion read as under:- (4) The Registrar shall be responsible for the due custody of the records and the common seal of the University. He shall be ex-officio Secretary of the Executive Council and the academic Council and shall be bound to place before them all available information of the business. He shall receive application for entrance to the University and shall keep a permanent record of all courses, curricular and other information as may be necessary. Sub-section (5) was deleted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(d), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Deleted portion read as under:- The Registrar may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-Chancellor Resign his office. The resignation shall be delivered to the Vice-Chancellor ordinarily sixty days prior to the date on which the Registrar wishes to be relieved of his office, but the Executive Council may relive him earlier. The resignation shall take effect from the date on which he is so relieved. Sub-section (9) and (10) were added by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 3(e), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 19--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1) The Comptroller of the University shall be whole-time salaried officer of the University. He shall be an officer belonging to the Indian Audit and Accounts Service or the Maharashtra Finance and Accounts Service appointed by the State Government on deputation, for such period as the State Government may, from time to time, fix. The terms and conditions of service shall be such as the State Government may determine.] (2) The Comptroller shall, under the general supervision and control of the Vice- Chancellor, hold and manage the property and investments of the University and shall advise the University as regards its financial policy. (3) The Comptroller shall- (a) ensure that no expenditure, not authorised in the budget, is incurred by the University; (b) be responsible for ensuring that the expenditures are made as authorised in the budget; when any budget revisions are required in the interest of expediting new programmes, changed requirements or any other reasons, he shall be responsible for preparing the needed revisions and expediting their approval by the concerned authorities; (c) disallow any expenditure, which may contravene any provision of this Act or any Statutes made thereunder or for which provision is required to be made by or under this Act: (d) propose to the Executive Council that explanation be called for unauthorised expenditure or other financial irregularities in any particular case and recommend disciplinary action against the persons at fault. 2 [(4) [...] (5) The Comptroller shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are laid down by or under this Act or may be conferred or imposed on him by the Statutes or by the Vice-Chancellor. Sub-section (1) was substituted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 4(a), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Substituted portion read as under :- (1) (i) The Comptroller of the University shall be a whole time salaried officer of the University, appointed by the Executive Council From out of a panel of three names of officers belonging to Indian Audit and Accounts by the State Government, on deputation, (ii) The Comptroller shall hold officer for a period of three years subject to such terms and conditions as specified by the Executive Council: Provided that, a person appointed as Comptroller shall retire from office if, during the term of his office, he competes the age of fifty-eight years. Sub-section (4) was deleted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 4(b), (w.e.f. 8.7.2010). Deleted portion read as under :- The Comptroller may, by writing under his hand addresse to the Vice-Chancellor, resign his office. The resignation shall delivered to the Vice-Chancellor ordinarily sixty days prior to the date on which the Comptroller wishes to be relieved of his office, but the Executive Council may relive him earlier. The resignation shall take effect from the date on which he is so relived.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 20--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Dean of each Faculty of the University shall be a whole time salaried officer and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor on the recommendation of the Executive Council. (2) The Dean of each Faculty shall be the Chief Executive and Academic Officer of the Faculty responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for its administration.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 21--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Dean of each Faculty shall be responsible for organization, administration and conducting teaching, research and extension education, lower education administration of farm research centres, hospitals, diagnostic centers, etc. under his jurisdiction. (2) The Dean shall- (i) formulate and present policies to the Academic Council for its consideration; (ii) make report to the Vice-Chancellor on the work of the different departments of the Faculty; (iii) supervise the registration and progress of the students in the colleges of the Faculty: (iv) be responsible to the Vice-Chancellor for the proper use of buildings assigned to the colleges, schools and research institutions and of the requirements thereof; (v) prepare the budget in consultation with the appropriate officers and staff members in the technical area. (3) Every Dean shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are laid down by or under this Act and as may be prescribed.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 22--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Director of the University shall be a whole time salaried officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under section 50. (2) The Director of the University shall work directly under the Vice-Chancellor and,- (a) be responsible for the due performance of the functions of the colleges and other teaching institutions, and co-ordinate and guide education, in all the constituent colleges of the university in close co-operation with the Associate Dean of the constituent colleges and other officers; (b) shall develop liaison with international education institute to improve the education standards in the context of globalization and also develop interactive educational programmes with foreign universities; (c) plan and execute faculty improvement programmes, through appropriate Government agencies; (d) be responsible for the due performance of functions of the research stations all over the State and shall co-ordinate all research of the University in close co-ordination with the Deans of constituent colleges and other officers; and (e) be responsible for the co-ordination of all extension education programmes of the University in close co-operation with the Deans the Faculties and other officers.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 23--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) An Associate Dean shall be a whole time salaried officer of the University and shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under section 50. (2) An Associated Dean shall be responsible for conducting teaching, research and extension education programmes at all levels within the limits of prescribed jurisdiction and shall also be the Principal of a constituent college. (3) An Associate Dean shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as are laid down by or under this Act and as may be prescribed.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 24--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of this Act, the designations, qualifications, method of recruitment, pay, allowances and other conditions of service of all employees of the University and their powers and duties shall be such as may, from time to time be determined by the Statutes.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 25--> State(s): Maharashtra The following shall be the authorities of the University, namely :- (i) The Executive Council. (ii) The Academic Council. (iii) The Faculties. (iv) The Board of Studies. (v) Such other bodies of the University as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 25A--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the State Government may, consultation with the Chancellor, by an order published in the Official Gazette, specify the eligibility conditions for being elected or nominated as a member of any authority of the University.] Section 25A was inserted by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 5, (w.e.f. 8.7.2010).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 26--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Executive Council of the University shall be the Executive authority of the University and shall consist of the following members, namely:- (i) The Vice-Chancellor ex-officio Chairman. (ii) The Commissioner of Animal Husbandry or an Additional Director of Animal Husbandry, so nominated by the Commissioner. (iii) The Commissioner, Fisheries or his nominee not below the rank of Joint Director of Fisheries. (iv) The Dairy Development Commissioner or Additional Dairy Development Commissioner or his nominee not below the rank of Joint Director. (v) The Commissioner, Agriculture or his nominee not below the rank of Additional Director of Agriculture. (vi) The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests or his nominee, not below the rank of Conservator of Forests. (vii) Director of the University. (viii) Deans of the Faculties. (ix) One eminent scientist in the field of Veterinary or Animal Science with adequate experience of active research to be nominated by the Chancellor in consultation with the Vice-Chancellor. (x) Two progressive livestock breeders or fisheries breeder to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor. (xi) One representative from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research or Indian Veterinary Research Institute. (xii) One representative from Indian Council of Medical Research. (xiii) Three members of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly elected by the Assembly, from amongst its members. (xiv) Two members of the Maharashtra Legislative Council elected by that Council from amongst its members. (xv) The Chairman of Animal Husbandry and Dairy Committee of six Zilla Parishad, one each from the Revenue Division, in the State to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor. (xvi) One representative to be nominated by the Veterinary Council of India. (xvii) One Representative each from Dairy, Fisheries and Poultry Industries nominated by the Chancellor. (xviii) One eminent woman social worker to be nominated by the Chancellor. (xix) One Chairman each from the Dairy Poultry and fisheries Co-Operative Societies to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor. The Registrar shall be the ex officio secretary of the Executive Council. (2) (a) A member elected by the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly or the Maharashtra Legislative Council shall cease to be a member of the Executive Council as soon as he ceases to be a member of the electing body. (b) The Chairman of the Animal Husbandry Committee of any Zilla Parishad who becomes a member of the Executive Council under clause (xv) of sub-section (I) shall cease to be a member of the Executive Council as soon as he ceases to be the Chairman of the said committee or on the expiry of the period of one year from the date of his appointment to the Executive Council, whichever is earlier. (c) The Chairman of the Dairy, Poultry or Fisheries Co-operative Society, which becomes a member under clause (xix) shall cease to be a member of the Executive Council as soon as he ceases to be the Chairman of the said society. (d) The term of the office of the members of the Executive Council other than the ex-officio members shall be 1 [five years]. These words were substituted for the words "three years" by Mah. 19 of 2010, s. 6, (w.e.f. 8.7.2010).
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 27--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to such conditions as may be laid down by or under this Act Executive Council shall exercise the following powers and perform the following duties, namely: - (i) to outline broadly what programmes the University should have; (ii) to discuss and review the annual report of the University and make suggestions thereon; (iii) to consider and frame the annual financial estimates of the University and make suggestions thereon; (iv) with the approval of the State Government, to borrow, on the security of University property, moneys for the purposes of the University; (v) to accept, subject to the Statutes, on behalf of the University, bequests, donations and transfers of any movable and immovable property to the University; (vi) to transfer any movable or immovable property on behalf of the University; (vii) to establish and maintain constituent colleges, departments, hostels, research stations, farms, schools, libraries, laboratories and demonstration centres and other facilities for students and employees; (viii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts and investments of the University; (ix) to fix, demand and receive payment of such fees and other charges as may be prescribed, from time to time. (x) to make provision for instruction, teaching and training in such branches of learning and courses of study as it may think fit, for conduct of research and for the advancement and dissemination of knowledge. (xi) to grant recognition to colleges and post-graduate institutions; (xii) to approve the academic standards in constituent colleges and recognised institutions and ensure the observance thereof; (xiii) to recognise institutions of higher learning and research and withdraw recognition thereof; (xiv) to make provisions for- (a) extension educations of rural people, (b) in-service training of the staff of the University, the concerned Department of Government, Zilla Parishads, and other field staff, (c) physical and military training, (d) sports and athletic clubs, (e) students welfare; (xv) to arrange for and direct the inspection of recognised institutions and issue instructions for maintaining their efficiency and for ensuring proper conditions of employment for members of their staff and in case of disregard of such instructions, to recommend modifications of the conditions of their recognition, or to take such other steps as it may deem proper; (xvi) to lay down scales of pay and conditions of employment of members of the staff in constituent colleges and recognized institutions and to ensure the observance thereof; (xvii) to make, amend or repeal the Statutes and Regulations; (xviii) to accept, reject or refer back the Regulations to the Academic Council or any other authority; (xix) to appoint examiners, fix their remunerations, if any, and to arrange for the conduct of and for publishing the results of the University examinations and other tests; (xx) to appoint such Boards and Committees, whether standing or temporary as it may deem necessary, for the proper functioning of the University and define their constitution, functions and tenure; (xxi) to delegate by Regulations any of its powers to the Vice-Chancellor or such officer of the University or Board or Committee appointed by it, as it may deem fit; (xxii) to determine the form to provide for the custody and to regulate the use of the common seal of the University; (xxiii) to sanction fellowships (including travelling fellowships), scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; (xxiv) to recommend the conferment of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions to the Chancellor; (xxv) to sanction honorary degrees or other academic distinction; (xxvi) to make provision for consumers' co-operative societies to serve the needs of the students and staff of the University and of the colleges and institutions under its control; (xxvii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act; (xxviii) to exercise all powers of the University not otherwise provided for in the Act or the Statutes and all other powers which are requisite to give effect to the provisions of this Act or the Statutes.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 28--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Executive Council shall meet once in every two months, or more often as may be considered necessary, and on such dates as may be fixed by the Vice-Chancellor. All meetings of the Council shall be held at headquarters of the University, but, with the previous approval of the Chancellor, any meeting may be held at any other place. (2) When a date has been fixed for the meeting of the Executive Council by the Vice-Chancellor under sub-section (1), the Registrar shall give notice in writing, to the members of the Council of such meeting.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 29--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Academic Council of the University shall serve as an advisory body of the University and shall have the right to advise the Vice-Chancellor and the Executive Council on all academic, research and extension education matters. (2) The Academic Council shall consist of the following members, namely:- (i) The Vice-Chancellor ex-officio Chairman. (ii) The Director of the University. (iii) The Dean of each Faculty. (iv) Associate Deans. (v) The Heads of Departments. (vi) One representative from Veterinary Council of India. (vii) One academic staff member from each Faculty, other than the Head of the Department, elected by the Faculty. The Registrar shall be ex-officio Secretary to the Academic Council. (3) The Academic Council may co-opt as members, not more than four experts with adequate knowledge or practical experience in different aspects of Animal Sciences and for such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed, and such co-opted members shall have the right to take part in the proceedings of the Council and also to vote like any other members of the Council. (4) The Academic Council shall meet at least once before the beginning of each semester.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 30--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to such conditions as may be laid down by or under the provisions of this Act or the Statutes, the Academic Council shall study and make recommendations on the courses of study, curricula, conduct of teaching, research and extension education within the University and the maintenance of the standard thereof. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Academic Council shall exercise the following powers and perform the following duties, namely:- (i) to make proposals for establishment of colleges, departments, research stations, libraries, laboratories, demonstration stations and such other activities necessary in the interest of animal husbandry, diary, and fishery improvement. (ii) to make recommendations to the Executive Council for the institution of posts of Academic Officers specified in section 13, Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant Professorships, Lectureships, Demonstrator ships, and posts at research stations including extension education and in regard to their qualifications, duties, emoluments and other conditions of service; (iii) to formulate, modify and revise schemes for the constitution or reconstitution of Departments of teaching, research and extension educations: (iv) to make Regulations relating to courses of study leading to degrees, diplomas and certificates in consultation with the Faculty and Board of Studies concerned; (v) to make Regulations regarding the admission to students to the University; (vi) to make Regulations regarding the examinations conducted by the University and the conditions on which the students shall be admitted to such examinations; (vii) to make recommendations to the Executive Council regarding post-graduate teaching, research and extension education; (viii) to make proposal for allocating subjects to the different Facilities; (ix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties a. may be conferred or assigned to it by or under the provisions of this Act.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 31--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The University shall constitute all or any of the following Faculties and such other Faculties and Board of Studies as may be provided by the Statutes, from time to time, namely:- (i) Veterinary Sciences, (ii) Fishery Sciences, (iii) Dairy Technology. (2) The subjects comprising each Faculty shall be determined by the Statutes. (3) Each Faculty shall, subject to the recommendations of the Academic Council and the approval of the Executive Council, have charge of the teaching courses of study, the research work and the extension education programmes in various disciplines. (4) There shall be a Dean of each Faculty. He shall be the Chief Academic Officer responsible for the due observation of the Statutes and Regulations. He shall be ex officio Chairman of the Faculty. (5) Each Faculty shall consist of,- (i) Dean of the Faculty as ex-officio Chairman; (ii) Associate Deans of each constitutent college of the concerned Faculty; (iii) Heads of Departments; (iv) One Professor other than the Head of the Department, to be elected by the Academic staff members of the Departments; (v) The Principal of recognised institutions in related Faculty; (vi) The Associate Professors and two Assistant Professors to be elected by the respective groups. (6) The term of office of elected members shall be for three years. (7) A Faculty may co-opt not more than four officers of the State Government or of any Zilla Parishad as members, such members shall be chosen for such period and in such manner as may be prescribed, so as to provide adequate representation of extension education workers. (8) Each Faculty shall meet at least once in a semester, but sufficiently in advance of the Academic Council meeting, in order that the recommendations of the Faculty can be considered by the Academic Council.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 32--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the powers of the Academic Council of taking decisions, the Faculties may consider and make recommendations to the Academic Council on all the administrative and technical matters. As far as possible, the Academic Council shall be guided by the relevant Faculty in its decisions. Barring the policy matters, the Dean of each Faculty shall take action on the resolutions adopted by the Faculty under intimation to the Vice-Chancellor. Each Faculty may constitute such Boards of Studies, for such subjects, consisting of such members, for such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed. The other powers and duties of the Faculties shall be such as may be prescribed.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 33--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of this Act, the statutes may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the constitution powers and duties of the authorities of the University, and the declaration of other bodies to be such authorities; (b) the other conditions of service of the Vice-Chancellor and his powers and duties; (c) the designations, qualifications, method of recruitment, pay, allowances and other conditions of service of various categories of employees of the University, and their powers and duties; (d) the constitution, reconstitution or abolition of Faculties and their powers and duties; (e) the establishment of Departments of Teaching in the Faculties; (f) the conferement and withdrawal of honorary and academic distinctions; (g) the institution of pension or provident fund or insurance scheme, or all or any one or more of them, for the benefit of employees of the University; (h) inc designations, qualifications, method of recruitment, pay, allowances, and other conditions of service of Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Research Assistant, Veterinary Officer, Farm Demonstrators and other categories of employees of constitutent colleges and recognised institutions and their powers; and (i) registrations, of graduates and maintenance of register of graduates; (j) recognition of examinations of other Universities or educational institutions, as equivalent to the examinations of the University; (k) any matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act; (I) any other matter which is necessary to give effect to the provisions of this Act.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 34--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Executive Council of the University shall make new Statutes in conformity with the provisions of this Act and submit them to the Chancellor for his assent within three months of the appointed day. (2) The Executive Council may make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes from time to time, in the manner hereafter in this section provided. (3) The Executive Council may take into consideration the draft of a statute either on its own motion or on a proposal by the Vice-Chancellor: Provided that, any Statute pertaining to the academic matters shall be examined by the Academic Council, before they are considered by the Executive Council. (4) Every Statute passed by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Chancellor, who may give or withhold his assent thereto or refer it back to the Executive Council for reconsideration. (5) No Statute passed by the Executive Council shall be valid or shall come into force until assented to by the Chancellor. (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if in the opinion of the State Government, it is necessary to amend any Statute or make a new Statute, the State Government may, with the concurrence of the Chancellor, make an amendment in the Statute or make a new Statute and notify it in the Official Gazette.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 35--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Faculties may make regulations, consistent with this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings including the quorum required and the conduct of their business: (b) providing for the matters which by this Act or the Statutes have to be provided by Regulations; (c) providing for all matters solely concerning such authorities or for matters for which provision is, in the opinion of such authorities, necessary for the exercise of their powers and performance of their duties under this Act or the Statutes. (2) Each authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving on notice to the members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and for keeping of a record for the proceedings of the meetings. (3) The Academic Council may; subject to the provisions of the Statutes, and approval of the Executive Council, make Regulations providing for courses of study, system of examinations, and degrees and diplomas of the University, after receiving drafts of the same from the Faculty concerned. (4) Any draft of the Regulations received from the Faculty may be approved by the Executive Council with or without any modification, or may be rejected by the Executive Council or may be returned by it to the Faculty for further consideration, together with the suggestions of the Academic Council. (5) The Executive Council may direct the amendment, in such manner as it may specify of any Regulations made by any authority under this section or the annulment of any such Regulation, so however that any such amendment or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done or omitted to be done under chat Regulation.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 36--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Executive Council shall have the power to recognise any institution of research or specialised studies under the management of any authority other than the University as a recognised institution for the purpose of providing means of instruction and research to meet partially the requirements of the University for advanced degrees, and for imparting lower education in Animal and Fishery Sciences. (2) An institution applying for recognition under this section shall send a letter of application to the Registrar and shall give full information in such a letter in respect of the following matters, namely:- (a) constitution and personnel of the managing body; (b) subject and courses in regard to which recognition is sought; (c) accommodation, equipment and the number of students for whom provision has been or is proposed to be made; (d) the strength of the staff, their qualifications and salaries and the research work done by them; (e) fees levied or proposed to be levied and the financial provision made for capital expenditure on buildings, lands and equipment and for the continued maintenance and efficient working of the institution. (3) On receipt of a letter under sub-section (2), the Executive Council shall- (a) direct a local enquiry to be made by a competent person authorised by it in this behalf; (b) make such further enquiry as may appear to it to be necessary; (c) record its opinion, after consulting the Academic Council, on the question whether the application should be granted or refused either in whole or in part, stating the results of any inquiry under clauses (a) and (b). (4) The Executive Council shall also have power to recognise any institution or farms for Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries, under the management of any authority other than the university, as recognised institution for the purpose of providing means of education and research including instruction in lower level education in these and allied activities. The procedure prescribed in sub-sections (2) and (3) for applying for and granting or refusing to grant recognition to any institution of research or specialised studies shall apply mutatis mutandis for applying for and granting or refusing recognition to any institution for Veterinary, Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries education.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 37--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every recognised institution shall furnish such report, returns and other information as the Executive Council may require to enable it to judge the efficiency and necessity of the college or institution, with respect to the University requirements. (2) The Executive Council shall cause every such college or institution to be inspected, from time to time, by persons authorised by the Executive Council in this behalf. (3) The Executive Council may, call upon any recognised institution so inspected to take, within a specified period, such action as may appear to it to be necessary in respect of any of the matters referred to in the last two preceding sections.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 38--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The rights conferred on an institution by recognition may be withdrawn or suspended for any period by the Executive Council, if the institution has failed to observe any of the conditions of its recognition, or the institution is conducted in a manner which is prejudicial to the interests of Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Educations or research. (2) A motion for such withdrawal or suspension shall be initiated only in the Academic Council. The member of the Council who intends to move such a motion shall give notice thereof and shall in writing the grounds on which it is made. (3) Before taking the said motion into consideration, the Academic Council shall send a copy of the notice and written statement mentioned in sub-section (2) to the Head of the institution concerned, together with the intimation that any representation, in writing submitted within a period specified in the intimation, on behalf of the institution will be considered by the Academic Council: Provided that, the period so specified may, if necessary, be extended by the Academic Council. (4) On receipt of the representation or on the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (3), the Academic Council, after considering the notice of motion, statement and representation, shall consider the action to be taken in the matter. If the Academic Council considers that action would be taken for withdrawal or suspension of recognition, the Academic Council shall pass a resolution for that purpose, stating the grounds for such withdrawal or suspension and, make a recommendation to that effect to the Executive Council. (5) On receipt of such recommendation by the Academic Council, the Executive Council may, after such further enquiry as may appear to it to be necessary, decide whether the recognition should be withdrawn or be suspended for a specified period.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 39--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The University shall, through its constitutent college, undertake teaching, research and extension education activities in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 4. (2) The constituent colleges and recognised institutions of the University shall have a common pattern of teaching and organisation as may be directed by the University, from time to time. (3) The University shall according to need establish additional colleges and institutions to serve the requirements of the various Faculties. (4) The University shall according to need start additional training centres or close down either permanently or temporarily any of the training institutions/courses or classes under its control as it may consider appropriate.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 40--> State(s): Maharashtra The University shall establish Programmes such as extension services for Animal Husbandry, Daity and Fishery Sciences, Extension Education and continuing Education Services and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, make available useful information based upon the findings of research available, to the farmers and other people in the rural areas to help solve their problems. It shall conduct demonstration and training programmes for the benefit of the students, extension workers, livestock breeders and other rural people by establishing or utilising Extension Education Units at the existing veterinary colleges increase milk production, fish production and improve genetic set up of the cross-breed and local breeds, which shall be the principal objectives of all extension activities which shall be co-ordinated with the other appropriate agencies in the University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 41--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The University shall establish a research service. The Research and Experiment Stations of the University shall be conducted by it as Constituent Research Institution in such manner and with such suitable changes as the University may consider appropriate. (2) The University shall according to need establish or reorganise experimental stations for research, both fundamental and applied, at suitable places in University. (3) The University may, at any time close down, curtail or expand either permanently or temporarily any of the research stations as the University may think appropriate.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 42--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) In consultation with the appropriate officers of the University, Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible for taking such steps as may be necessary for the full co-ordination of teaching, research and extension education activities of the University. (2) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible, working through the appropriate officers and the staff of the University, for ensuring that the conditions are established whereby there is maximum feasible progress in the development of new information and upgradation of technology in the industrial, physical and social sciences related to the Animal Husbandry and Fishery Science and their transfer to the teaching curricula and to the educational programme leading to their understanding and adoption, where applicable in practice, under the University. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall be responsible working through the appropriate officers and staff of the University, to ensure that there is an appropriate inter-relation of the different curricula and courses offered in the different Faculties of the University, so as to avoid unnecessary duplication of functions between the Faculties and provide the students with the best course offerings and Faculty contacts feasible within the University's resources and talents. (4) The University shall develop its programme of research and extension education keeping in view the need of the State in' general and in particular, provide appropriate technical support and consultative advice to the State Government Departments engaged in Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries Development work. (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, having regard to the interest of the State as a whole, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, entrust any specialized research programme to the recognized institutions, for such period and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified in such notification.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 43--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Each University shall establish a fund to be called the University Fund. (2) The following shall from part of or be paid into, the University Fund, namely:- (a) any contribution or grant by the Government; (b) the income of the University from all sources, including income from fees and charges and sale proceeds; (c) bequests, donations, endowments and other grants, if any, received by the University. (3) With the previous sanction of the State Government, any portion of the University Fund may, from time to time be credited by the University to a separate heading in the University accounts, provided that shall be credited and debited to such special heading such sums only as shall expressly relate to the objects for which a special fund is so created. (4) The University Fund shall, at the discretion of the Executive Council, be kept in the State Bank of India, or in any scheduled bank as defined in the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, which holds a licence issued by the Reserve Bank of India under section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or in a Co-operative Bank approved by the State Government for the purpose, or be invested in securities authorised by the Indian Trust Act, 1882, or, subject to the maximum limit of rupees five lakh in the shares of or by giving loans to, Consumers Co-operative Societies established for the purpose of the University or any of the affiliated colleges or recognised institutions.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 44--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The University shall prepare the annual financial estimates of receipts and expenditure of the University in such manner as the State Government may determine. (2) The Executive Council shall consider the estimates so prepared and approve them with or without modification. (3) The University shall submit such estimates as approved by the Executive Council to the State Government by such date as may be notified to the University, by the State Government for it's sanction. (4) The State Government may pass such orders with reference to the said estimate as it thinks fit and communicate the same to the University which shall give effect to such orders. (5) The Comptroller shall be responsible for the preparation of the financial estimates and statement of accounts of University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 45--> State(s): Maharashtra The University shall furnish to the State Government such statements, returns accounts, reports and other information as the State Government may, from time to time, require, relating to any grants made by it and shall take such action and furnish such further statements, returns, accounts, reports, or other information relating to utilisation of any grants made by the State Government, within such time and in such manner, as the State government may, from time to time direct.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 46--> State(s): Maharashtra Without the prior approval of the State Government, or an officer authorised by it in this behalf, the University shall not - (a) create any new posts of other officers as specified in section 13 or the Heads of Department or Professor or of any officers of equivalent rank; (b) revise the pay, allowances, post-retirement benefits and other benefits of any officers and other employees, both in teaching and non-teaching categories; or (c) grant any special pay, allowances, or other extra remuneration of any description whatsoever, including, ex-gratia payment, increase in the rates of scholarships or other benefits having financial implications to any such officers and employees.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 47--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The annual account of the University shall be prepared by the Comptroller under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and all monies accruing to, or received by the University, from whatever source and all amounts disbursed and paid by the University shall be entered in the accounts. (2) The annual accounts and the balance-sheet shall be submitted by the Vice- Chancellor to the State Government, which shall cause an audit to be carried out by an auditor appointed by it. The accounts when audited shall be printed and copies thereof, together with the copies of the audit report shall be presented by the Vice-Chancellor to the Executive Council, the Pro-Chancellor and the Chancellor within three months from the date on which the accounts as audited are received by the Vice-Chancellor. (3) The Executive Council shall submit a copy of the accounts and the audit report to the State Government within nine months from the end of the financial year, and the State Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of the State Legislature. (4) The Executive Council shall, every year, along with a copy of the accounts and the audit report referred to in sub-section (3), submit to the State Government a statement showing the action taken by the University on all the earlier audit reports showing the number of points on which action has been taken and the number of points on which action has been initiated and those on which action is yet to be initiated.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 48--> State(s): Maharashtra It shall be competent for the State Government to give directions to the University regarding the manner in which the accounts relating to certain specific activities should be maintained and the University shall act according to the directions of the State Government.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 49--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, every salaried officer and academic staff members of the University shall be appointed under a written contract. The contract shall be lodged with the Registrar, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the employee concerned. (2) No such employee shall receive any remuneration for any work in or outside the University, except as may be provided by the Statutes. (3) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration, consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Chancellor. The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any Civil Court in respect of the matter decided by the Tribunal. Every such request shall be deemed submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section, within the meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and the provisions of that Act shall, apply accordingly.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 50--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) No person shall be appointed by the University as a member of the academic staff, except on the recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose in accordance with the provisions of the Statutes made in that behalf: Provided that, appointment to the posts of Director of the University, Associate Deans, Head of a Department and Professor shall be made on the recommendation of the Selection Committee to be constituted by the Executive Council. (2) The Selection Committee referred to in the proviso to sub-section (1) shall consist of - (i) The Vice-Chancellor of the University, (ii) One non-official member to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor, from amongst the non-official members of the Executive Council, (iii) Two experts to be nominated by the Vice-Chancellor, (iv) Two representatives of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, one of whom shall be a specialist in the particular field for which the recruitment is to be made, (v) The Dean of concerned Faculty. (3) The Vice-Chancellor shall act as Chairman of the Selection Committee.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 51--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government shall have power to give the University, from time to time, such directions as it may consider necessary in regard to categories of posts in which reservation of posts shall be made in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the members belonging to Other Backward Classes, the percentage of the posts to be reserved for them and any other matters connected with such reservation, and the University shall comply with such directions.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 52--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Save as otherwise provided any member of any authority or body of the University may resign his office by letter addressed to the Vice-Chancellor, through the Registrar, and on the Vice-Chancellor accepting the resignation, the office of such member shall become vacant: Provided that, where any member is appointed or nominated on any such authority or body by the Chancellor, he may resign his office by letter addressed to the Chancellor and his resignation shall be effective and his office shall become vacant when the resignation is accepted by the Chancellor. (2) Any member of any authority or body of the University shall cease to be a member thereof on his being convicted by a Court of law of an offence which involves moral turpitude.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 53--> State(s): Maharashtra When any vacancy occurs in the office of a member other than an ex officio member of any authority or body of the University before the expiry of the term of office of such member, the vacancy shall be filled, as soon as conveniently may be, by election, nomination, appointment or co-option, as the case may be, of a member who shall hold office so long only as the member in whose place he has elected, nominated, appointed or co-opted, would have held it, if the vacancy had not occurred.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 54--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding that the Executive Council or the Academic Council or any other authority or body of the University is not duly constituted, or there is a defect in its constitution or re-constitution or that there is a vacancy in the membership of any such authority or body, no act or proceeding of such authority or body shall be invalid merely on any such ground.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 55--> State(s): Maharashtra If any question arises regarding the interpretation of any provision of this Act or any Statute or Regulation or, as to whether a person has been duly nominated, elected, appointed, co-opted or has become, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or body of the University, the matter may be referred on petition by any person or body directly affected or suo motu by the Vice-Chancellor to the Chancellor, who shall, after giving the person or body affected a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after taking such advice as he deems necessary, decide the question, and his decision shall be final.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 56--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to the students of the University shall vest in the Vice-Chancellor. (2) The Vice-Chancellor may, in the exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled or rusticated for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a college, institution or Department of the University for a specified period or be punished with fine, not exceeding three hundred rupees, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University, college, institution or Department for a specified period, not exceeding five years, or that the result or results of the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he has or they have appeared be postponed or cancelled. (3) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice-Chancellor, the Principals of colleges and institutions and Heads of Teaching Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise such powers over the students in their respective charges, as may be necessary for the maintenance of proper discipline. (4) The Vice-Chancellor shall, subject to the approval of the Executive Council, make rules of discipline and proper conduct for the students of the University, which shall also apply to the students of all colleges and institutions, and every student shall be supplied with a copy of such rules at the time of his admission. (5) The disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice-Chancellor shall extend to the students of all colleges and institutions recognised by the University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 57--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) It shall be the duty of every authority and officer of the University to ensure that the interests of the University are duly safeguarded. (2) If it is found that a damage or loss been caused to the University by any act on the part of any authority or officer of the University not in conformity with the provisions of this Act, or the Statutes or Regulations, except when done in good faith, or by any failure so to act in conformity thereof, or by wilful neglect or default on its or his part, such damage or loss shall be liable to be recovered from the authority or the members concerned, thereof, or from the officer concerned, as the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Statutes.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 58--> State(s): Maharashtra All acts and orders done and passed in good faith by the University, or any of its authorities, bodies or officers shall be final; and accordingly no suit or legal proceeding shall be instituted or maintained against or damage claimed from the University or its authorities or bodies or officers for anything purporting to be done or passed in good faith and in pursuance of this Act and the Statutes and Regulations framed thereunder.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 59--> State(s): Maharashtra Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act or the Statutes to appoint a committee, such committee may, except as otherwise provided consist of its members, or partly of its members and partly of other persons, as the authority concerned may in each case decide.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 60--> State(s): Maharashtra The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of the Vice-Chancellor and submitted by him to the Executive Council on or before such date as may be prescribed. The report as approved by the Executive Council shall be submitted by the Vice-Chancellor to the Chancellor and the State Government. The State Government shall cause the report to be laid before each House of the State Legislature.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 61--> State(s): Maharashtra The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to amend or omit from the First Schedule, any college, institution, research centre or training centre specified therein.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 62--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983 or Statutes, Regulations and Orders made thereunder, on and from the appointed day,- (a) The Faculties of Veterinary Science, Fisheries (including Marine Biology) and the Animal Husbandry wing from the faculty of Agriculture alongwith the Departments of each of the Krishi Vidyapeeths shall stand transferred to the University and shall be deemed to be the constitutent Faculties and Department, of the respective sciences of the University; (b) The Colleges Institutions Research Centres, Training Centres and Farms of each of the Krishi Vidyapeeths and the Research Centres and Training Centres under the control of the Department of the State Government specified in the First Schedule shall stand transferred to the University and shall be deemed to be the constituent colleges and recognised institutions, research centres, training centres and Farms of the University; (c) The control and management of the Colleges, Institutions, Faculties, Departments, Research Centres, Training Centres and Farms referred to in clauses (a) and (b) above, and all the properties, assets and liabilities of Krishi Vidyapeeths and the State Government, in relation thereto, shall stand transferred to and vest in the University; (d) all benefactions accepted or received by Veterinary, Dairy and Fisheries wings of any of the Krishi Vidyapeeths and held by it immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed to have been accepted or received or held by the University under this Act and all the conditions on which such benefactions were accepted or received or held shall be deemed to be valid under this Act, not withstanding that such conditions may be inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act; (e) Any will, deed or other documents made before the appointed day which contains any bequest, gift terms or trust in favour of the Veterinary, Dairy and Fisheries Colleges of the Krishi Vidyapeeths shall, on and from the appointed day, be constructed as if the University is named therein instead of the Krishi Vidyapeet; (f) The Research Projects related to Animal Husbandry, Veterinary Science Dairy Technology and Fishery Science of each of the Krishi Vidyapeeths and Research Centres of each of the Krishi Vidyapeeths and Government shall stand transferred to and vest in the University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 63--> State(s): Maharashtra On and from the appointed day, no new college or Faculty imparting education in Veterinary Sciences, Dairy Technology and Fishery Sciences and Allied Sciences shall be established, except as a constituent college or Faculty of the University.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 64--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every person, who immediately before the appointed day, is serving in colleges and institutions of the Krishi Vidyapeeths referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 62, shall from the said day become an employee of the University and shall cease to be an employee of the respective Colleges, Institutions, etc. of the Krishi Vidyapeeth. (2) As soon as may be, after the appointed day the State Government may, after consulting the Vice-Chancellor of the concerned Krishi Vidyapeeths and the University direct by general or special order that- (i) such of the employees of the State Government who immediately before the appointed day serving in the Institutions specified in First Schedule; and (ii) such of the employees of the Krishi Vidyapeeths as are specified in such order, shall stand allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the University with effect from such date as may be specified in such order: Provided that, the non-teaching staff of the Faculties of Veterinary Science and Fishery Sciences and Animal Husbandry wings of the Krishi Vidyapeeth may exercise option for retention by the said Vidyapeeth, if the said Vidyapeeth agrees to retain such non-teaching staff along with post held by them on the day immediately before the appointed day.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 65--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The sums at the credit of the Provident Fund accounts of the person referred to in sub-section (1) of section 64 on the day immediately before the appointed day and of the employees referred to in sub-section (2) of that section as on the dates specified in the order under sub-section (2) shall be transferred to the University and the liability in respect of the said Provident Fund accounts shall be liability of the University. (2) There shall be paid to the University, out of the accumulation in the superannuation fund and other like funds, if any, of the Krishi Vidyapeeths or, as the case may be, of the State Government, such amounts as have been credited to the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, on behalf of the persons referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 64. The amounts so paid shall form part of the superannuation fund or other like funds, if any, that may be established by the University for the benefit of its employees.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 66--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Krishi Vidyapeeths shall, out of its funds as on the appointed day pay to the University such amount, as the State Government may in consultation with the said Vidyapeeths, specify. (2) The amount payable under sub-section (': shall be in addition to the amounts transferred under section 65.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 67--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 16 within six months from the appointed day, the First Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the State Government on a salary to be fixed by it, for a period not exceeding three years and on such other conditions as it thinks fit: Provided that, the person appointed as the First Vice-Chancellor shall retire from office if, during the term of his office, he completes the age of sixty years.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 68--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) It shall be the duty of the First Vice-Chancellor to make arrangements for constituting the various authorities of the University specified in section 24 within six months from the appointed day or such longer period, not exceeding one year, as the State Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, allow. (2) The First Vice-Chancellor shall, in consultation with the State Government make such rules, as may be necessary for the functioning of the University. (3) The Authorities constituted under sub-section (1) shall commence to exercise their powers and perform their functions on such date or dates, as the State Government may by notification, specify.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 69--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 18, within three months from the appointed day, the first Registrar shall be appointed by the State Government on a salary to be fixed by it for a period not exceeding three years, and on such other conditions as it thinks fit: Provided that, the person appointed as the first Registrar shall retire from office if, during the term of his office, he competes the age of fifty-eight years.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 70--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in section 26, from the appointed day until such time as the Executive Council of the University is constituted in accordance with that section holds its first meeting; the Executive Council consisting of the following members shall be deemed to be constituted for the purposes of this Act, namely:- (a) The Vice-Chancellor - ex officio Chairman: (b) The Diary Development Commissioner or his nominee not below the rank of Additional Dairy Development Commissioner; (c) The Commissioner of Animal Husbandry or his nominee not below the rank of a Joint Director of Animal Husbandry; (d) the Commissioner of Fisheries; (e) The Director of the University; (f) One Dean to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor; (g) One Fishery Scientist to be nominated by the Chancellor; (h) One Progressive farmer to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor; (i) One representative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research; (j) Three members of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly to be nominated by the State Government; (k) Two members of the Maharashtra Legislative Council to be nominated by the State Government; (I) The Chairman of Animal Husbandary and Dairy Development Committee of six Zilla Parishads, one each from the Revenue Division to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor; (m) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive Council.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 71--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 29, from the appointed day until such time as the Academic Council constituted in accordance with the provisions of that sub-section holds its first meeting, the Academic Council consisting of the following members shall be deemed to be constituted for the purposes of this Act:- (a) The Vice-Chancellor - ex officio Chairman; (b) The Director of the University; (c) The Dean of Faculties; (d) Two Associate Deans to be nominated by the Pro-Chancellor; The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Academic Council.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 72--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Statutes or Regulations, every student of the Colleges or Institutes, specified in the first Schedule, who immediately before the appointed day, was studying in such Colleges or Institutes and was eligible to be admitted to any examination held or conducted by the Krishi Viyapeeths, shall be permitted to complete his course of study or be admitted to the examination of the University and the University shall make arrangements,- (a) for the instruction, teaching, training and holding examination for such student for such period and in such manner as may be determined by the First Vice-Chancellor in accordance with the course of study in the Krishi Vidyapeeth; and (b) for the conferment of the corresponding degree, diploma or other academic distinction of the University upon the qualified student on the result of such examination.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 73--> State(s): Maharashtra The Maharashtra Agriculture Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983, shall, with effect from the appointed day, stand amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the Second Schedule.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 74--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) All references to the Veterinary Dairy and Fisheries colleges in any enactment or other instrument issued under any enactment, to any Krishi Vidyapeeth shall be construed as references to the University. (2) All graduates in Animal and Fishery Sciences registered or deemed to be registered as graduates of any Krishi Vidyapeeths shall be deemed to be registered graduates of the University; (3) All Statutes made by any Krishi Vidyapeeths relating to the Veterinary Dairy and Fishery Faculties shall in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force and be deemed to have been made under this Act until they are superseded or modified by the Statutes made under this Act. (4) All regulations made by the Executive Council, the Academic Council or the Veterinary, Dairy and Fishery Faculties or other authority of any Krishi Vidyapeeths shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force and be deemed to have been made under this Act by the Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Veterinary, Dairy and Fishery Faculties or other authority, as the case may be, of the University until they are superseded or modified by the Regulations made, under this Act. (5) All notices and orders made or issued by any authority of any Krishi Vidyapeeths shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force and be deemed to have been made or issued by the corresponding authority of the University until they are superseded or modified under this Act: Provided that, no Statutes, Regulations Notices or Orders made or issued under the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983, and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed to be inconsistent with the provisions of this Act by reason only that the power to make or issue such Statute, Regulation, Rule, Notice or Order under this Act vests in a different authority or body or officer, or that the subject matter thereof is permissible only under a different form of subordinate legislation or instrument, to be made under this Act.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section 75--> State(s): Maharashtra If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, as occasion requiries, but not later than two years from the appointed day, by order do anything not inconsistent with the objects and purposes of this Act, which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Maharashtra [See section 62(b)] (A) Colleges (1) The Bombay Veterinary College, Mumbai. (2) The College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Parbhani. (3) The College of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Udgir. (4) The Kranti Sinh Nana Patil Veterinary College, Shirwal. (5) The Nagpur Veterinary College, Nagpur. (6) College of Fisheries, Shirgaon. (7) Post Graduate Institute in Veterinary and Animal Science, Akola. (8) Dairy Technology College, Warud, Taluka Pusad, District Yawatmal. (B) Research Centres/Institutes (1) Taraporewala and Marine Biological Research Station, Mumbai (2) Marine Biological Research Station, Ratnagiri. (3) Research Centre in Fisheries, Akola. (4) Cow Research Centre, Igatpuri. (5) Cow Research Centre, Rahuri. (6) Fodder Research Centre, Palghar. (7) Kharland Research Centre, Panvel. (8) Sheep and Goat Research Project, Rahuri. (C) Training Centres (1) Institute of Dairy Management and Animal Husbandry Course, Dapchari. (2) In Service Diploma Course of Animal Husbandry Department, Gokhale Nagar, Pune. (3) Livestock Supervisor's Training Centre, Akola. (4) Livestock Supervisor's Training Centre, Lanja. (5) Dairy Science Institute, Mumbai, (D) Government Department - Cattle Breeding Farms (1) Cattle Breeding Farm, Kudal (District Sindhudurg). (2) Cattle Breeding Farm, Udgir (District Latur). (3) Cattle Breeding Farm, Igatpuri (District Nasik). (4) Cattle Breeding Farm, Boragaon Manju (District Akola). (5) Cattle Breeding Farm, Nagpur (District Nagpur). (E) Other Recognised Institution (1) Krishi Development Trust, Baramati, District Pune. (2) Arts, Science and Commerce College, Bhor, District Pune. (3) Shriampur District Central Dairy Merchant Sangh, Babhaleshwar, District Ahmednagar. (4) Shri Marutrao Ghule Patil Shikshan Sanstha, Dnyaneshwar Nagar, Post Bhende Budruk, Ahmednagar. (5) Gaurishankar Education Society, Satara. (6) Kagal Education Society, Kagal, District Kolhapur. (7) Ganesh Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, Sasarale, District Sangli. (8) Shivkrupa Education and Research Centre, Shirala, District Sangli. (9) Kisan Vidya Prasarak Mandal, Boradi, Taluka Shirpur, District Dhule. (10) Pashudhan Paryavekshak Training Centre, Manjari, District Pune. (11) Pashudhan Paryavekshak Training Centre, Kolhapur. (12) Agricultural Science Centre (Kharvate). Dahivali. (13) Mhasoba Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, Nimgaon, Mhalungi, Taluka Shirur, District Pune. (14) Institute of Agricultural and Dairy Sciences, Pravranagar, Post Loni, Taluka Srirampur, District Ahmednagar. (15) Phaltan Education Society, Phaltan, District Satara. (16) Arts and Commerce College, Ashta, Taluka Valva, District Sangli. (17) Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, Akluj, District Solapur. (18) Bhavbhuti Shikshan Sanstha, Amgaon, District Bhandara. (19) Shivaji Shikshan Sanstha, Amravati. (20) Dhamangaon Shikshan Sanstha, Dhamangaon Railway, District Amravati. (21) Ravi Bhau-Uddeshiya Shikshan Sanstha, Nagpur. (22) Tarachand Khadese Ma. Shikshan Sanstha, Nagpur. (23) Shiksha Mandal (Pripi) Wardha. (24) Banda Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, Chandrapur (Civil Line). (25) Satpuda Shikshan Sanstha, jandhvi Jamod, District Buldana.
Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University Act, 1998_Section Sch.2--> State(s): Maharashtra (See section 73) In the Maharashtra Agricultural Universities (Krishi Vidyapeeths) Act, 1983,- (a) in section 2, in clause (b), the-words "animal husbandry, dairying, veterinary, fisheries, marine biology," shall be deleted; (b) in section 9, the words, "Veterinary Science and Fisheries" shall be deleted; (c) in section 12, in sub-section (3), in clause (g), for the words "animal husbandry, horticulture, forestry, dairy science and food technology and fisheries" the words "horticulture, food technology and forestry" shall be substituted; (d) in section 30, in sub-section (1), entry (iii) shall be deleted; (e) in section 35, in sub-section (1),- (i) in entry (i), the words "and Animal Husbandry" shall be deleted; (ii) entry (ii) and entry (ix) shall be deleted; (f) in section 45, in sub-section (1),- (i) in entry (i), the words "and Animal Husbandry" shall be deleted; (ii) entry (ii) shall be deleted; (g) in section 70, in sub-section (2), in clause (ii), "entry (c)" shall be deleted. 
