Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences Act, 1998. And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences Act, 1998 (Mah. X of 1999), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 (Mah. Ord. XIV of 2010), on the 5th October, 2010; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th October, 2010.
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 22 of the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences Act, 1998 (Mah. X of 1999) (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "22A. Power of Government to specify eligibility conditions for being member of any authority of University:- Notwithstanding, anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, the Government may, in consultation with the Chancellor, by an order published in Official Gazette, specify the eligibility conditions for being or nominated as a member of any authority of the University.".'.
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 85 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(2A) The Government shall cause the audited annual accounts of the University, received by it, to be laid before each House of State Legislature.".
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra Section 86 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered a sub-section (1) thereof; and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following shall be added, namely:- "(2) The Government shall cause the annual report of the "University, received by it, to be laid before each House of the State Legislature.".
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 94 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "94. Admission of students to privileges of University:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations or Rules, any student who immediately prior to the date, of commencement of this Act and on the date of commencement of the Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010 (Mah. XXXV of 2010) was studying for a degree in Health Sciences in any of the Universities specified in the Schedule to this Act, shall be deemed to be the student of the University.".
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2010 (Mah. Ord. XIV of 2010), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken or issued, as the case may be, under corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
