Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act abolish the urban immovable property tax and further to increase the maximum rate of general tax at which the Bombay Municipal Corporation may tax building and lands in Greater Bombay, and to provide for matters connected with the purposes aforesaid. WHEREAS, it is expedient to abolish the urban immovable property tax and further to increase the maximum rate of general tax at which the Bombay Municipal Corporation my tax building and lands in Greater Bombay and to provide for matters connected with the purposes aforesaid; It is hereby enacted in the Thirteenth year of Republic of India as follows:-
Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962. (2) It shall come into force on such1 date as the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf. 1st day of April 1963, Vide, G. N., U. D. & P. H. D. No. BMC-1061/52057-C, dated January 1963.
Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Part VI of the Bombay Finance Act, 1932 (hereinafter referred to as "the Finance Act") shall, on the commencement of this Act, stand repealed. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of Part VI of the Finance Act, that Part and the rules and orders made thereunder or in pursuance thereof, shall continue to have effect for the purposes of the levy, assessment (including re-assessment), exemption, collection, rebate, remission or refund of the urban immovable property tax, or for the purposes of any penalty or any other payment under the said Part in respect of any period before such repeal and for any other purpose connected with or incidental to any of the purposes aforesaid. (3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) and subject thereto, section 7 of the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904, shall apply in relation to the repeal of Part VI of the Finance Act.
Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra [the amendments made by section 3 has been incorporated in the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act and the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, respectively]
Urban Immovable Property Tax (Abolition) and General Tax (Increase of Maximum Rate) Act, 1962_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra [the amendments made by section 4 has been incorporated in the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act and the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, respectively] 
