Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to amend the Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University Act, 1989. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University Act, 1989, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted 'in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002.
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 5 of the Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), in sub-section (1), after clause (x), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(xa) to start or conduct a sub-centre or study centre in any territory outside the State of Maharashtra, with the approval of the Government concerned; (xb) to undertake academic collaboration programmes with Universities and Institutions abroad, with the approval of the State Government, and if necessary, of the Central Government;".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that, the University, may, in the interest of promotion of open university and distance education system in the educational pattern of the State, with the prior permission of the State Government and Government of India, open its sub-centres or study centres outside India."
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 9 of the principal Act, - (a) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(IA) The Pro-Vice-Chancellor;"; (b) after clause (2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(2A) The Controller of Examinations ;".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "10A. Pro-Vice-Chancellor:-The Pro-Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in such manner, for such terms and on such emoluments and other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "11A. Controller of Examination:-The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor in such manner, for such terms and on such emoluments and other conditions of service and shall exercise such powers and perform such functions, as may be prescribed by the Statutes.".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 15 of the principal Act, after clause (4), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely :- "(4A) The Board of Examinations; (4B) The Board of University Teaching and Research;".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 19 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "19A. Board of Examinations;-"The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Examinations shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes. 19B. Board of University Teaching and Research:-The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of University Teaching and Research shall be such as may be prescribed by the Statutes.".
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 21 of the principal Act, in clause (b), for the word "Director" the words "Pro-Vice-Chancellor, Director, Controller of Examinations" shall be substituted.
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 27 of the principal Act, sub-section (4) shall be deleted.
Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the portion beginning with the words "which shall," and ending with the words of sections "State Legislature" shall be deleted. 
