Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to abolish Bhil Naik Inams prevailing in the districts of West Khandesh and Nasik in the State of Bombay. WHEREAS it is necessary and expedient in the public interest to abolish the Bhil Naik Inams held for service useful to Government on political considerations in the districts of West Khandesh and Nasik in the State of Bombay and to provide for other incidental and consequential matters hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955. (2) It extends to the districts of West Khandesh and Nasik in the State of Bombay. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (i) "appointed date" means the date on which this Act comes into force; (ii) "Bhil Naik I nam" means the grant of a village or land for service useful to Government on political considerations in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in Government Resolution in the Revenue Department No. 5763, dated the 19th August 1902 and entered in the alienation register kept under section 53 of the Code as "Class VI-Village servants useful to Government" and includes the land granted in Marod village of Navapur taluka under Government order in the Revenue Department No. 288, dated the 11th January, 1919; (iii) "Code" means the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879; (iv) "Collector" includes an officer appointed by the State Government to perform the functions and exercise the powers of the Collector under this Act; (v) "inamdar" means a holder of a Bhil Naik Inam; (vi) "inam village" or "inam land" means a village or land, as the case may be, held by an inamdar under a Bhil Naik Inam; (vii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. (2) The other words and expressions used but not defined in this Act shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Code.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra Nothing in this Act shall apply to- (i) devastan inams or inams held for religions or charitable institutions; and (ii) inams other than Bhil Naik Inams held for service useful to Government in an inam village or inam land. 1 [Explanation.- For the purposes of this section an inam held for a religious of charitable institution shall mean a Devasthan or Dharmadaya inam granted or recognised by the ruling authority for the time being for a religious or charitable institution and entered as such in the alienation register kept under section 53 of the Code or in the records kept under the rules made under the Pensions Act, 1871.] This Explanation was added and shall be deemed always to have been added at the end by Bombay 40 of 1956, s. 4 and Second Schedule.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding any settlement, grant, sanad or order or any law for the time being in force, with effect from and on the appointed date - (1) all Bhil Naik Inams shall be deemed to have been abolished, and (2) any liability to render service and all other incidents appertaining to such inams are hereby extinguished. (3) All inam villages and inam lands are hereby resumed and shall be deemed to be subject to the payment of land revenue under the provisions of the Code and the rules made thereunder and the provisions of the Code and the rules relating to unalienated lands shall apply to such lands.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) In an inam village and inam land- (i) in the case of land which is not uncultivated on the appointed date and is in the actual possession of an inamdar or in the possession of a person holding through or from him other than an inferior holder referred to in clause (b) below, such inamdar, and (ii) in the case of land, which is not uncultivated on the appointed date and is in the possession of an inferior holder on payment of annual assessment only to the inamdar such inferior holder, shall be primarily liable to the State Government for the payment of land revenue due in respect of such land and shall be entitled to all the rights and shall be liable to all obligations in respect of such land as an occupant under the Code or the rules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force: Provided that the inamdar, in respect of the land which is in the possession of a person holding through or from him and the inferior holder in respect of the land in his possession shall be entitled to the rights of an occupant on payment to the State Government of such occupancy price as may be fixed by the State Government by special or general order but not exceeding an amount equal to six times the amount of the full assessment of such land within the prescribed period. (2) If the inamdar or the inferior holder fails to pay the occupancy price within the prescribed period he shall be deemed to be unauthorisedly occupying the land and shall be liable to be summarily ejected in accordance with the provisions of the Code. (3) The occupancy of the land granted under this section shall not be transferable or partible by metes and bounds without the previous sanction of the Collector and except on payment of such amount as the State Government may, by general or special order, datermine. Explanation.- For the purpose of this section and section 6, land shall be deemed to be uncultivated if it has not been cultivated for a continuous period of three years immediately before the appointed date.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra For the removal of doubt it is hereby declared that all uncultivated and waste lands, whether assessed or unassessed, in an inam village or inam land and all other kinds of property referred to in section 37 of the Code situate n an inam village or inam land, which are not the property of the individuals or of any aggregate of persons legally capable of holding property and except in so far as any rights of such persons may be established in or over the same and except as may be otherwise provided in any law for the time being in force, are, together with all rights in and over the same or appertaining thereto, the property of the State Government and it shall be lawful to dispose of or set apart the same by the authority and for the purpose provided in section 37 or 38 of the Code, as the case may be.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any person is aggrieved by the provisions of this Act as abolishing, extinguishing or modifying any of his rights to, or interest in, property such person may apply to the Collector for compensation. (2) An application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the Collector in a prescribed form within six months from the appointed date. The Collector shall, after holding a formal inquiry in the manner provided by the Code, make an award determining the compensation in the manner and according to the method provided for in sub-section (1) of section 23 and section 24 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. 1 [(2A) (i) Where the officer making an award under sub-section (2) is a Collector under this Act but not a Collector appointed under section 8 of the Code and the amount of such award exceeds five thousand rupees, then the award shall not be made without the pervious approval of- (a) the Collector appointed under section 8 of the Code, if the amount of the award does not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees, or (b) the Commissioner, if the amount of the award exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees but does not exceed one lakh of rupees, or (c) the State Government, if the amount of the award exceeds one lakh of rupees. (ii) Where the officer making an award under sub-section (2) is a Collector under this Act and also a Collector appointed under section 8 of such award exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees, then such award shall not be made without the previous approval of- (a) the Commissioner if the amount of the award does not exceed one lakh of rupees, or (b) the State Government, if the amount of the award exceeds on lakh of rupees. (iii) Every award under sub-section (2) shall be in the form prescribed in section 26 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.] (3) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person to compensation on the ground that any land, which was wholly or partially exempt from the payment of land revenue has been under the provisions of the Act made subject to the payment of full assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Code. (4) Any person aggrieved by the award of the Collector made under sub-section (2) may appeal to the Bombay Revenue Tribunal constituted under the Bombay Revenue Tribunal Act, 1939, within 60 days from the date of the award. (5) In deciding appeals under sub-section (4), the Bombay Revenue Tribunal shall exercise all the powers which a Court has and follow the same procedure which the Court follows in deciding appeals from the decree or order of an original Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. (6) In computing the period for filing appeals the provisions of sections 4, 5, 12 and 14 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, shall apply to the appeals made under this section. Sub-section (2A) was inserted by Bombay 93 of 1958, s. 2, Sch.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in the Court-fees Act, 1870 every appeal made under this Act to the Bombay Revenue Tribunal shall bear a court-fee stamp of such value as may be prescribed.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra The award made by the Collector subject to an appeal to the Bombay Revenue Tribunal and the decision of the Bombay Revenue Tribunal on the appeal shall be final and conclusive and shall not be questioned in any suit or proceeding in any court.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 9A--> State(s): Maharashtra Where any award was made under sub-section (2) of section 7 before the commencement of the Bombay Land Tenures Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1958 and no appeal was filed against such award under sub-section (4) of section 7, then notwithstanding anything contained in section 9, the State Government may call for the record of the inquiry or proceedings relating to such award for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality, propriety or regularity of such inquiry or proceedings and if, after giving the interested parties an opportunity to be heard, it is not satisfied as to the legality, propriety or regularity of such inquiry or proceedings, it may cancel the award and direct the Collector to make a fresh award and thereupon all the provisions of this Act relating to the making of an award the finality of such award, and the appeal against such award shall mutatis mutandis apply to such fresh award.] Section 9A was inserted by Bombay 93 of 1958, s. 2, Sch.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra All inquiries and proceedings before the Collector and the Bombay Revenue Tribunal under this Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra The amount of compensation payable under the provisions of this Act shall be payable in transferable bonds carrying interest at the rate of three per cent, per annum from the date of the issue of such bonds and shall be repayable during a period of twenty years from the date of the issue of such bonds by equated annual instalments of principal and interest. The bonds shall be of such denominations and shall be in such forms as may be prescribed.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra Nothing in this Act shall in any way be deemed to affect the application of any of the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, to any inam village or inam land or the mutual rights and obligations of a holder and his tenants, save in so far as the said provisions are not in any way inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra The State Government may, subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act. Such rules shall when finally made be published in the Official Gazetts.
Bombay Bhil Naik Inams Abolition Act, 1955_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect,- (a) any obligation or liability already incurred before the appointed date or (b) any proceeding or remedy in respect of such obligation or liability; and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced as if t .s Act had not been passed. 
