Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to provide for compulsory primary education and to make better provision for the management and control of primary education in the Province of Bombay. WHEREAS it is duty of Government to secure the development and expansion of primary education; and whereas it is the declared policy of Government that universal, free and compulsory primary education should be reached by a definite programme of progressive expansion; and whereas it is expedient to make better provision for the development, expansion, management and control of primary education in the Province of Bombay; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947. (2) It extends to the 1 [Bombay area of the State of Maharashtra excluding Greater Bombay.] (3) It shall come into force on such date as the 2 [State] Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Substituted for the words "pre-Reorganisation State of Bombay, excluding the transferred territories and Greater Bombay" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) "Administrative Officer" means an officer appointed under section 21 or 22; (2) "Approved school" means a primary school maintained by the 1 [State] Government or by a school board 2 [or Zilla Parishad] or by an authorized municipality or which is for the time being recognised as such by a school board 3 [or Zilla Parishad] or by the 4 [State] Government or by an officer authorized by it in this behalf; (3) "Area of compulsion" means the area in which primary education upto any standard is compulsory; (4) "Area of an authorized municipality" means the area comprised within the limits of such municipality and shall include the area of a non-authorized municipality approved schools in which vest in or are controlled by the authorized municipality; (5) "To attend an approved school" means to be present for instruction at such school on such days and at such time and for such period on each day as may be required under the regulations framed by the school board 5 [or, as the case may be, Zilla Parishad]; (6) "Authorised Municipality" means a municipality which is authorized by the 6 [State] Government under sub-section (1) of section 16 to control all approved schools within its area; (7) "Child" means a boy or girl whose age is not less than six and not more than fourteen years at the beginning of the school year. Explanation.- For the purposes of this definition, "school year" shall mean the year beginning with such date as the school Board, 7 [or, as the case may be, Zilla Parishad] may, with the sanction of the Director, fix; (8) "Director" means 8 [The Director of Education] 9 [...] 10 [(9) "district" in clause (h) of section 5 and in sections 6 and 19 means the district as formed under the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879,11 and elsewhere the area comprised in a district so formed excluding the areas of authorized municipalities and cantonments;] (10) "Zilla Parishad" means a Zilla Parishad constituted under the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961;] 12 [...] (11) "Municipal School Board" means a school board constituted for the area of an authorized municipality under section 3; (12) "Non-authorized Municipality" means a municipality other than an authorized municipality; (13) "Parent" includes a guardian or any person who has the custody of a child; 13 [13A] "Parishad Education Officer" means the Parishad Education Officer of a Zilla Parishasd;] (14) "Prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; (15) "Primary Education" means education in such subjects and up to such standards, as may be determined by the 14 [State] Government from time to time; (16) "Primary Education Fund" means the fund maintained under section 44; (17) "Primary School" means a school or a part of a school in which primary education up to any standard is imparted; (18) "15 [Board] of Primary Education" means the board constituted under section 58; (19) "School Board" means 16 [...] a municipal school board, 17 [...] 18 [(20) "shikshan sevak" means a member of base teaching cadre appointed on honorarium and subject to such terms and conditions as specified in the Government Resolution, published in the Maharashtra Government Gazette, Extraordinary, No. 12 Part I-Central, Sub-Section, dated the 15th February, 2007, for eventual appointment as a teacher; (21) "teacher means a member of the teaching staff and includes the head of a school.] Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "the Director of Public Instructions" by Bombay 39 of 1951, s. 3, Second Schedule. The words "for State of Bombay" were omitted by the Bombay Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1956. Clauses (9) and (10) were substituted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. See now the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (Maharashtra XLI of 1966). Clause (10A) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Clause (13A) was inserted by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80 Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. Substituted for the words "State Board" by the Bombay Adaptation of Laws (State and concurrent subject Order, 1956. The words "a district school board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 or 1962, 286, Tenth Sch. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Clause (20) and (21) were added by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 2. (w.e.f. 30.4.2007).
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) 1 [...] (2) For each area of an authorized municipality there shall be municipal school board. Sub-section (1) was deleted by Mah 14 of 2007.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Each school board shall consist of members not less than twelve and not more than sixteen in number. 1 [(2) Of these members five in number shall be appointed by the State Government.] (3) The number of members under 2 [sub-section (1)] shall be determined by the 3 [State] Government from time to time. (4) Of the members appointed by the 4 [State] Government under sub-section (2) one shall be an officer of the 5 [State] Government; 6 [and the remaining four members shall be persons from each of the following categories,- (a) Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, (b) Other Backward Classes, (c) Minorities, and (d) General, and (i) Who shall have a degree in any faculty from any statutory University. or shall possess any other equivalent or higher educational qualification which the 7 [State] Government may specify in this behalf or (ii) who have had experience of the system or institutions of primary education. (5) (a) The members other than those appointed by the 8 [State] Government shall be elected by 9 [...] the authorized municipality 10 [...]. Provided that where approved schools within the area of any non-authorized municipalities are controlled by 11 [...] the authorized municipality, not more than two of such members as may be determined by the 12 [State] Government from time to time shall be elected in the manner prescribed by the said non-authorized municipalities, on 13 [...] municipal school board, 14 [...]. (b) Members elected under this sub-section shall not necessarily be member or the electing local authority. 15 [(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, in the case of 16 [an] authorized municipality the term of office of the 17 [...] councillors of which expires on or before the 31st day of July 1949, the section of the members of the school board shall not be held by such 18 [...] authorized municipality 19 [...] until after the new 20 [...] authorized municipality, has been constituted.] 21 [(6) Of the members elected 22 [...] by the authorized municipality such number not exceeding two as may be prescribed shall be from amongst the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.] 23 [Provided that, where the prescribed number of members to be elected from amongst the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes is two, one member shall be from amongst the Scheduled Castes and one member shall be from amongst the Scheduled Tribes: Provided further that, where a member to be elected from the category of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, is not available, the member shall be elected from the available category of the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be); (7) Members elected under sub-section (5) shall have passed the 24 [the Higher Secondary School Certificate Examination] or shall possess such other equivalent or higher, educational qualification 25 [as the State Government may specify in this behalf]. 26 [...] Provided 27 [...] that out of the seats of the members to be elected by 28 [...] the authorized municipality not less than three shall be reserved in the prescribed manner for persons 29 [who have passed a degree in any faculty and a degree of Bachelor of Education from any statutory university] or who passes any other equivalent or higher educational qualification which the 30 [State] Government may specify in this behalf];. 31 [Explanation.- For the purposes of sub-sections (6) and (7) "Scheduled Castes and "Scheduled Tribes" means those Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which are deemed to be Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in relation to the 32 [State of Maharashtra] under Article 341 or 342, as the case may be, of the Constitution.] (8) If the 33 [State] Government is satisfied that any election (including a bye-election) cannot for any reason be held at all or cannot be completed within such period as the 34 [State] Government considers reasonable or has not resulted in the return of the required number of qualified persons willing to take office, the 35 [State] Government shall nominate from amongst persons who would have been qualified to be elected the required number of persons as members of the school board and the persons so nominated shall be deemed to have been duly elected under sub-section (5): 36 [Provided that if at any time after the nomination of such persons as members of the school board, the State Government is satisfied that a fresh election (including a bye-election) can be duly held, the State Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, direct that the members so nominated shall cease to hold office with effect from such date as may be specified in such notification, notwithstanding the fact that the term of office of such members for which they had been nominated has not expired.] (9) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the term of office of the members of a school board shall cease on the expiry of the term of the electing 37 [...] authorized municipality: Provided that the term of office of such members shall not be deemed to expire by reason only of the fact that the 38 [...] authorized municipality 39 [...] is dissolved or superseded. (10) (a) If the term of office of the members of a school board expires during the supersession of the electing 40 [...] authorized municipality a new school board shall be constituted as provided in sub-sections ( ) to (7) until the 41 [...] authorized municipality 42 [...] is re-established, provided that the members of such school board shall be nominated by the 43 [State] Government. (b) The term of office of the members of the school board so nominated shall be for such period not exceeding three years as the 44 [State] Government may determine: Provided that if during such period the 45 [...] authorized municipality 46 [...] is re-established, the term of office of the members of the school board shall expire on the date on which a new school board is constituted. (11) Notwithstanding 47 [The cessation or expiry of the term of office of the members of any school board under sub-section 48 [(8), (9)] or (10) they shall continue in office until the members of a new school board are elected, appointed or nominated, as the case may be. (12) (a) Any member of a school board other than the chairman or vice chairman may resign his office by giving notice in writing to that effect to the chairman and such resignation shall take effect from the date of its receipt by the chairman. (b) The vice-chairman may resign his office as vice-chairman or member by giving notice in writing to that effect to the chairman. The chairman may resign his office as chairman or member by giving notice in writing to that effect to the president 49 [...] the authorized municipality 50 [...]. Such resignation shall take effect from the date of their acceptance by the chairman or the president. (13) Casual vacancies including that of a chairman or vice-Chairman during the term of a school board shall be filled for the remaining period by election, appointment or nomination, as the case may be: 51 [Provided that no election shall be held to fill up a vacancy of a member occurring within four months of the date on the term of office of the members of the school board expires. 52 [(14) During a such period the continuing members may act as if no vacancy has occurred]. 53 [...] Sub-section (2) was substituted by Maharashtra- of 2010 s. 2(i). Substituted far "sub-section (1) and (2)" by Mah- of 2010 s. 2(ii). This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. This portion was substituted by Maharashtra- of 2010, s. 2(iii). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. The words "the district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "the district school board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws order, 1950. The words "the district school board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This clause was inserted by Bombay 8 of 1962, s. 2(1). This world was substituted for the words "a district local board or" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "members or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. The words "district local board or the" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "district local board or the" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. This Sub-Section was Substituted for the original by Bombay. 25 of 1952, s.2(1). The amendments made by section 2 of Bombay 25 of 1952 shall not apply to any school board existing on the date of the commencement of the said Act but shall apply to any new school board constituted thereafter (vide s.10 of Bombay 25 of 1952) The words " by the district local board or" were deleted by Mah, 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. These provisos were added by Maharashtra _ of 2010, s. 2(iv). Substituted for the words " Primary school certificate examination" by Mah - of 2010, s. 2(v)(a)(i). Substituted for the words "as may be prescribed" by Maharashtra- of 2010, s. 2(v)(a)(ii). This provisos was deleted by Maharashtra _of 2010 s. 2(v)(b). The word "further" was deleted by Maharashtra of 2010 s. 2(v)(c)(i). The words "the district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, 286, Tenth sch. Substituted for the words "who have passed the matriculation or the second year training certificate examination" by Maharashtra - of 2010, s. 2(v)(c)(ii). The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This Explanation was substituted for the original by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 2(3), see also para 2 of footnote 3. Substituted for the words "Pre-Reorganisation State of Bombay, excluding the transferred territories" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws Order, 1950. This proviso was added by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 2(1). The words "district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This proviso was added by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 2(1). The words "district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This proviso was added by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 2(1). The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of laws Order, 1950. The words "district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the original by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 2(2)(i). These brackets and figures were substituted for the brackets and figure "(9)" by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 2(2)(ii). The words "the district local board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. This proviso was added by Bombay 8 of 1949, s. 2(2). This sub-section was added by Bombay 8 of 1949, s. 2(3). Sub-section (15) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra No person shall be elected, appointed or nominated a member of a school board who - (a) is less than 25 years of age, or (b) is a judge of civil court or 1 [a salaried magistrate], or (c) (i) has been sentenced by a criminal court to fine, imprisonment or whipping for an offence involving moral turpitude and punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months or to transportation, such sentence not having been subsequently reversed or quashed, or (ii) is a person against whom an order has been passed under section 118 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, in proceedings instituted under section 110 of the said Code, such order not having subsequently been reversed or quashed, or (iii) has been removed from office under this Act and five years have not elapsed from the date of such removal, unless he has, by an order of the 2 [State] Government notified in the Official Gazette, been relieved from the disqualification arising on account of such sentence, order or removal from office, or (d) is a stipendiary officer or an employee of any school board, 3 [...] or municipality, or (e) who has been adjudged an insolvent and has not obtained his discharge, or (f) has, directly or indirectly, by himself or his partner, any share or interest in any work done by order of, or in any contract entered into on behalf of the school board or the 4 [authorized municipality], or (g) is an employee or teacher in any approved school, or (h) has resided within the district for a period of less than six months preceding the date fixed for recording of votes for elections to the school board, (i) has been adjudged by a competent court to be of unsound mind. Explanation.- A person shall not be deemed to have incurred disqualification under clause (f) by reason of his- (a) having any share or interest in any lease sale or [...] any immovable property or in an agreement for the same if before possession of seat as a member of the school board, he has obtained the sanction of the 5 [State] Government to have such share or interest, or (b) having a share or interest in any joint stock company or in any society registered or deemed to be registered under the Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925, which may contract with or be employed by or on behalf of the school board or the 6 [authorized municipality], or (c) having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the school board or the 7 [authorized municipality] may be inserted, or (d) holding a debenture or being otherwise interested in any loan raised by or on behalf of the school board or the 8 [authorized municipality], or (e) having a share or interest in the occasional sale to the school board or 9 [authorized municipality] of any article in which he regularly trades, or in the purchase from the school board or the 10 [authorized municipality] of any article, to a value in either case not exceeding in any official year five hundred rupees, or such higher amount not exceeding two thousand rupees as the school board or the 11 [authorized municipality] with the sanction of the 12 [State] Government may fix in this behalf, or (f) having a share or interest in the occasional letting out on hire to the school board or the 13 [authorized municipality] or in the hiring from the school board or the 14 [authorized municipality] of any article for an amount not exceeding in any official year fifty rupees, or such higher amount not exceeding two hundred rupees as the school board or the 15 [authorized municipality] with the sanction of the 16 [State] Government may fix in this behalf, or (g) being a police patel who is an ex-officio keeper of village cattle pounds under the control of the 17 [authorized municipality]. Substituted for the words "a magistrate" by Bombay 46 of 1949, s. 3. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950 The words "or district local board" were deleted by Bombay 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "electing local authority" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If the validity of the election of a member of a school board is brought in question by an unsuccessful candidate to or by any parson qualified to vote at the election, such person may at any time within fifteen days after the date of the declaration of the result of the election, apply to the District Judge of the district within which the election has been or should have been held for the determination of such question. (2) An enquiry shall thereupon be held by a Judge not below the grade of an Assistant Judge and such Judge may, after such enquiry as he deems necessary, pass an order confirming or amending the declared result of the election or setting the election aside. For the purposes of the said enquiry, the said Judge may exercise any of the powers of a civil court, and his decision shall be conclusive. If he sets aside an election, a date shall forthwith be fixed, and the necessary steps taken for holding a fresh election. (3) All applications received under sub-section (1)- (a) in which the validity of the election of members is in question shall as far as possible, be heard by the same Judge, and (b) in which the validity of the election of the same member is in question shall be heard together. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the Judge shall not allow- (a) any application to be compromised or withdrawn, or (b) any pleadings in the proceedings to be altered or amended, unless he is satisfied that such application, alteration or amendment is bona fide and not collusive, (5) (a) If on holding such enquiry the Judge finds that a candidate has for the purpose of the election committed a corrupt practice within the meaning of sub-section (6), he shall declare the candidate disqualified both for the purposes of that election and of such fresh election as may be held under sub-section (2), and shall set aside the election of such candidate if he has been elected. (b) If, in any case to which clause (a) does not apply, the validity of an election is in dispute between two or more candidates, the Judge shall after a scrutiny and computation of the votes recorded in favour of each such candidate, declare the candidate who is found to have the greatest number of valid votes in this favour to have been duly elected: Provided that for the purpose of such computation no vote shall be reckoned as valid if the Judge finds that any corrupt practice was committed by any person, known or unknown, in giving or obtaining it. (6) A person shall be deemed to have committed a corrupt practice- (a) who, with a view to inducing any voter to give or refrain from giving a vote in favour of any candidate, offers or gives any money or valuable consideration, or holds out any promise of individual profit or holds out any threat of injury to any person; or (b) who gives, procures or abets the giving of a vote in the name of a voter who is not the person giving such vote; and a corrupt practice shall be deemed to have been committed by a candidate, if it has been committed with his knowledge and consent, or by a person who is acting under the general or special authority of such candidate with reference to the election. Explanation.- The expression "a promise of individual profit" - (i) does not include a promise to vote for or against any particular measure which may come before a school board for consideration, but (ii) subject thereto, includes a promise for the benefit of the person himself or any person in whom he is interested. (7) If the validity of the election is brought in question only on the ground of an irregularity or informality which has not materially affected the result of the election or which has not been corruptly caused, the Judge shall not set aside the election. (8) If the Judge sets aside an election under clause (a) of sub-section (5) he may, if he thinks fit, declare any person by whom any corrupt practice has been committed within the meaning of sub-section (6) to be disqualified from being a member of any school board for a term of years not exceeding five and the decision of the Judge shall be conclusive: Provided that no such declaration shall be made in respect of any person without such person being given an opportunity to show cause why such declaration should not be made: Provided further that such person may by an order of the 1 [State] Government in that behalf be at any time relieved from such disqualification This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 6A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If it appears to the State Government on representation being made to it that a member of a school board was disqualified for being such member under the provisions of section 5 or section 9-A at the time when such member was elected, appointed or nominated and the member does not admit that he was so disqualified, the question shall be decided by the State Government, and its decision shall be final. (2) No such representation shall be entertained,- (i) if it is made by a person who is or entitled to file an application to the District Judge under section 6 to question the validity of the election of the member, (ii) if it is made before the expiration of the period prescribed for such application under the said section, or (iii) if an application to the District Judge under section 6 is pending or has been tried, unless the State Government is satisfied that the question of the member's disqualification by reason of these circumstances was not or could not have been raised in such proceedings. (3) Where in relation to proceedings under sub-section (1) the member admits that he was disqualified under the provisions of section 5 or section 9-A or where under the aforesaid sub-section the State Government decides that the member was disqualified, his seat shall thereupon become vacant; but no person who does not admit that he was disqualified, shall be held to be disqualified unless such decision has been arrived at after giving such person reasonable opportunity to show cause.] This section was inserted by Bombay 12 of 1956, s. 2.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any member of a school board, during the term for which he has been elected, appointed or nominated- 1 [(a) absents himself from the meetings during three successive months or from three consecutive meetings of the school board whichever period is longer without the 2 [...] permission of the Board or] (b) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 3 [Section 5] he shall be disabled from continuing to be a member of such board and his seat shall be deemed to be vacant: Provided that he shall not be deemed to have incurred any disqualification under clause (f) of section 5 by reason of his having any share of interest in any lease, sale or purchase of any immovable property or in any agreement for the same, if he has obtained the previous sanction of the 4 [State] Government to have such share or interest. (2) In any question, dispute or doubt arises whether a vacancy has occurred under this section, the orders of the 5 [State] Government shall be final for the purpose of deciding such question, dispute or doubt. These clause was substituted for the original by Bombay 46 of 1949, s. 4. The word "previous" was deleted by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 3. This word and figure were substituted for the word and figure "section 6" by Bombay 9 of 1951 s. 3, Second Schedule. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 7A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any person sits or votes as a member of a school board when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall upon it being so found by the Collector be liable in respect of each day on which he so sites or votes to a penalty of 50 rupees to be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. (2) The Collector shall give such person a reasonable opportunity of being heard and shall record his decision, and the reasons therefor, in writing. (3) Any person found liable to pay a penalty under this section, may within fifteen days of such decision appeal to the State Government, and the decision of the State Government shall be final.] This section was inserted by Bombay 12 of 1956, s. 3.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra A member shall not vote or take part in a discussion on any matter before a meeting of a school board in which he has directly or indirectly, by himself or his partner, any share or interest such as is described in clause (f) of section 5 or in which he is professionally interested on behalf of a client, principal or other person. The vote so given shall not be counted.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra The 1 [State] Government may on its own motion or on the recommendation supported by a resolution passed by at least two-thirds of the whole number of members of - (i) a school board, or (ii) 2 [...] the authorized municipality which elected the members. Remove any member elected, appointed or nominated on the school board, if such member has been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties or of any disgraceful conduct or has become incapable or performing his duties as a member by reason of any physical or mental infirmity: Provided that no person shall be so removed nor shall any resolution recommending the removal of any member be passed unless the member to whom it relates has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be so removed or why such recommendation should not be made. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This words the district local board or were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 9A--> State(s): Maharashtra If any person, who was a member of a school board and who had resigned his office as such member, has been, after due inquiry, found guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties or of any disgraceful conduct as a member, the State Government may by an order notified in the Official Gazette declare him, not-withstanding the fact that he had resigned his office as such member, to be disqualified for being elected, appointed or nominated a member of any school board from such date and for such period not exceeding five years as may be specified in the order. The State Government may at any time by like order remove the disqualification so incurred by any person. The decision of the State Government under this section shall be final.] Section 9A was inserted by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 4.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every school board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from amongst the members of the board. (2) A Chairman or a Vice-Chairman shall be removable from office by a resolution passed to that effect, provided that at least two-thirds of the total number of members of the school board vote in favour of such resolution or where the number of such members voting in favour of such resolution is less than two-thirds but more than one-half of the total number of members of the school board, sanction is accorded by the 1 [State] Government for such removal and provided further, that before such resolution is passed, the Chairman or vice-Chairman is given at least two weeks, notice of such resolution and a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why such resolution should not be passed. (3) Every Chairman or Vice-Chairman who, for a continuous period exceeding three months, absents himself from the 2 [area of an authorized municipality] without leave of the school board shall cease to be Chairman or Vice-Chairman. (4) No leave shall be granted by the school board under sub-section (3) for a total period exceeding six months during the term of the school board. (5) Whenever leave is granted to a Vice-Chairman under sub-section (3) a member shall be elected to be Vice-chairman during the period of such leave. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "district" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 10A--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, State Government, 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 2 [Zilla Parishad] shall have control over all approved schools within the district and may grant and to any approved school other than a primary school maintained by the 3 [State] Government 4 [...] or by an authorized municipality. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made rules made thereunder, and so far as its 5 [district fund] will allow, the 6 [Zilla Parishads] shall perform the following duties and functions:- (a) to provide for the welfare of the children attending primary schools; (b) to maintain an adequate number of primary schools; (c) to provide adequate accommodation and equipment for primary schools; (d) to maintain an adequate staff of Assistant Administrative Officers, Supervisors, Attendance Officers, clerks, teachers, 7 [shikshan sevaks] inferior servants and other staff 8 [...]; (e) to maintain an adequate number of engineering staff required for the construction and maintenance of schools and other buildings; (f) to determine, on the recommendation of the 9 [Parishad Education Officer], the distance measured according to the nearest road between an approved school and the residence of a child for purposes of clause (c) of section 33: (g) to determine with the approval of the 10 [Parishad Education Officer] the hours of instruction and the number and duration of vacations; (h) to determine the exact location of primary schools; (i) to grant on the recommendation of the 11 [Parishad Education Officer] exemption from attending an approved school to a child who is receiving instruction otherwise than in an approved school; (j) to sanction all tenders for the supply of forms, stationery, furniture or equipment; 12 [(k) to open additional schools;] (l) to recommend to the Director such modifications in the curriculum as may seem necessary to suit local requirements; (m) to advise the 13 [State] Government generally in respect of primary education within the district; (n) to carry on propaganda for the expansion of primary education; (o) to perform such other duties and function as may be prescribed; (3) The 14 [Zilla Parishad] shall from time to time with the sanction of the Director make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder for: - (i) laying down the days, the times and the periods on each day during which a child be present for instruction at an approved school; (ii) determining the constitution, powers and duties of the taluka advisory committees; (iii) the supply of books, slates educational requisites, milk, meals or clothes to children of any age receiving primary education, if provision for such supply is made. Substituted for the words "District School Boards" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "or by school board" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "Primary education fund" by Mah 5 of 1962, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 to 2007, s. 3. The words as may in the opinion of the State Government be necessary" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the word "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, sch. Substituted for the word "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, sch. Substituted for the word "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, sch. Clause (k) was substituted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth sch. This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 1 [State] Government may authorize any municipality constituted under the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, or under the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, to control all approved schools within its area. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules and regulations made thereunder, all existing and future rights, liabilities, power and duties of any municipality, which was a local authority under the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923, immediately before the date of coming into force of this Act, in respect of primary school teachers 2 [shikshan sevaks] and other persons employed by it for the purposes or primary education shall on such date vest in and be performed or exercised by the said municipality as an authorized municipality under this Act; and all properties, moveable and immovable, vesting in or held by or under the control of such municipality for the purposes of primary education, shall from such date continue to vest in, be held by or be under the control of the said municipality as such authorized municipality. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 4, (w.e.f. 30.4.2007).
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 17--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder an authorized municipality shall perform the following duties and functions, namely:- (a) to make adequate provision for maintaining the existing primary schools and opening new schools wherever necessary and for granting aid to approved schools other than primary schools maintained by the 1 [State] Government or by a school board or by an authorized municipality; (b) to provide adequate accommodation and equipment for primary schools; (c) to maintain an adequate staff of Assistant Administrative Officer, Supervisors, Attendance Officers, clerks, teachers 2 [shikshan sevaks] inferior servants and other staff as may in the opinion of the 3 [State] Government be necessary; (d) to make adequate provision for facilities for the free primary education of all children to whom a scheme of compulsion applies; (e) to sanction with or without variation the budget of the municipal school board; (f) to perform such other duties and functions as may be prescribed. (2) The authorized municipality may, subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, also make provision for the welfare of the children attending primary schools within its area. (3) The authorized the municipality shall, subject to the sanction of the 4 [State] Government, make regulations (i) determining the qualifications, pay and terms of employment of the Assistant Administrative Officers, Supervisors, Attendance Officers, Clerks, inferior servants and other staff; (ii) regulating the administration, management and control of primary schools; (iii) determining the qualifications, pay and terms of employment of the Administrative Officer appointed by it under section 22; (iv) for the supply of books slates, educational requisites, milk, meals or clothes to children receiving primary education, if provision of such supply is made. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 5, (w.e.f, 30.4.2007). Substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 18--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the municipal school board shall be responsible for the management and control of all primary schools which vest in the authorized municipality and for the control of all other approved schools within the area of the authorized municipality excepting such as are maintained by 1 [State] Government; and the board shall service as powers and perform such duties and functions of the authorized municipality in respect of primary education as may be prescribed. (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, a municipal school board shall perform the following duties and functions namely:- (a) to prepare schemes to be submitted by the authorized municipality to the 2 [State] Government for expansion of primary education and to carry out the provisions of such scheme; (b) to disburse moneys from the primary education fund in accordance with the budget sanctioned by the authorized municipality; (c) to perform the duties and functions specified in clauses (f) to (j) and (I) and (n) of sub-section (2) of section 13; (d) to perform such other duties and functions as may be prescribed. (3) the municipal school board shall, with the sanction of the Director, make regulations laying down the days, the time and the periods on each day during which a child shall be present for instruction at an approved school. Substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 18A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) In any area administered by virtue of an order made by the Governor General under section 290A of the Government of India Act, 1935 all primary schools with their lands, buildings, records and equipment and all other properties moveable or immoveable, which were vested in, held by or under the control of Government or a local authority in such area, for the purposes of primary education, immediately before the date on which such order was made, hereinafter in this section referred to as the said date, shall with effect from the said date, if such area has formed part of a district for which a district school board has been constituted, vest in, be held by or be under the control of the district school board, and in other cases, the 2 [State] Government. (2) During the period the properties so vest in or are held by or are under the control of the 3 [State] Government in any area under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful for the 4 [State] Government or such authority as it may appoint in this behalf to exercise in such area all the powers and perform all the duties of a district school board under this Act. (3) All properties vesting in, held by or under the control of, the 5 [State] Government under this section shall, on such date as may be notified by the 6 [State] Government in the Official Gazette, vest in, be held by or be under the control of, the district school board constituted for the district in which such area is situated or such authorized municipality as the 7 [State] Government may specify in the notification. (4) The district school board or the authorized municipality or the 8 [State] Government, as the case may be, shall take over and employ such primary school teachers and other persons as were employed by or under Government or a local authority immediately before the date notified under sub-section (3) or the said date, as the case may be for the purposes of primary education on the same terms and conditions on which such teachers or persons were employed immediately before the relevant date or on such terms and conditions as the 9 [State] Government may direct. (5) In the event of any question, dispute or doubt arising as to whether any particular property shall so vest in or be held by or be under the control of the district school board, the authorized municipality or the 10 [State] Government or any particular staff shall be so taken over and employed by any of them or any terms and conditions on which such staff shall be taken over and employed, the matter shall be referred to the 11 [State] Government whose decision thereon shall be final. Inserted by Bombay 40 of 1949, s. 6. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 19--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of the rules made thereunder all properties moveable and immoveable vesting in, held by or under the control of any non-authorized municipality for the purpose of primary education shall vest in, be held by or be under the control of the 1 [Zilla Parishad] of the district in which it is situated or such authorized municipality as the 2 [State] Government may specify with the consent of the authorized municipality; and all existing and future rights liabilities, powers and duties of any such non-authorized municipality in respect of primary school teachers 3 [shikshan sevaks] and other persons employed by it for such purposes shall vest in and be performed or exercised under this Act and all approved schools within the area of such non-authorized municipality shall be controlled by the said 4 [Zilla Parishad] or the authorized municipality, as the case may be. (2) The 5 [State] Government may, at any time by an order published in the Official Gazette together with the reasons therefore, direct that any authorized municipality shall, with effect from a date specified in this behalf, cease to be an authorized municipality; and with effect from such date the said municipality shall be a non-authorized municipality. The provisions of sub-section (1) shall thereupon apply in the case of such municipality. (3) If any non-authorized municipality is at any time authorized by the 6 [State] Government to control all approved schools within its area, the said municipality shall thereafter be an authorized municipality. Thereupon all properties moveable or immovable vesting in, held by or under the control of a 7 [Zilla Parishad] or an authorized municipality for the purposes of primary education in such area shall vest in, be held by or be under the control of such first mentioned municipality; and all existing and future rights, liabilities, powers and duties in respect of primary school teachers 8 [shikshan sevaks] and other persons employed by such 9 [Zilla Parishad] or authorized municipality for the purposes of primary education in such area shall also vest in and be performed or exercised by the said first mentioned municipality. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 19(a) (w.e.f. 30.4.2007). substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 6(b), (w.e.f. 30.4.2007). Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 20--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) 2 [...] Every authorized municipality shall maintain an adequate staff of Assistant Administrative Officers, Supervisors, Attendance Officers, clerks, primary school teachers 3 [shikshan savaks] and inferior servants and other staff (including engineering staff), as may in the opinion of the 4 [State] Government be necessary for the administration, management and control of approved schools within its area 5 [or for enabling a Primary Schools Panchayat constituted under section 36B to discharge its functions under this Act.] (2) The staff maintained under sub-section (1) shall be servants 6 [...] of the authorized municipality 7 [...] and shall receive their 8 [honorarium, pay] allowances, 9 [...] gratuities and pensions from its primary education fund. 10 [The primary school teachers] maintained, by an authorized municipality shall receive their provident fund from the primary education fund.] (2A) 11 [...] (3) The rates of the 12 [honorarium, pay] and allowances and terms of employment in respect 13 [...] of the primary school teachers 14 [and shikshan sevaks] maintained by an authorized municipality shall be as fixed from time to time by the 15 [State] Government. (4) The 16 [State] Government may from time to time prescribe the duties to be performed by the staff maintained under sub-section (1). The words "Every district school board with the approval of the State Government and" were deleted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007. The words "District school Board" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 6(b), (w.e.f. 30.4.2007). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Figures and letter were added by Bombay 67 of 1954, s. 2. The words "of the district school board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "as the case may be" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "pay" by Maharashtra 14 of 2009, s. 7, (w.e.f. 14.4.2007). The words "provident fund" were deleted by Bombay 46 of 1951, s. 2(1). Substituted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule. Sub-section (2A) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "pay" by Maharashtra 14 of 2009, s.7, (w.e.f. 14.4.2007) The words "of all the members of the staff maintained by a district school board and" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 6(b), (w.e.f. 30.4.2007). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 21--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) For every school board there shall be an Administrative Officer. He shall be the chief executive officer of the board; his powers and duties shall be as prescribed. (2) The Administrative Officer shall be appointed by and shall be servant of the 1 [State] Government. He shall draw his pay and allowances from the 2 [State] revenues. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 22--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 21, the 1 [State] Government may by notification in Official Gazette delegate the power to appoint an Administrative Officer to an authorized municipality which is a municipality constituted under the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, and the annual expenditure of which on primary education is not less than Rs. 1,00,000 for three financial years immediately preceding the date of the notification. The Administrative Officer so appointed shall be the servant of the authorized municipality and shall draw his pay, allowances, provident fund, gratuity and pension from its primary education fund. (2) The appointment of such Administrative Officer shall be made after inviting and considering the suggestions if any, of the municipal schools board and with the approval of 2 [State] Government. No such officer shall, save with the previous sanction of the 3 [State] Government, be removed from his office reduced or suspended except by a resolution passed by at least two-thirds of the whole number of councillors of the authorized municipality. (3) The qualifications, pay allowances and terms of employment of such Administrative Officer shall be in accordance with the regulations framed by the authorized municipality with the sanction of the 4 [State] Government. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 23--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) There shall be a staff selection committee for every 3 [...] authorized municipality. (2) The staff selection committee shall consist of 4 [an] officer designated by the Director, the Chairman of the school board and the Administrative Officer. (3) The Administrative Officer shall act as secretary of the staff selection committee. (4) The committee shall select candidates for appointments as Assistant Administrative Officers, Supervisors, 5 [and Attendance Officers] 6 [...] The Committee shall also select teachers to be deputed for training. The selection of candidates 7 [...] shall be made in accordance with the instructions issued by the 8 [State] Government. (5) 9 [Subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), the school board] or the authorized municipality to the Administrative Officer as the case may be shall make appointments of the candidates so selected in accordance with the directions given by the staff selection committee. 10 [(6) Subject to any general or special orders, which may, from time to time, be made by the State Government in this behalf, appointments to the posts of primary schools teachers 11 [and shikshan sevaks] shall be made from the list of candidates selected by such agency or organization, by whatever name called, as the State Government, may, by general or special order, specify.] he marginal note was substituted by Maharashtra 4 of 1987, s. 2(4). Inserted by Mah 14-07-2007, s. 8, (w.e.f. 30-4-2007). The words "district school board or" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "the Educational Inspector of the district or any other" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "Attendance Officer and teachers" by Maharashtra 4 of 1987, s. 2(l)(a). The words "and in the case of district school boards, also members of the other staff excluding inferior servants" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words, "and teachers" were deleted by Maharashtra 4 of 1987, s. 2(l)(b). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words" the school board" by Maharashtra 4 of 1987, s. 2(2). Sub-section (6) was added by Maharashtra 4 of 1987, State Government, s. 2(3). Inserted by Mah 14-07-2007, s. 8, (w.e.f. 30-4-2007).
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 24--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Administrative Officer shall have power, subject to such general instructions as may be issued from time to time by the Director, to promote, transfer and take all disciplinary action (including removal or dismissal) against the staff maintained under section 20. (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of dismissal, removal, reduction or any other order involving disciplinary action made under sub-section (1) may submit an appeal to a tribunal consisting of the chairman of school board and 1 [any officer, designated by the Director]. The tribunal shall follow the prescribed procedure for the disposal of its business. In the event of a difference of opinion between the members of the tribunal the appeal shall be referred to the Director whose decision 2 [subject to the provisions of the section] shall be final: Provided that a primary school teacher who is a guaranteed teacher on the date of the coming into force of this Act, may make a further appeal to the 3 [State] Government against any order of removal or dismissal. Explanation.- A guaranteed teacher means a primary school teacher, who was holding a permanent appointment as such teacher on 30th June 1923. (3) An appeal under sub-section (2) shall be made within 30 days 4 [from the date on which the order appealed against was communicated to the aggrieved person.] 5 [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the State Government may call for and examine the record of any order made by the Administrative Officer under sub-section (1) 6 [or of any order made in appeal by the tribunal or Director under sub-section (2) involving disciplinary action against the staff maintained under section 20, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness or propriety of the punishment awarded under the said order and if after causing such inquiry to be made as it deems fit the State Government is of opinion that the said order should be modified, annulled or reversed, the State Government may pass such order thereon as it deems fit: Provided that no such order shall be made by the State Government in revision to the prejudice of any person unless such person has had an opportunity of being heard in his defence.] Substituted for the words "the Educational Inspector of the district" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Bombay 50 of 1958, s. 2(a). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the original by Bombay 26 of 1954, s. 3. Sub-section (4) was added by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 5. These words, brackets and figures were inserted by Bombay 50 of 1958, s. 2(b).
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 25--> State(s): Maharashtra It shall be the duty of the 1 [Parishad Education Officer] to prepare in accordance with the directions received from the Director in this behalf a scheme to provide compulsory primary education in such area and for children of such ages and up to such standard and within such period as the Director may specify. The 2 [Parishad Education Officer] shall obtain the comments and suggestions of the 3 [Zilla Parishad] upon the scheme so prepared by him and shall submit it together with such comments and suggestions, if any, to the Director who shall forward it to the 4 [State] Government with his remarks. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of a Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of a Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, Sch. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 26--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) An authorized municipality may by a resolution declare its intention to provide compulsory primary education in the whole or any part of its area in the case of children of such ages and up to such standard as the municipality may decide and shall submit its proposals to the 1 [State] Government through the Director in the form of a scheme. (2) An authorized municipality, if called upon by the 2 [State] Government so to do, shall within a time to be specified by the 3 [State] Government submit to the Director a scheme to provide compulsory primary education in such area and in the case of children of such ages and up to such standard and within such period as the 4 [State] Government may specify. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 27--> State(s): Maharashtra The scheme submitted under the two preceding sections shall be in the form prescribed and shall contain the following particulars:- (a) area of compulsion; (b) the census of children of the ages to which the scheme shall apply classified by languages spoken by the children; (c) a list of existing approved schools and schools proposed to be opened, classified by languages in which instruction is given or is proposed to be given; (d) a schedule of existing and proposed staff of Assistant Administrative Officers, Supervisors, Attendance Officers, clerks, teachers 1 [shikshan sevaks] and inferior servants; (e) the recurring and non-recurring cost of the scheme and in the case of a scheme submitted by an authorized municipality the resolution of the municipality agreeing to bear its share of the additional recurring and non-recurring cost; (f) if there is a non-authorized municipality within the area of compulsion, the amount of annual contribution which the municipality according to the orders issued by the 2 [State] Government under sub-section (2) of section 41 shall make. Inserted by Maharashtra 14 of 2007, s. 9. (w.e.f. 30-4-2007). Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 28--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 2 [State] Government may after such inquiry as may be necessary sanction with or without modifications the scheme submitted under section 25 or 26. The scheme sanctioned shall come into effect from such date as may be notified by the 3 [State] Government in the Official Gazette. (2) Every scheme of compulsion sanctioned under the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923, and which is in force immediately before the coming into force of this Act shall be deemed to be a scheme sanctioned under this Act. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 29--> State(s): Maharashtra A sanctioned scheme may with the sanction of the 1 [State] Government be withdrawn or from time to time modified by an authorized municipality, or may by an order published with the reasons for making it in the Official Gazette be modified, cancelled or temporarily suspended by the 2 [State] Government. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 30--> State(s): Maharashtra The 1 [State] Government may by notification in the Official Gazette exempt children of either sex of any particular class or community in any area of compulsion or part thereof from the operation of this Act. Substituted for the words "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 31--> State(s): Maharashtra When a scheme has been sanctioned, no fee shall be charged within the area of compulsion in any school maintained by the 1 [Zilla Parishad] or the authorized municipality, as the case may be, in respect of any child for the standards included in the scheme. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 32--> State(s): Maharashtra In every area of compulsion, the parent of every child to whom a scheme applies shall in the absence of a reasonable excuse as hereinafter provided and if such parent and child ordinarily reside, in such area course such child to attend an approved school in such area.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 33--> State(s): Maharashtra A parent shall be deemed to have a reasonable excuse for failure to cause a child to attend an approved school in any of the following cases:- (a) where the child is prevented from attending school by sickness, infirmity or other unavoidable cause; (b) where the child is receiving, otherwise than in an approved school, instruction which in the opinion of the school board 1 [or Zilla Parishad, as the case may be] is efficient or has received from the school board 2 [or Zilla Parishad, or] as the case may be,] a certificate of having already completed his primary education up to the standard included in the scheme; (c) where there is no approved school within the distance fixed by the 3 [Zilla Parishad or] school board under section 13 or 18, as the case may be; (d) where after due application, entrance to an approved school has been refused to the child and there is no other approved school to which he can be admitted within the distance fixed under section 13 or 18, as the case may be; until such time as the parent is notified by the Administrative Officer 4 [or 5 [Parishad Education Officer]] that the child can be admitted; (e) where there is no approved school in the locality in which instruction is given in the language spoken by the child; (f) where there is no approved school in the locality to which the parent can send the child without exposing him to religious instruction to which the parent objects. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 34--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Where the 1 [Zilla Parishad or school board] is satisfied that the parent of any child who is bound under the provisions of section 32 to cause such child to attend an approved school, has failed to do so, the 2 [Zilla Parishad or, as the case may be, the school board] after giving the parent an opportunity of being heard and after such inquiry as it considers necessary may make an order directing the parent to cause such child to attend an approved school on and from a date which shall be specified in the order. (2) This power may be delegated by 3 [the Zilla Parishad to any member of the Education Committee appointed by it or the 4 [Parishad Education Officer] or any officer of the Zilla Parishad and by] the school board to any of its members or to the Administrative Officer or other officer of the school board. (3) Any parent aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days from the date of such order, appeal to the 5 [Deputy Director of Education of the Division] who may confirm or rescind the order as he deems fit. Substituted for the words "school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, Sch. Substituted of the words "Educational Inspector of the district" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 35--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If an order with reference to a child has been made under sub-section (1) of section 34 against any parent and if such parent fails to comply with the provisions of section 32 with respect to such child on or after the date specified in such order, unless such order is rescinded in an appeal made under sub-section (3) of the said section 34, such parent shall, on conviction be punished with fine not exceeding two rupees; and in case such failure continues after such conviction, he shall also be punished with fine of eight annas for every day on which the failure continues or is repeated. (2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (1) except on 2 [a complaint presented in person or sent by registered post] 3 [by the 4 [Parishad Education Officer] or any officer authorized by him in this behalf or, as the case may be] by the Administrative Officer or any other officer authorized by him in this behalf]. Section 35 was substituted for the original by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 6. Substituted for the words "the complaint filed" by Bombay 67 or 1954, s. 3. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35. of 1963, s. 80, Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 36--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Whoever knowingly takes into his employment, either on his own behalf or on behalf of any person, any child in respect of whom the provisions of section 32 apply, so as to interfere with the education or instruction of such child shall, on conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding twenty-five rupees. (2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this section except on 1 [a complaint presented in person or sent by registered post 2 [by the 3 [Parishad Education Officer] or any officer authorized by him in this behalf or, as the case may be,] by] the Administrative Officer or any other officer authorized by him in this behalf, and before making any complaint under this section against any person 4 [the 5 [Parishad Education Officer] or,] Administrative officer or such officer shall unless such person has been previously convicted under sub-section (1) cause a warning to be given to such person. Substituted for the words "the complaint of" by Bombay 67 of 1954, s. 4. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35. of 1963, s. 80, Sch. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of the Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35. of 1963, s. 80, Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 36A--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purpose of taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (1) of section 35 against a parent or against a person under sub-section (1) of section 36:- (1) if such parent or person resides in a town or village where a judicial Magistrate holds his court, the court of such Magistrate, (2) if such parent or person resides within the limits of the jurisdiction of a nyaya panchayat which has been empowered to take cognizance of and try such offence under sub-section (2) of section 37 read with clause (f) of section 41 of the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1933, such nyaya panchayat, and (3) If such parent or person resides elsewhere, the Primary Schools Panchayat constituted under section 36B within the limits of the jurisdiction of which such parent or person resides, shall be the court competent to take cognizance of such offence. Sections 36A to 36D were inserted by Bombay 67 of 1954, s. 5.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 36B--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette constitute a Primary Schools Panchayat for the trial or offences punishable under sections 35 and 36 in the areas referred to in clause (3) of section 36A. (2) The Primary Schools Panchayat constituted under sub-section (1) shall consist of three members appointed by the State Government one of whom shall be the Chairman. The qualifications of the members shall be such as may be prescribed. The members so appointed shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government. (3) Two members shall form a quorum for the disposal of the business of the Primary Schools Panchayat. (4) Any vacancy of the member of the Primary Schools Panchayat shall be filled in as early as practicable: Provided that during any such vacancy the continuing members may act as if no vacancy had occurred. (5) The Primary Schools Panchayat shall, except as otherwise provided in this Act, in respect of cases relating to an offence punishable under section 35 or section 36, have the same powers and shall follow the same procedure as is followed by a nyaya panchayat in respect of such offence under Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 19331 and the provisions of the said Chapter shall mutatis mutandis apply in respect of such cases. The court of the judicial Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence shall try the case summarily in the manner provided in section 263 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. See now the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 (Bombay III of 1959).
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 36C--> State(s): Maharashtra Where the parent of a child has failed to cause such child to attend the approved school in pursuance of a direction given by the 1 [Zilla Parishad or, as the case may be, the school board] under sub-section (1) of section 34, the Head Master of such school shall issue a certificate to the effect that such parent has failed to cause the child to attend the approved school in compliance with such direction and such certificate shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to be conclusive evidence of such failure in a prosecution against the parent under section 35. Substituted for the words "School board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s.286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 36D--> State(s): Maharashtra Every prosecution under section 35 or 36 pending before any Court in any area on the date on which a Primary Schools Panchayat is constituted for such area under section 36B and all proceedings arising from, and incidental to, any such prosecution shall be tried, heard and determined by such Court or any other Court having jurisdiction to try, hear and determine the same, as if no such Primary Schools Panchayat had been constituted for such area.]
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 37--> State(s): Maharashtra Every Administrative Officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.] Substituted for the original by Bombay 36 of 1949, s. 8.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 38--> State(s): Maharashtra The subjects, curricula, books and standards of teaching of approved schools shall be such as may from time to time be specified by the 1 [State] Government. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 39--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every primary school, other than a primary school maintained by the 1 [State] Government or by a 2 [Zilla Parishad or school board] or by an authorized municipality, which fulfils the conditions prescribed in this behalf shall be entitled to recognition as an approved school. (2) Such recognition shall be given by the 3 [Zilla Parishad or school board] or by the 4 [State] Government or by an officer authorized by it in this behalf; and the manner in which grant-in-aid is to be given to such approved school shall be as prescribed. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 40--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every approved school shall be open during the school hours to inspection by the inspecting officers of the 1 [State] Government for the purpose, in particular of ascertaining - (a) whether instruction is given in accordance with the provisions of section 38; (b) whether the provisions of this Act for the compulsory attendance of children are being carried out; (c) whether the health of the school children is satisfactory; (d) whether the instruction given is not of a pernicious nature; (e) whether the registers and records are being maintained as required by the Director. (2) The Administrative Officer 2 [or, as the case may be, the 3 [Parishad Education Officer]] and the manager of an approved school shall furnish such returns and supply such information as the Director may from time to time require, and shall give reasonable facilities to officers appointed under sub-section (1) of section 48 and to any officer specially deputed under this sub-section by the Director in the discharge of their duties. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Inserted by Maharashtra 43 of 1962, s. 26, Sch. Substituted for the words "Educational Inspector of a Zilla Parishad" by Maharashtra 35 of 1963, s. 80, Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 41--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) 1 [...] (2) Every non-authorized municipality shall pay over annually to the 2 [Zilla Parishad] or the authorized municipality, as the case may be, for the purposes of primary education such proportion of the rateable value of properties in the area of the municipality as may from time to time be fixed in this behalf by the 3 [State] Government and the income accruing from any funds (including trust funds) held, and all moneys received by it for the said purposes. Sub-section (1) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for words "district school board," by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 42--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If a scheme submitted by an authorized municipality is sanctioned under section 28, the 2 [State] Government shall bear half of the additional recurring and non-recurring annual cost of the scheme so sanctioned; but the liability of the 3 [State] Government shall not exceed half of the said cost, as it was estimated by the authorized municipality. (2) Nothing in this section shall affect the claim of any authorized municipality to any annual grant which at the time this Act comes into force is being paid to it as a local authority under the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923, by the 4 [State] Government for the purposes of primary education: Provided that, if the 5 [State] Government considers that the primary education fund of any authorized municipality has been or is about to be misused or misapplied, it may call upon such authorized municipality for an explanation of such misuse or misapplication; and if not satisfied with the explanation given may make such reduction in the grants payable to such authorized municipality as it may deem proper. 6 [...] Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word Provincial by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Sub-section (3) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 43--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 44--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) A fund called the primary education fund shall be maintained 1 [...] by every authorized municipality. (2) The following shall form part of, or be paid into, the primary education fund:- (a) the balance of the primary education fund maintained under section 8A of the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923; 2 [(b) the contributions payable by non-authorized municipalities under subsection (2) of section 41;] (c) fees and fines received in respect of primary schools maintained by the school board or the authorized municipality, as the case may be; (d) 3 [...] (e) in the case of an authorized municipality, the grant paid or payable by the authorized municipality on account of primary education; (f) the grant paid or payable by the 4 [State] Government on account of primary education; (g) such other sums as may from time to time be received on account of primary education. Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (e) the grant payable by an authorized municipality shall be the amount of expenditure on account of primary education in any year less the grant paid by the 5 [State] Government in that year, and fees and sums of money from other sources of income belonging to the fund. The words "by every district school board and" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Cause (b) was inserted by Maharashtra 43 of 1963, s. 26, Sch. Clause (d) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s, 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 45--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The primary education fund shall stand in the name of the school board and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be applied for the purposes specified therein and or such other purposes as may be prescribed. (2) The fund shall be maintained, administered and used in the manner prescribed.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 46--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The primary education fund shall be kept in the Government treasury or in the bank to which the Government treasury business has been made over or in such other bank or co-operative society registered or deemed to have been registered under the Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925,1 as may be approved by the 2 [State] Government. (2) It shall be lawful for the school board to invest such portion of the primary education fund as is not likely to be immediately required in post office cash certificates or in securities of the Central Government or any 3 [State] Government. (3) Every investment in Government securities shall be made through the Reserve Bank of India or any other bank approved by the 4 [State] Government in this behalf. See now the Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 (Maharashtra 24 of 1961). Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 46A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The State Government shall establish a provident fund (hereinafter called the said fund) for the staff maintained by 2 [Zilla Parishads for the purposes of this Act] 3 [...] 4 [(1A) The rates of subscriptions and contributions and other conditions of the provident funds established by the State Government under this section shall be such as may be prescribed.] (2) Any provident fund established and maintained by a district school board 5 [for such staff] before the date of the coming into force of the Bombay Primary Education and Housing Board (Amendment) Act, 1951, shall be merged into and form part of the said fund the district school board 6 [...] concerned shall as soon as may be said date transfer from its primary education fund to the said fund a sum equal to the total amount standing to the credit of all the subscribers or depositors in the provident fund till the date of such transfer: Provided that in the event of any doubt arising as to the amount to be so transferred by any district school board 7 [* * *[from its primary education fund to the said fund, the matter shall be referred to the State Government or any officer authorized by it in this behalf, whose decision shall be final. (3) The 8 [Zilla Parishad] 9 [...] concerned shall, in respect of each of its employees who is a subscriber to the said fund, pay into the said fund such portion of the contribution in such manner as the State Government may, from time to time, determine.] 10 [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (3), the State Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, direct that the said fund shall be merged into and form part of such other provident fund established for the staff maintained by a Zilla Parishad in connection with the administration of primary education as may be specified in the order; and thereupon the Zilla Parishad shall transfer from the said fund to the other provident fund a sum equal to the total amount standing to the credit of all the subscribers or depositors in said fund till date of such transfer.] Inserted by Bombay 46 of 1051, s. 3. Substituted for the words "District school boards" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "or for the primary school teachers maintained by authorized municipalities" were deleted by Bombay 33 of 1953, s. 3. This sub-section was inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "or an authorized municipality for such staff or teaches as the case may be," by Bombay 23 of 1953, s. 3. The words "or the authorized municipality" were deleted by Bombay 33 of 1953, s. 3. The words "or authorized municipality" were deleted by Bombay 33 of 1953. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. The words "or authorized municipality" were deleted by Bombay 33 of 1953. This sub-section was inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 47--> State(s): Maharashtra The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and members of school board may be paid allowances for expenses incurred by them in travelling for the purposes of the business of the school board at such rates and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 48--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 1 [State] Government may appoint such officers (including inspecting officers) as it may deem necessary for the purposes of superintendence and inspection and generally for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. (2) The officers appointed under sub-section (1) shall be the servants of the 2 [State] Government, and their powers and duties shall be such as may be prescribed. Substituted for the "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 49--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) An inspecting officer nominated by the Director in this behalf shall have the right of being present at any meeting of the school board, and with the consent of the chairman, of taking part in the discussions thereat, but he shall not be entitled to vote upon, or move any resolution, at such meeting. Powers of supervision. (2) The Director 1 [...] or any officer authorized by a general or special order of the 2 [State] Government may- (a) (i) enter on and inspect any immoveable property occupied for any purpose connected with primary education by a school board or authorized municipality or any educational institution under its control or management; or (ii) cause such property or institution to be entered upon and inspected by any other person authorized by him in this behalf; (b) call for any extract from the proceedings of any authorized municipality or school board, or of any committee appointed by any of them relating to any matter connected with primary education or; (c) call for and inspect any book or document relating to any matter connected with primary education in the possession or under the control of an authorized municipality or school board. The words "or Educational Inspector of the district" were deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. Substituted for the "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 50--> State(s): Maharashtra The Director may- (a) call for from any 1 [Zilla Parishad or] authorized municipality or school board or Administrative officer any return, statement, account or report relating to any matter connected with primary education; (b) call 2 [upon any Zilla Parishad or] authorized municipality or school board to take into consideration any objection which appears to him to exist to the doing of anything connected with primary education which is about to be done 3 [by such Zilla Parishad or municipality] or board or any information furnished by him which appears to him to necessitate the doing of a certain thing 4 [by such Zilla Parishad or municipality] or board and to make a written reply to him within a reasonable time, stating in case of disagreement with the Director its reasons for not desisting from doing or for not doing such a thing. Inserted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "upon an" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "upon an" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962. Substituted for the words "upon an" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 51--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If in the opinion of the Director the execution of any order or resolution of a school board or the doing of anything which is about to be done or is being done by or on behalf of the board is in excess of the powers conferred by, or contrary to this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder or is otherwise unlawful, he may, by order in writing under his signature, suspend the execution or prohibit the doing thereof. (2) When the Director makes an order under sub-section (1), he shall forthwith forward to the board affected by it a copy of such order with a statement of the reasons for making it, (3) The Director shall forthwith submit to the 1 [State] Government a report of every case occurring under this section and the 2 [State] Government may annul, confirm, revise or modify any order made therein and make in respect thereof any other order: Provided that no order of the Director passed under this section shall be confirmed, revised or modified by the 3 [State] Government without giving the board reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the said order. Substituted for the "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 52--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any authorized municipality when called upon makes default in preparing a scheme or after a scheme has been sanctioned omits to make adequate provision for compulsory primary education in accordance with a scheme as sanctioned and to bring into operation or continue to keep in operation such scheme, the 1 [State] Government may after due inquiry appoint a person to prepare the scheme or bring it into operation or to continue to keep it in operation as the case may be, and the expense thereof shall be paid by the authorized municipality to the 2 [State] Government. (2) If the expense is not so paid the 3 [State] Government may make an order directing any person who has for the time being custody of any moneys on behalf of the authorized municipality either as banker or in any relation to pay such expense from such moneys as he may have in his hands or may from time to time receive and such person shall be bound to obey to such order. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 53--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) When the 2 [State] Government is informed that a school board has made a default in performing any duty imposed on it by or under this Act or by or, under any enactment for the time being in force, the 3 [State] Government may if it is satisfied after such inquiry as it may think fit, that the school board has been guilty of such default, by an order in writing direct the school board to perform the duty within a period fixed for the performance of that duty: Provided that no such order shall be made unless the school board has been given an opportunity to show cause why such order should not be made. (2) If such a duty is not performed within the period so fixed, the 4 [State] Government may appoint some person to perform it and may direct that the expense of performing it with a reasonable remuneration to the person appointed to perform it shall be paid within such time as it may fix to such person by the school board or as the 5 [State] Government may direct. (3) If the expenses and remuneration are not paid the 6 [State] Government may make an order directing the officer in charge of the treasury or bank or society in which the primary education fund is kept or the whole or portion thereof is deposited or lent at interest, to pay such expense and remuneration from such moneys as may be standing to the credit of the school board in such treasury or bank or society or as may from time to time be received from or on behalf of the school board by way of deposit by such treasury or bank or society and such officer or bank or society shall be bound to obey such order. Every payment made in pursuance to such order shall be a sufficient discharge to such officer, bank or society from all liabilities to the school board in respect of any sum or sums so paid by him or out of the moneys so received or standing to the credit of the school board in such treasury, bank or society. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 54--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act the 2 [State] Government shall have power to give to a 3 [Zilla Parishad] all such directions as it may consider necessary in regard to any matter connected with primary education and the 4 [Zilla Parishad] shall comply with such directions. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch. Substituted for the words "district school board" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 55--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 1 [State] Government may, from time to time cause enquiry to be made by any of its officers in regard to any authorized municipality or school board on matters connected with primary education concerning them or any matters with respect to which the sanction, approval, consent or order of the 2 [State] Government is required by or under this Act. (2) The officer holding such enquiry shall have the powers of a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, to take evidence and to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for the purposes of the enquiry. (3) The 3 [State] Government may make orders as to the cost of any enquiries made under sub-section (1) and as to the party by whom and the funds out of which they shall be paid and such order may on the application of the 4 [State] Government or of any person named therein be executed as if it were a decree of a civil court. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 56--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If in the opinion of the 1 [State] Government a school board is not competent to perform or is not properly performing the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder or exceeds or abuses its powers, or is acting or has acted contrary to the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder it may by an order published in the Official Gazette with the reasons for making it either- (a) dissolve the Board or (b) supersede it for a period to be specified in the order. 2 [Such period may be longer than the term for which the members of the school board would have held office under section 4 if the school board had not been superseded under this section.] (2) When the school board is dissolved or superseded, the following consequences shall ensue:- (a) all members of the board shall in the case of supersession as from the date of the order of supersession, and in the case of dissolution as from the date specified in the order of dissolution, be deemed to have vacated their offices as such members; (b) all powers and duties of the board shall, during the period of dissolution or supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the 3 [State] Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf; (c) the person or persons appointed under clause (b) may delegate their powers and duties to any individual or committee or sub-committee. (3) On the issue of an order of dissolution under sub-section (1) election of members shall be held under the provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder on or before the date to the specified by the 4 [State] Government and the board shall be re-established by the election, appointment or nomination of members under the aforesaid provisions on such date as may be specified by the 5 [State] Government. (4) If, after enquiry made, the 6 [State] Government so directs, the period of supersession with all the consequences aforesaid shall, from time to time, be continued by an order published as aforesaid until such date as may be fixed, by the 7 [State] Government for the re-establishment of the board. (5) After the board is superseded it shall be re-established by election, appointment or nomination or members under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder applicable thereto- (a) if no direction has been made under sub-section (4) on the expiration of the period specified in the order of supersession under clause (b) of subsection (1) and (b) if a direction had been made under sub-section (4) on such date as is fixed under that sub-section for the re-establishment of the school board. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words and figure were added by Bombay 24 of 1956, s. 6. substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 57--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 58--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 59--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 60--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified,- (i) the State Government may delegate any of its powers or duties under this Act or the rules made thereunder to any officer or authority subordinate to it; and (ii) the Director may also, with the previous sanction of the State Government, delegate any of his powers or duties under this Act or the rules made thereunder or delegated to him by the State Government under clause (i) to any officer subordinate to him. (2) Nothing in this section shall derogate from the right of the State Government or the Director to exercise any or all of the powers or duties hereby delegated by it or him, as the case may be, to any subordinate officer or authority.] Substituted for the original by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 8.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 61--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, an authorized, municipality may delegate any of its powers, duties and functions under this Act to the municipal school board. (2) (a) A school board may from time to time constitute committees and discontinue or alter the constitution of such committees. (b) The school board may delegate any of its powers, duties and functions to any such committee or to any member or Administrative Officer or stipendiary or any other officer of the board; and such committee, member or officer shall conform to any instructions that may from time to time be given by the board. (3) The authorized municipality or the school board may at any time withdraw any of the powers, duties and functions so delegated.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 62--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be commenced against any school board or authorized municipality or a servant thereof or any person acting under the orders, of the said board or municipality for anything done, or purporting to have been done in pursuance of this Act, which entitles or requires a school board, authorized municipality, member, officer, servant as such or other person so acting to exercise any powers or perform duties without giving to such school board, authorized municipality, member, officer, servant or person one month's previous notice in writing of the intended action and of the cause thereof, or after six months from the date of the act complained of. (2) In the case of any such suit for damages if tender of sufficient amends shall have been made before the action was brought, the plaintiff shall not recover more than the amount as tendered, and shall pay all costs incurred by the defendant after such tender.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 63--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 1 [State] Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision such rules may be made for all or any of the following matters:- (a) the manner of election of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and the members of a school board; (b) the duties and functions of the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman; (c) procedure for the conduct of school board's business 2 [and school committees for non-authorized municipalities;] (d) procedure for sanctioning tenders; (e) the constitution and functions of village school committees; 3 [(ee) provident funds, gratuities and pensions for the primary school teachers maintained by an authorized municipality;] 4 [(f) the rates of subscriptions and contributions and other conditions of the provident fund established for the staff maintained by 5 [Zilla Parishads for the purposes of this Act.]; 6 [...] 7 [...] (g) provision for the welfare of the children attending primary schools including provision for the care of their health and for the physical and moral training; (h) pre-vocational courses as a part of upper primary courses; (i) regulation of the delegation of powers, duties and functions under this Act; and (j) matters to be prescribed under this Act. (3) Rules made under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be made after previous publication. Substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were added by Bombay 25 of 1952, s. 9. Clause (ee) was inserted by Bombay 33 of 1953, s. 4(i). Substituted for the original clauses (f) by Bombay 46 of 1951, s. 4. Substituted for the words "district school boards" by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286 Tenth Sch. The words "and primary school teachers maintained by authorized municipalities" were deleted by Bombay 33 of 1953, s. 4(H). Clause (fa) was deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 64--> State(s): Maharashtra The Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923, is hereby repealed: Provided that until a new school board is constituted under section 4, any existing school board under the Bombay Primary Education Act, 1923, shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties and functions and shall be subject to all the rights and liabilities as if it is constituted under this Act.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 65--> State(s): Maharashtra The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the provisions relating to primary education in the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901, the Bombay Local Boards Act, 1923, and the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 65A--> State(s): Maharashtra Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, on and with effect from the date on which the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, comes into force (hereinafter in this section referred to as "the said date") - (1) all the existing district school boards shall stand dissolved and the Chairman and Vice-Chairman and other members thereof shall be deemed to have vacated their office; (2) subject to the provisions of this section and of the Eleventh Schedule of the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, a Zilla Parishad in relation to any local area for which an existing school board was functioning immediately before the said date (hereinafter referred to as "the successor Zilla Parishad") shall exercise, perform or discharge all the powers, duties and functions under this Act of such existing school board; (3) all primary schools with their lands, buildings, records and equipment and all other properties, moveable or immovable, which were vesting in, held by or were under the control of any existing district school boards immediately before the said date shall vest in, be held by or be under the control of the successor Zilla Parishad; (4) every scheme of compulsion prepared by an existing district school board and forwarded to the State Government under this Act immediately before the said date shall be deemed to be a scheme prepared by the successor Zilla Parishad; (5) any regulation made under this Act by an existing district school board and in force in the area subject to the jurisdiction of such district local board immediately before the said date shall, continue to be in force as if made by the successor Zilla Parishad until amended or superseded by it.] Section 65A was inserted by Maharashtra 5. of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Sch.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 66--> State(s): Maharashtra Deleted by Maharashtra 5 of 1962, s. 286, Tenth Schedule.
Bombay Primary Education Act, 1947_Section 67--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint, the District School Board of Banaskantha shall notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, stand reconstituted and shall be deemed, to be the District School Board for the District of Banaskantha as formed on the 1st day of November 1956 by the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, and shall consist of such number of members as may be nominated by the State Government in this behalf. (2) The members to be nominated shall, as far as may be, be persons who were the members of the Banaskantha School Board and who represented the areas included in the said district excluding the Abu-Road taluka, before such reconstitution. (3) The members of the school board so reconstituted shall hold office for such period, as the State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette specify, but not exceeding one year from the date of such reconstitution. (4) The Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the school board reconstituted as aforesaid shall be elected in the manner provided in this Act. (5) (a) When the period of office of the members of the school board under sub-section (3) is due to expire, the school board of the district shall be constituted in the manner provided in section 4 and other relevant provisions of this Act. (b) Notwithstanding the expiry of the period of office of such members, they shall continue in office until the members of the new school board are elected, appointed or nominated, as the case may be. (6) Upon the reconstitution of the school board under this section, or as soon as may be thereafter, the State Government after consulting the Government of Rajasthan, may by Order provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (a) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities (including any rights and liabilities under contract) of the former school board of Banaskantha to the reconstituted school board of Banaskantha and the terms and conditions (if any) of such transfer; (b) the transfer or re-employment of any of the employees of the former school board to or by the reconstituted school board of Banaskantha; (c) such incidental consequential and supplementary matters as may be necessary to give effect to such apportionment and transfer. (7) Where an Order is made under this section transferring the assets, rights or liabilities of the former school board, then by virtue of that Order such assets, rights and liabilities of such school board shall vest in and be the assets, rights and liabilities of the reconstituted school board.] Section 66 and 67 were inserted by the Bombay Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order. 1956. 
