Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to provide for the licensing of race-courses in the 1 [State of Bombay]. WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for the 2 [regulation, control and management of horse racing and all matters directly or indirectly connected therewith] in the 3 [State of Bombay]; It is hereby enacted as follows:- These words were substituted for the words "Bombay Presidency" by Bombay 48 of 1958, s. 3(a). These words were substituted for the original by Bombay 10 of 1938, s. 2. These words were substituted for the words "Bombay Presidency" by Bombay 48 of 1958, s. 3(a).
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912. (2) 1 [This section extends to the whole of the State of Bombay.] The rest of the Act extends only to such areas as the 2 [3 [State] Government] may by notification in the 4 [Official Gazette] direct: 5 [Provided that on the commencement of the Bombay Race-courses Licensing and the Bombay Betting Tax Acts (Extension and Amendment) Act, 1958, the rest of the Act shall extend to those areas in which the Hyderabad Horse Racing and Betting Tax Regulation, 1358F, was in force immediately before such commencement.] This sentence was substituted for the original by Bombay 48 of 1958, s. 3(b). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. These words were substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This Proviso was added by Bombay 48 of 1958, s. 3(b).
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act- (a) "horse-race" means any race in which any horse, mare or gelding runs or is made to run in connection with any other horse, mare or gelding for any prize of what nature or kind soever, or for any bet or wager made or to be made in respect of any such horse, mare or gelding or the riders thereof, and at which more than twenty persons shall be present; (b) "race-course" means any ground on which a horse-race can be held.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) No horse-race shall be held save on a race-course for which a license for horse-racing granted in accordance with the provisions of this Act is in force. (2) The terms of such license shall be published in the 1 [Official Gazette.] The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The owner, lessee or occupier of any race-course may apply to the 1 [2 [State] Government] for a license for horse-racing on such race-course. Grant of license for horse-racing. (2) The 3 [4 [State] Government] may withhold such license or grant it subject to such conditions and for such period as 5 [it] may think fit, 6 [Such conditions may provide for- (a) the payment of a license fee; (b) the amount of stakes which may be allotted for the different kinds of horses; (c) the measures to be taken for the training of persons to become jockeys; (d) such other matters, whether directly or indirectly connected with horse-racing, for which, in the opinion of the 7 [State] Government, it is necessary or expedient to make provision in the license .] 8 [(3) The 9 [10 [State] Government] may by such license authorise the licensee to grant, subject to such conditions as shall be specified by the State Government in such license , a license or permit 11 [to any bookmaker to carry on his business or vocation or to act as a book-maker or turf commission agent in respect of horse-races held on a race-course, being a race-course which is situate in this State or outside it. The license may be granted for such period] not exceeding the period of the license granted to the licensee as the licensee may think fit;] Cancellation of license. 12 [(4)] The 13 [14 [State] Government] may at any time cancel any license granted under this section in the event of any breach of the conditions subject to which it was granted. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The word "it" was substituted for the word "he" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This portion was inserted by Bombay 10 of 1938, s. 3. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This sub-section and the word "and" were inserted by Bombay 4 of 1931 s. 9(a)(i). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were deemed always to has been substituted with effect from the 1st day of May 1973 for the words "to any book-maker for such period" by Mah. 44 of 1974, s. 2. Sub-section (3) was renumbered as sub-section (4) by Mah. 44 of 1974, s. 9(a)(ii). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever takes part in any horse-race on any race-course for which a license granted in accordance with the provisions of section 4 is not in force shall be punishable with fine which may amount to two hundred rupees.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra If any horse-race is held on any race-course for which a license granted in accordance with the provisions of section 4 is not in force, any person being the owner, lessee or occupier of such race-course shall be punishable with fine which may amount to one thousand rupees.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1)] If any person to whom a license has been granted in accordance with the provisions of section 4 contravenes any of the conditions subject to which such license was granted, such person shall be punishable with fine which may amount to one thousand rupees. 2 [(2)] If any person to whom a license or permit has been granted by a license in pursuance of the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 4 contravenes any of the conditions subject to which such license or permit was granted he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.] Section 7 was renumbered as 7(1) by Mah. 44 of 1974, s. 9(b). Sub-section (2) was inserted by Bombay 4 of 1931, s. 9(b).
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra No Court inferior to that of a presidency Magistrate or of a Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence under this Act.
Bombay Race-courses Licensing Act, 1912_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra The State Government may from time to time by general or particular order published in the 1 [Official Gazette] exempt any horse-race from the operation of this Act. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. 
