Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to enable Government to prescribe the Official Seals of Sessions Judges, Magistrates 1 [, members of the State Legislature] and other public authorities, WHEREAS it is expedient 2 [...] to enable the Government to prescribe what official seals 3 [...] public authorities 4 [...] shall have and use; It is enacted as follows:- These words were inserted by Mah. 24 of 1981, s. 2. The words and figures "to extend the provisions of Bombay Act 2 of 1870 (an Act to enable the Government of Bombay to prescribe the official seals of Magistrates) so as ", the word" other and the words "besides Magistrates" respectively were repealed by the Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895). The words and figures "to extend the provisions of Bombay Act 2 of 1870 (an Act to enable the Government of Bombay to prescribe the official seals of Magistrates) so as ", the word" other and the words "besides Magistrates" respectively were repealed by the Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895). The words and figures "to extend the provisions of Bombay Act 2 of 1870 (an Act to enable the Government of Bombay to prescribe the official seals of Magistrates) so as ", the word" other and the words "besides Magistrates" respectively were repealed by the Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895).
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883.
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 1A--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act extends to the whole of State of Maharashtra.] Section 1A was inserted by Mah. 11 of 1960, s. 3.
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra Bombay Act II of 1870 is hereby repealed. Every notification issued under the said Act and now in force shall be deemed to have been issued under this Act.
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra The 2 [3 [State] Government], may, from time to time, by notification in the 4 [Official Gazette], direct what official seals 5 each of the following 6 [...] public authorities shall have and use (namely):- (1) Sessions Judges, Additional and Joint Sessions Judges and Assistant Sessions Judges; (2) Presidency Magistrates; (3) any other Magistrates; (4) any other judicial officer or public authority, whose official seal is not prescribed by law and no other authority is legally competent to prescribe. Every such notification may from to time be [modified] or rescinded by the State Government by a like notification. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. For notification prescribing seals, see Maharashtra Rules and Orders under State Acts, Volume I. The word "Courts and others" were repealed by the Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895).
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra Every notification made under the last preceding section shall come into force on such date as the State Government shall therein fix in this behalf.
Bombay Public Authorities Seals Act, 1883_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The State Government may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Maharashtra Legislative Council, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct what official seal the members of the Maharashtra State Legislature shall have and use, as occasion may arise, subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3). (2) The official seal may be used by a member of the State Legislature for attesting or authenticating the execution of, or signature on, any deed, instrument or other document, or certifying true copies of any such document, when it is presented to him for such purpose, or for granting any recommendation or certificate, in all cases where the member of the State Legislature is authorised or recognised to do such thing under any law for the time being in force or under any executive orders issued by any Government Department or by any statutory corporate body and for such other purposes as the State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. (3) Every member of the State Legislature shall be furnished with an official seal by the State Government, which may be used by such member for the purposes referred to in sub-section (2) during the period he continues to be such member and it shall be returned or cause to be returned to the State Government as soon as he ceases to be such member.] Section 5 was added by Mah. 24 of 1981, s. 3. 
