Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 An Act further to amend the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949, the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (Bom. LIX of 1949), the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 (C.P. and Berar II of 1950) and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (Mah. XL of 1965), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. XIII of 2011), on the 26th May 2011 ; And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :- The following Act of the Maharashtra Legislature, received the assent of the Governor on 10th August, 2011 and was published in the Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extra-ordinary, Part VIII, dated 10th August, 2011.
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th May 2011.
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 5 of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (Bom. LIX of 1949), in sub-section (3), for the words "elect only one Councillor" the words "elect as far as possible two Councillors but not less than two and not more than three Councillors, and each voter shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be entitled to cast the same number of votes, as the number of Councillors to be elected in his ward" shall be substituted.
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 9 of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 (C.P. and Berar II of 1950), in sub-section (2), for the words "elect only one Councillor" the words "elect as far as possible two Councillors but not less than two and not more than three Councillors, and each voter shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be entitled to cast the same number of votes, as the number of Councillors to be elected in his ward" shall be substituted.
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 10 of the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (Mah. XL of 1965), for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(2) Each of the wards shall elect as far as possible four Councillors but not less than three and not more than five Councillors, and each voter shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 11, be entitled to cast the same number of votes, as the number of Councillors to be elected in his ward.".
Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations, the City of Nagpur Corporation and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. XIII of 2011), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (Bom. LIX of 1949), the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 (C.P. and Berar II of 1950) and the Maharashtra Municipal Councils, Nagar Panchayats and Industrial Townships Act, 1965 (Mah. XL of 1965), as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the relevant Acts, as amended by this Act. 
