Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to limit the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts throughout the Bombay Presidency in matters relating to the land revenue and for other purposes. Whereas in certain parts of the Presidency of Bombay the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in matters connected with the land-revenue is more extensive than it is in the rest of said Presidency ; and whereas it is expedient that the jurisdiction of all the. Civil Courts in the said Presidency should be limited in manner hereinafter appearing ; and whereas it is also expedient to amend the Bombay Civil Courts Act, section 32 and to receive certain provisions of the 1 thirteenth section of Regulation XVII of 1827 of the Bombay Code, which was repealed by the Land Improvement Act, 18712 * * * * It is hereby enacted as follows :- S. 17 of this Act which revised s. 13 of Bom. Reg. 17 of 1827 was repealed by Act 15 of 1880 except in scheduled districts, i. e. the villages belonging to the following Mehwassi Chiefs : (1) The Parvi of Kathi; (2) The Parvi of Nal; (3) The Parvi of Singpur; (4) The Walvi of Gaohalli; (5) The Wassawa of Chikhil; (6) The Parvi of Nawalpur, to which the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 (Bom. 5 of 1879), has not been extended; see s, 2 of Act 15 of 1880. The words "and to provide for the recovery by the Local Government of advances made for purposes other than those specified in section three of the Land Improvement Act, 1871," were repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1894 (4 of 1894).
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876. So much of section 4 as relates to claims to set aside, on the ground of irregularity, mistake or any other ground except fraud, sales for arrears of land revenue, 1 [shall come into force in the Presidency of Bombay on such 2 day] as the Governor General in Council directs in that behalf by notification in the Gazette of India. The rest of this Act shall 3 [come into force therein on the passing thereof]; and it shall extend to 4 [the 5 [State of Maharashtra]], but not so as to affect- (a) any suit regarding the assessment of revenue on land situate in 6 [the City of Bombay], or the collection of such revenue ; (b) any of the provisions of Bombay Acts V of 1862 and VI of 1862, or of 7 [Act 8 [XXI of 1881] or of 9 [Act XXIII of 1871]] ; 10 ***** These words, were substituted for the words "shall come into force on such day" by Bom. 48 of 1959, s. 3 (a). The 19th September 1881- see notification No. 197, dated 18th March 1881, in Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. 1 p. 92. These words were substituted for the words "come into force on the passing thereof by Bom. 48 of 1959, s. 3 (b). These words were substituted for the words "all the territories under the Government of the Governor of Bombay in Council" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950 These words were substituted for the word "State of Bombay" by A. O. 1960. The words "the City of Bombay" were substituted for the words "the Collectorate of Bombay" by s.9 of the Greater Bombay Laws and the Bombay High Court (Declaration of Limits) Act, 1945 (Bombay. 17 of 1945), Sch. E read with Bom. 52 of 1947, s. 2 proviso. This reference was substituted for the words and figures "Act XV of 1871" by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891). The Broach and Kaira Incumbered Estates Act 1881. The Pensions Act, 1871. Cl. (c) was repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1895 (16 of 1895). It was as follows "(c) any suit instituted before the passing of this Act".
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra [Repeal of enactments.] Rep. Act XXII of 1891.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act, unless there be something repugnant in the subject or context,- "land" includes the sites of villages, towns and cities; it also includes trees, growing crops and grass, fruit upon, and juice in, trees, rights-of-way, ferries, fisheries and all other benefits to arise out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to things attached to the earth; "land-revenue" means all sums and payments in money or in kind, received or claimable by or on behalf 1 [of the 2 [Government]] from any person on account of any land held by or vested in him and any cess or rate authorized 3 [by the 4 [State] Government] under the provisions of any law for the time being in force ; "Revenue officer" means any officer employed in or about the business of the land-revenue, or of the surveys, assessment, accounts or records connected therewith. The words "of the Crown" were substituted for the words "of Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "by the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government", by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the exception hereinafter appearing, no Civil Court shall exercise jurisdiction as to any of the following matters : (a) 1 [claims against the 2 [Government]] relating to any property appertaining to the office of any hereditary officer appointed or recognised under 3 Bombay Act No. III of 1874 or any other law for the time being in force, or of any other village-officer or servant, or claims to perform the duties of any such officer or servant, or in respect of any injury caused by exclusion from such office or service, or suits to set aside or avoid any order under the same Act or any other law relating to the same subject for the time being in force passed 4 [by the 5 [State] Government] or any officer duly authorized in that behalf, or 6 ******* (b) objections- to the amount or incidence of any assessment of land revenue authorized 7 [by the 8 [State] Government] or to the mode of assessment, or to the principle on which such assessment is fixed, or to the validity or effect of the notification of survey or settlement, or of any notification determining the period of settlement ; (c) claims connected with or arising out of any proceeding for the realization of land-revenue or the rendering of assistance 9 [by the 10 [State] Government] or any officer duly authorised in that behalf to superior holders or occupants for the recovery of their dues from inferior holders or tenants ; claims to set aside, on account of irregularity, mistake or any other ground except fraud, sales for arrears of land revenue ; (d) [claims against the 2 Government]] - (1) to be entered in the revenue-survey or settlement-records or village-papers as liable for the land-revenue, or as superior holder, inferior holder, occupant or tenant, or (2) to have any entry made in any record of a revenue-survey or settlement or (3) to have any such entry either omitted or amended ; (e) the distribution of land or allotment of land-revenue on partition of any estate under 11 Bombay Act IV of 1868 or any other law for the time being in force ; (f) 12 [claims against the 13 [Government] ]- to hold land wholly or partially free from payment of land-revenue or to receive payments charged on or payable out of the land-revenue, or to set aside 14 [any cess, rate, premium or penalty imposed, assessed or authorised] 15 [by the 16 [State] Government], under the provisions of any law for the time being in force, or respecting the occupation of waste or vacant land belonging 17 [to the 18 [ Government]]; 19 [(fa) claims against the Government or any Revenue Officer for remission or suspension of land revenue, or for a declaration that crops have failed in any year ; (fb) suit to set aside or modify decision determining village site or abadi made by Collector or a survey officer under the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 or by an Revenue Officer under any other law for the time being in force ; (fc) suit to compel the performance of any duty imposed on any Revenue Office by or under any law relating to land revenue ; (fd) suit for or in respect of the declaration of a Bhumidhari as having the rights of a Bhumiswami under section 150 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954. (fe) application for purchase of right in trees under sub-section (3) of section 162 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 ; (ff) suit to modify any entry in the Nistar Patrak prepared under section 219 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954 ;] (g) claims regarding boundaries fixed under 1 Bombay Act No, I of 1865, or any other law for the time being in force, or to set aside any order passed by a competent officer under any such law with regard to boundary-marks : Provided that, if any person claims to hold wholly or partially exempt from payment Proviso, of land-revenue under- (h) any enactment for the time being in force expressly creating an exemption not before existing in favour of an individual or of any class of persons, or expressly confirming such an exemption on the ground of its being shown in a public record or of its having existed for a specified term of years, or (i) an instrument or sanad given by or by order of the 20 [21 [State] Government] under Bombay Act No. II of 1863, section I, clause first, or Bombay Act No. VII of 1863, section 2, clause first, or 22 [(ii) any instrument, sanad or other written grant duly given or made by any of the Governments of the territories, which immediately before the commencement of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, were comprised in the State of Subs, by A. 0. 1960. Hyderabad or Madhya Pradesh and which now form the State of Maharashtra, or] (j) any other written grant by the British Government expressly creating or confirming such exemption, or (k) a judgment by a Court of taw, or an adjudication duly passed by a competent officer under 23 Bombay Regulation XVII of 1872, Chapter X, or under 24 Act No. XI of 1852 25 [or any other law for the time being in force], which declare the particular property in dispute to be exempt, such claim shall be cognizable in the Civil Courts. Illustrations to (h) (1) It is enacted that, in the event of the proprietary right in lands, the property of Government being transferred to individuals, they shall be permitted to hold the lands for ever at the assessment at which they are transferred. The proprietary right in certain lands is transferred to A at an assessment of Rs. 100. An exemption from higher assessment not before existing is expressly created in favour of A by enactment, and he may seek relief in the Civil Court against over-assessment. (2) It is enacted that, when a specific limit to assessment has been established and preserved, the assessment shall not exceed such specific limit. A is the owner of land worth Rs. 100 for assessment. He claims to be assessed at Rs. 50 only on the strength of a course of dealing with him and his predecessors under which his land has not been more highly assessed. There is no exemption not before existing created by enactment, and A's claim is not cognizable in a Civil Court. (3) It is enacted that land-revenue shall not be leviable from any land held and entered in the land-registers as exempt. A claims to hold certain land as exemption the ground that it has been so held by him, and is so entered in the land-register. This is an exemption expressly confirmed by enactment on the ground of its being shown in a public record, and A's claim is cognizable in a Civil Court. (4) It is enacted that the Collector shall confirm existing exemptions of all lands shown in certain maps to be exempt. A claims exemption, alleging that his land is shown in the maps to be exempt. A's claim is cognizable in a Civil Court. (5) It is enacted that assessment shall be fixed with reference to certain considerations and not with reference to others. This is not an enactment creating an exemption in favour of any individual or class, and no objection to an assessment under such an enactment is cognizable in a Civil Court. The words "claims against the Crown" were substituted for the words "claims against Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The Bombay Hereditary Officers Act, 1874. The words "by the provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government", by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The para beginning with the words "claims against the Government relating to lands held under treaty" and ending with the words "to be held for service" was deleted by Bom. 48 of 1959, s. 4(i). The words "by the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "by the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. (Bom. 4 of 1868, Bom. 1 of 1865 (except ss. 37 and 38) and Bom. Reg. 17 of 1827 are repeated by the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 (Bom. V of 1879), in areas in which the later Act is in force. Ss. 37 and 38 of Bom. 1 of 1865 are repealed so far as they apply to any village in the Ratnagiri or the Kolaba District to which the Khoti Settlement Act, 1880 (Bom, 1 of 1880), extends or is extended. The words " claims against the Crown" were substituted for the words "claims against Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This words substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were substituted for the words "any cess or rate authorised" by Bom. 48 of 1959, s, 4 (ii). The words "by this Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "to the Crown" were substituted by the words "to Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This words substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Clauses (fa) to (ff) were inserted by Bom. 48 of 1959, s. 4 (iii). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor of Bombay in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This words was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. Clause (ii) was inserted by Bom. 48 of 1959, s. 4 (iv) Bom. 4 of 1868. Bom. 1 of 1865 (except ss. 37 and 38), and Bom. Reg. 17 of 1827 are repealed by the Bombay Land-Revenue Code, 1879 (Bom. V of 1879), in areas in which the latter Act is in force. Ss, 37 and 38 of Bom. 1 of 1865 are repealed so for as they apply to any village in the Ratnagiri or the Kolaba District to which the Khoti Settlement Act, 1880 (Bom. 1 of 1880), extends or is extended. Bombay Rent-free Estate Act, 1852 These words were inserted by Bom, 48 of 1959, s 4 (iv).
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra Nothing in section 4 shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts from entertaining the following suits : (a) suits 1 [against the 2 [Government]] to contest the amount claimed, or paid under protest, or recovered, as land-revenue, on the ground that such amount is in excess of the amount authorized in that behalf 3 [by the 4 [State] Government] or that such amount had, previous to such claim, payment or recovery, been satisfied, in whole or in part or that the plaintiff, or the person whom he represents is not the person liable for such amount ; (b) suits between private parties for the purpose of establishing any private right, although it may be affected by any entry in any record of revenue-survey or settlement or in any village-papers ; (c) suits between superior holders or occupants and inferior holders or tenants, regarding the dues claimed or recovered from the latter ; and nothing in section 4, clause (g), shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts from entertaining suits, other than suits 3[against the 4[Government]) for possession of any land being a whole survey-number or a recognized share of a survey number ; 5 [and nothing in section 4 shall be held to prevent the Civil Courts in the districts mentioned in the Second Schedule hereto annexed from exercising such jurisdiction as, according to the terms of any law in force on the twenty-eighth day of March, 1876, they could have exercised over claims 6 [against the 7 [Governments]] (a) relating to any property appertaining to the office of any hereditary officer appointed or recognized under 8 Bombay Act No. III of 1874 or any other law for the time being in force, or of any other village-officer or servant ; (b) to hold land wholly or partially free form payment of land-revenue ; (c) to receive payments charged on, or payable out of the land-revenue.] The words "against the Crown" were substituted for the words "against Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "by the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "by Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This paragraph was added by the Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction (Amendment) Act, 1877 (16 of 1877). The words "against the Crown" were substituted for the words "against Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The Bombay Hereditary Officer Act.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra Revenue-officers shall not be liable to be sued for damages in any Civil Court for any act bona fide done or ordered to be done by them as such in pursuance of the provisions of any law for the time being in force. If any Revenue-officer absconds or does not attend when called on by his official superior, and if the Collector of the district proceeds against him or his sureties for public money, papers or property according to the provisions of any law for the time being in force, such Collector shall not be liable to pay damages or costs in any suit brought against him by such officer or sureties although it appears that a part only, or no part whatever, of the sum demanded was due from the officer so absconding or failing to attend, or that he was not in possession of the papers or property demanded of him.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra Nothing in any law for the time being in force which authorizes the punishment departmentally of any Revenue-officer for any offence or breach of duty, or which sanctions his prosecution criminally for such offence or breach, shall be held to bar any remedy which may be had in Civil Court against such officer.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 8-10--> State(s): Maharashtra [Suits against Revenue-officer; appeals from their proceedings ; power for Local Government to call for record.] Rep. Act XV of 1880.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [Except as otherwise expressly provided in the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, no Civil Court shall entertain any suit [against the [Government]], on account of any act or omission of any Revenue-officer unless the plaintiff first proves that previously to bringing his suit, he has presented all such appeals allowed by the law for the time being in force as, within the period of limitation allowed for bringing such suit, it was possible to present. These words were substituted for the words "No Civil Court shall entertain" by Mah. 41 of 1966, s. 334 (Schedule K).
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra If, in the trial or investigation of any suit, claim or objection which, but for the passing of this Act, might have been tried or investigated by a Civil Court, there arises any question on which 2 * * * * the 3 [4 [State] Government] desires to have the decision of the High Court, 5 * * * * the 6 [7 [State] Government]8 * * *may cause a statement of the question to be prepared, and may refer such question for the decision of the High Court 9 * * *. The said High Court shall fix an early day for the hearing of the question referred, and cause notice of such day to be placed in the court-house. The parties to the case may appear and be heard in the High Court in person or by their advocates or pleaders. The High Court when it has heard and considered the case, shall send a copy of its decision, with the reasons therefor under the seal of the Court, to the Government by which the reference was made, and subject to any appeal which may be presented to 10 [the Supreme Court], the case shall be disposed of conformably to such decision. If the High Court considers that any such statement is imperfectly framed, the High Court may return it for amendment. The costs (if any) consequent on any such reference shall be dealt with as the High Court in each case directs. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "the Governor General in Council or" were omitted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government", ibid. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "the Governor General in Council or" were omitted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Local Government", ibid. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The word "as the case may be" were omitted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "of Judicature at Bombay" were omitted by the Adaptation of Laws (No.2) Order, 1956. These words were substituted for the words "Her Majesty in Council" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 19S0.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra If in any suit instituted, or in any appeal presented," in a Civil Court, the Judge doubts whether he is precluded by this Act from taking cognizance of the suit or appeal, he may refer the matter to the High Court. The High Court may order the Judge making the reference either to proceed with the case or to return the plaint. The order of the High Court on any such reference shall be subject to appeal to 6[the Supreme Court], and, save as aforesaid, shall be final.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra Every reference under section 12 or section 13 shall be heard by a Bench consisting of such number of Judges, not less than three as the Chief Justice from time to time directs.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra [Amendment of Section 32 of Act XIV of 1869] Rep. Act I of 1938,
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra Whenever any suit is brought in any Court of a subordinate judge of the first class 4 [against the 9[Government]5 ***] or against any Revenue Officer, 6 [and the [Government] * * * undertakes] the defence thereof, it shall be lawful 7 [for the [State] Government]], by certificate signed by a Secretary thereto, to require that the trial of any such suit shall have precedence over the trial of any other suit or other civil proceeding then pending in the Court of the first class subordinate judge, or, if the suit is transferred, in the Court of the District Judge; and the Court shall give effect to every such requirement. The privilege conferred 8 [on the Provincial Government] by this section shall mutatis mutandis, apply to any appeal or special appeal against any decree in any such suit as is described in this section. 17. [First clause, Revival of section 13 of Bom. Reg. XVII of 1827.] Repealed by Act XV of 1880; but the repeal does not operate in any scheduled district unless and until the Bombay Land-revenue Code (Bom. V of 1879) has been extended to such district. [Second clause, Operation of Bom. Reg. XVII of 1827 in sites of villages and towns.] Rep. Act XV of 1880. [Third clause, Recovery of certain advances made by Local Government.] Rep. Act XV of 1880. This word was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "or the Federal Railway Authority" were omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948. S. 16 was substituted for the original by section 2 of Bom. 21 of 1929. The words "against the Crown or the Federal Railway Authority" were substituted for the words "against Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "or the Federal Railway Authority" were omitted by the Indian Independence (Adaptation of Central Acts and Ordinances) Order, 1948. The words "and the Crown or the Federal Railway Authority undertakes" were substituted for the words "and the Government undertakes" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "for the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "for the Government", ibid. The words "on the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "or Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section Sch.1--> State(s): Maharashtra [Enactments repealed] Repealed by Act XII of 1891
Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction Act, 1876_Section Sch.2--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 The Second Schedule The district of Ahmedabad. The district of Kaira, exclusive of the Panch Mahals. The district of Broach. The district of Surat, exclusive of the lapsed State of Mandvi, as described in the Schedule annexed to 2 Act X of 1848. The district of Thana. The district of Kolaba, exclusive of the lapsed State of Kolaba mentioned in 3Act VIII of 1853. The district of Ratnagiri. The district of Kanara.] This Schedule was added by the Bombay Revenue Jurisdiction (Amendment) Act, 1877 (16 of 1877). It is referred to in s. 5, supra. Acts 10 of 1848 and 8 of 1853 were repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1891 (12 of 1891). 
