Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS, Shri Sharadchandra Krishnaprasad Desai, discharging the functions of the Governor of Maharashtra, was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Act, 1959, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and therefore, promulgated the Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Ordinance, 1987 (See 1987 67 STC Statutes 136); AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 23rd day of September, 1987.
Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), for clause (12A), the following clause shall be substituted, and shall be deeded to have been substituted with effect from the 1st day of August, 1985, namely :- "(12A) 'Edible oil unit' means an eligible unit engaged in - (i) delinting, decorticating or processing of groundnuts or other oil-seeds, or (ii) crushing of groundnuts or other oilseeds and manufacture of edible oil, or (iii) refining of oil and manufacture of edible oil, or (iv) manufacture of edible oil by any process in any manner, or (v) hydrogenation of edible oil;".
Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or Tribunal to the contrary, any assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of tax in respect of sales or purchases effected by any edible oil unit made or purporting to have been made, or any action taken or thing done in relation to such assessment, reassessment, levy or collection, under the provisions of the principal Act during the period commencing on the 1st day of August, 1985 and ending on, and including, the day immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to be as valid and effective as if such assessment, reassessment, levy or collection or action or thing had been duly made, taken or done under the principal Act, as amended by this Act, and accordingly, - (a) all acts, proceedings or things done or taken by the State Government or by any officer of the State Government or by any other authority in connection with the assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of any such tax, shall, for all purposes be deemed to be, and to have always been done or taken in accordance with law; (b) no suit, appeal, application or other proceedings, shall lie or be maintained or continued in any Court or before any Tribunal, officer or other authority, for the refund of any tax so paid; and (c) no Court, Tribunal, officer or other authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any such tax. (2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub-section (1), shall be construed as preventing a person, - (a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, any assessment, reassessment, levy or collection of tax referred to in sub-section (1), or (b) from claiming refund of any tax paid by him in excess of the amount due from him by way of tax under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. (3) Nothing in this Act shall render any person liable to be convicted of any offence in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by him, before the commencement of this Act, if such act or omission was not an offence under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, but for the amendments made by this Act, nor shall any person in respect of such act or omission be subject to penalty greater than that which could have been inflicted on him under the law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act,
Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Act, 1987_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Ordinance, 1987 (See 1987 67 STC Statutes 136), is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Bill, 1987 (L.A. Bill No. XXXIX of 1987) (Maharashtra Government Gazette, Extraordinary, Part V, dated 9th November, 1987, page 315), runs as follows :- In Writ Petition No. 1280 of 1986, M/s. Narendra Oil Refineries and Others v. The State of Maharashtra and Others (1988 68 STC 208), the High Court of Bombay, Nagpur Bench, held that the expression "edible oil unit" in clause (12A) of section 2 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 does not include an oil unit which manufactures edible oil by refining non-edible oil, for example, edible oil manufactured by refining washed cotton seed oil which is non-edible oil. The intention of defining the expression "edible oil unit" was to cover such manufacturing process also. It was, therefore, expedient to make this intention clear by amending, with retrospective effect, the definition of the expression "edible oil unit" suitably and also to make suitable validation and saving provision in respect of the assessment, reassessment, levy and collection, etc., in respect of sales or purchases made by such unit. 2. As both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session and Shri Sharadchandra Krishnaprasad Desai, discharging the functions of the Governor of Maharashtra, was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 for the purposes aforesaid, the Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment and Validating Provisions) Ordinance, 1987 (Mah. Ord. V of 1987) (See 1987 67 STC Statutes 136), was promulgated on the 23rd September, 1987. 3. The Bill is intended to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature. 
