Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975, and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Traders, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002, on the 26th February 2002, AND WHEREAS, it is in expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th February 2002.
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra Section 8D of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter in this Act, referred to as "the Bombay Sales Tax Act"), shall be deleted and shall be deemed to have been deleted with effect from the 14th November 2000.
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 40 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "40A. Lumpsum payment in lieu of tax on Lottery tickets - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, any dealer dealing in Lottery tickets may, at his option, pay, in lieu of the amount of tax payable by him, in respect of turnover of sales of tickets of a passive lottery (i.e. a lottery in which the lottery tickets of fixed value are pre-printed and sold), a lumpsum as stated in the Table hereunder :- 1. Weekly draw ..... Rupees Ten Thousand (Rs. 10,000). 2 Fortnightly draw, including any draw the period of which is more than a week but less than fortnight. Rupees Fifty Thousand (Rs. 50,000). 3 Monthly draw, including Monthly Bumper draw and any draw the period of which is more than a fortnight but less than a month. Rupees One lac (Rs. 1,00,000). 4 Special Bumper draw or Festival Bumper draw including any other draw not covered by any other category and any draw the period of which is more than a month. Rupees Two lac (Rs. 2,00,000). Provided that, where a dealer has paid the tax under this sub-section in respect of the sale of lottery tickets of a particular name and type of lottery ticket of a particular State and for a particular draw, no tax shall be payable in respect of the sale of such lottery tickets by any other dealer or any person in this State who is liable to pay tax under this Act. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid ten days prior to the date of the draw."
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In Schedule 'C' appended to the Bombay Sales Tax Act, in Part II, - (a) after entry 151, the following entry shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted, with effect from the 14th November 2000, namely:- "151A. Lottery Tickets. 13%. 13%."; (b) in entry 151A, so inserted, with effect from the date of coming into force of this Act, in columns (3) and (4), for the figures "13%" the figures "60%" shall be substituted.
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 11 of the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1975 (hereinafter, in this Act, referred to as "the Profession Tax Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "11A. Special powers of Profession Tax Authorit-ies for recovery of tax as arrears of land revenue - (1) For the purpose of effecting recovery of the amount of tax, interest and penalty, due and recoverable from any person by or under the provisions of this Act, as arrears of land revenue, - (i) the Commissioner of Profession Tax shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the Commissioner under the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (hereinafter in this section referred to as "the said Code"); (ii) the Additional Commissioner of Profession Tax shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the Additional Commissioner under the said Code; (iii) the Deputy Commissioner of Profession Tax shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the Collector under the said Code; (iv) the Assistant Commissioner of Profession Tax shall have and exercise all the powers (except the powers of arrest and confinement of defaulter in a civil jail) and perform all the duties of the Assistant or Deputy Collector under the said Code; (v) the Profession Tax Officer shall have and exercise all the powers (except the powers of confirmation of sale and arrest and confinement of defaulter in a civil jail) and perform all the duties of the Tahsildar under the said Code. (2) Every notice issued or order passed in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) shall, for the purposes of sections 13, 14, 15 and 25 be deemed to be a notice issued or an order passed under this Act.".
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 12 of the Professions Tax Act, after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely :- "(7) For carrying out the purposes of this Act, the Commissioner or an officer duly authorised by him may, appoint any person or persons, possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed, as his agent or agents (hereinafter referred to as the "recovery agent"). Such recovery agent shall be responsible for survey and recovery of the arrears of the tax (including interest and penalty) recoverable under this Act. (8) It shall be the duty of the recovery agent to carry out such functions and in such manner, as may be prescribed, and to render full and complete account of the arrears recovered to the Commissioner or to the officer duly authorised by him, in such manner, and at such time, as that officer may require. (9) The recovery agent shall have, for the purpose of survey and recovery of tax, interest and penalty, such powers as may be prescribed. (10) The recovery agent shall be paid such incentive as may be determined by the Government. (11) It shall be lawful for the Commissioner or an officer duly authorised by him, to have access to, and to cause production and examination of, books registers, accounts or documents maintained or required to be maintained by the recovery agent for the purpose of this Act, and the recovery agent shall, whenever called upon to do so, produce such books, registers, accounts or documents for inspection by the Commissioner or by the authorised officer."
Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Sales Tax and the Maharashtra State Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002, is hereby repealed (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Bombay Sales Tax Act and the Professions Tax Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken as the case may be under the corresponding provisions of the said Acts, as amended by this Act. 
