Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, on the 14th November, 2000 : AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th November, 2000.
Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 8C of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "8D. Levy of tax on lottery tickets. - (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, every dealer in lottery tickets in the State shall be liable to pay tax on sales thereof, only under this section, as provided in the Table hereunder, - TABLEProvided that, where a dealer has paid the tax under this sub-section in respect of the sale of lottery tickets of a particular name and type of lottery ticket of a particular State and, for a particular draw, no tax shall be payable in respect of the sale of such lottery tickets by any other dealer or any person in this State liable to pay tax under this Act. Serial No. Type of draw Rate per draw 1 2 3 1 Weekly draw Rupees twenty thousand (Rs. 20,000) 2 Fortnightly draw, including any draw the period of which is more than a week but less than a fortnight. Rupees sixty thousand (Rs. 60,000) 3 Monthly draw, including monthly bumper draw and any draw the period of which is more than a fortnight but less than a month. Rupees one lakh (Rs. 1,00,000) 4 Special bumper draw or Festival Bumper draw including any other draw not covered by any other category and any draw the period of which is more than a month. Rupees four lakhs (Rs. 4,00,000) : (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, tax payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid ten days prior to the draw.".
Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In schedule 'C' appended to the principal Act, in Part II, entry 151A shall be deleted.
Bombay Sales Tax (Second Amendment) Act, 2000_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 2000, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
