Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra (First published, after having received the assent of the President in the " Maharashtra Government Gazette ", on the 30th December 2011.) An Act further to amend the Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 16 of the Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), for the words "two lakh rupees" the words "ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 24 of the principal Act,- (a) for the words "one lakh rupees" the words "five lakh rupees" shall be substituted ; (b) in the proviso, for the words "one lakh rupees to one lakh fifty thousand rupees" the words "five lakh rupees to seven lakh fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "two lakh rupees" the words "ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 28A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words "two lakh rupees" the words "ten lakh rupees" shall be substituted.
Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 28A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- " 28B. Transfer of pending suits and appeals:-On the commencement of the Bombay Civil Courts (Amendment) Act, 2011,- (1) all suits in which the amount or value of the subject matter does not exceed rupees five lakhs and which are pending before the Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division), immediately, before such commencement, shall stand transferred to the concerned Court of Civil Judge (Junior Division) and such court may deal with such suit from the stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de-novo as such court may deem fit; (2) all appeals in which the amount or value of the subject matter does not exceed rupees ten lakhs and pending before the High Court immediately before such commencement, shall stand transferred to the concerned District Court and such District Court may deal with such appeal from the stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de-novo as such court may deem fit: Provided that, this section shall not apply to any suits and appeals which are pending before the Court of Civil Judge (Senior Division) or, as the case may be, before the High Court, which are statutorily provided under the relevant enactment before such Court.". 
