Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Village Panchayats (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002, on the 16th October 2002; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature ; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of October, 2002.
Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 7 of the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act"),- (a) in sub-section (1),- (i) for the words "four meetings" the words "six meetings" shall be substituted; (ii) after the existing proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely :- 'Provided further that, a period of not more than three months shall be allowed to elapse between the two meetings of the Gram Sabha : Provided also that, if the Sarpanch or Upa-Sarpanch, as the case may be, fails to call any such meeting within the specified period, the Secretary shall call the meeting and it shall be presumed that such meeting has been called with the concurrence of the Sarpanch or, as the case may be, Upa-Sarpanch."; (b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- "(3) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, the first meeting of the Gram Sabha after each general election to a panchayat and thereafter the first meeting of every year, shall be presided over by the Sarpanch and in his absence by the Upa-Sarpanch; and all other subsequent meetings of the year of the Gram Sabha, shall be presided over by a person elected by the persons present in that meeting of the Gram Sabha."; (c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely :- "(5) The meeting of the women members of the Gram Sabha shall be held before every regular meeting of the Gram Sabha, convened under sub-section (1). (6) The Gram Sabha shall have the disciplinary control over the Government, semi-Government and panchayat employees working in the village including the matters relating to their daily attendance in the office. The annual evaluation of such employees shall be brought to the notice of their respective higher authorities by the Gram Sabha. (7) The Gram Sabha shall report to the concerned Block Development Officer, the irregularities, if any, committed by any of such employees. The Block Development Officer shall consider such report within the period of three months from the date of its receipt. Such matters and the actions taken thereon shall be reviewed in the regular meetings of the Panchayat Samiti. If, the Block Development Officer fails to dispose of such reports within the specified period of three months, the same shall on the expiry of the said period, stand transferred to the Chief Executive Officer of the concerned Zilla Parishad for disposal, whose decision shall be final. The Chief Executive Officer of the Zilla Parishad shall take the decision on such reports so transferred to him, within a period of three months from the date of their receipt. (8) The Gram Sabha shall select the beneficiaries for individual beneficiary schemes of the State, or as the case may be, of the Central Government. (9) The Gram Sabha shall generally fix the date, time and place of the next meeting of the Gram Sabha, in its previous meeting. (10) Unless exempted by the Gram Sabha, all the Government, Semi-Government and panchayat employees working in the village shall attend the meetings of the Gram Sabha. (11) The proceedings of every meeting of the Gram Sabha shall be prepared and maintained by the concerned Secretary of the panchayat and in his absence, the proceedings shall be prepared by any Government, semi-Government or panchayat employee working in the village, such as Teacher, Talathi or Anganwadi Sevika as directed by the Sarpanch and the same shall be handed over to the panchayat for records.".
Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 8A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :- "8AA. Powers and duties of Gram Sabha:-It shall be competent for every Gram Sabha,- (i) to approve the social or economic development plans, programmes and projects to be implemented by the panchayat before such plans, programmes and projects are taken up for implementation by such panchayat; (ii) to grant permission for incurring any expenditure by the panchayat on the development schemes; (iii) to convey its views to the panchayat before taking any decision by the panchayat in respect of any proposal for acquisition of any land falling within the jurisdiction of such panchayat, for the Government purpose, by the Land Acquisition Authority concerned.".
Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 45 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6C), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely :- "(6D) A panchayat shall obtain permission of the Gram Sabha for incurring any expenditure on the development schemes. (6E) A panchayat shall be consulted by the concerned land acquisition Authority, before such Authority acquires any land falling within the jurisdiction of that panchayat for the Government purpose : Provided that, every panchayat shall obtain and consider the views of the Gram Sabha before conveying its views to the Land Acquisition Authority concerned.".
Bombay Village Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Village Panchayats (Amendment) Ordinance, 2002 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the principal Act, amended by this Act. 
