Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Coasting-vessels Act, 1838. BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Bombay Coasting-vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra Throughout the Bombay Coasting-vessels Act, 1838 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the words "Master-Attendant", wherever they occur, the words "Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department" shall be substituted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In the short title of the principal Act, the word "Bombay" shall be omitted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra The following section shall be inserted as section 1 of the principal Act, namely :- "1.Extent.- This Act extends in the first instance to the States of Bombay, Saurashtra and Kutch, but the Central government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend it to any other State which has a sea-coast."
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the principal Act,- (a) the words "residing within the State of Bombay" shall be omitted; and (b) for the words "the said State" the words "any State to which this Act extends" shall be substituted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In the second paragraph of section 4 and in sections 12 and 13 of the principal Act, the words "within the said State" shall be omitted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the principal Act, the words "within the State of Bombay" shall be omitted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "10.Fees for certificate.- The owner or owners of such vessels employed as aforesaid (fishing-vessels and harbour craft being excepted) on being registered as aforesaid, shall pay- for each certificate of registry for a vessel not exceeding 5 tons burthen, the fee of...1 rupee; for each certificate for a vessel exceeding 5 tons burthen and not exceeding 25 tons burthen, the fee of--- 5 rupees; for each certificate for a vessel exceeding 25 tons burthen and not exceeding 100 tons burthen, the fee of...7 upees; and for each certificate for a vessel of 100tons or greater burthen, per ton, the fee of ...2 annas."
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra In the Schedule to the principal Act,for the words "Bombay khandis" the word "tons" shall be substituted.
Bombay Coasting-Vessels (Amendment) Act, 1952_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra If immediately before the commencement of this Act there is in force in the State of Kutch, any law corresponding to the principal Act, that law shall, on such commencement, stand repealed: Provided that notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any certificate of registration issued) in the exercise of any power conferred by or under such corresponding law, shall be deemed to have been issued, done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under the principal Act, as amended by this Act, as if the principal Act as so amended was in force in the said State on the day on which any such thing was done or action was taken. 
