Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 and the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961. Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 (Bom. Ill of 1959) and the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961 (Ord. V of 1962); It is hereby enacted in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010. (2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extra-ordinary, Part VIII, dated 23rd December, 2010
Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 14 of the Bombay Village Panchayats Act, 1958 (Bom. III of 1959) in sub-section (1), after clause (j-4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(j-5) fails to submit a certificate of the concerned panchayat, alongwith the resolution of the Gram Sabha certifying that,- (i) he resides in a house owned by him and has a toilet in such house and he regularly uses such toilet; or (ii) he resides in a house not owned by him and has a toilet in such house and he regularly uses it or he has no such toilet but regularly uses the public toilet: Provided that, no member of a panchayat shall be disqualified under this clause, if he submits such certificate, within ninety days from the date of commencement of the Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010 ; or ".
Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 16 of the Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis Act, 1961, in sub-section (1), after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(p) he has failed to submit a certificate of the concerned panchayat, alongwith a resolution of the Gram Sabha certifying that,- (i) he resides in a house owned by him and has a toilet in such house and he regularly uses such toilet; or (ii) he resides in a house not owned by him and has a toilet in such house and he regularly uses it or he has no such toilet but regularly uses the public toilet: Provided that no Councillor shall he disqualified under this clause, if he submits such certificate, within ninety days from the date of commencement of the Bombay Village Panchayats and Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Second Amendment) Act, 2010 (Mah. XXXI11 of 2010)". 
