Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to fix a scale of standard weights and measures for the Presidency of Bombay. WHEREAS it is expedient to fix a scale of standard weights and measures for the presidency of Bombay and to provide for the adoption of the same in specified areas in the said presidency 1 [and for certain other matters hereinafter appearing]; And whereas the previous sanction of the Governor General required by sub-section (3) of section 80A of the Government of India Act and the previous sanction of the Governor required by section 80C of the said Act have been obtained for the passing of this Act; It is hereby enacted as follows:- These words were inserted by Bombay 56 of 1938, s. 2.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act shall apply to the whole of the presidency on Bombay. (2) Part I shall come into force at once. Government may, by notification in the 1 [Official Gazette], direct that Parts II, III, V and VI shall come into force in any district or municipal area on a date to be specified in such notification. (3) When Government has directed that Parts II, III, V and VI shall come into force in any district or municipal area under sub-section (2), Part IV shall come into force in any district or municipal area three months after the dates specified in the notification. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) "Inspector" means an inspector of weights and measures and weighing or measuring instrument appointed under section 19; (2) "Measuring instrument" includes any instrument for the measurement of length, area, capacity or volume; (3) "Mint" means 1 [Government Mint] Bombay; (4) "Mint Master" means the officer appointed for the time being to be the Master of the Mint, Bombay; (5) "Prescribed" with its grammatical variations means prescribed by rules 2 [...] made under this Act; (6) "Primary standards" means the weights and measures prepared and stamped under section 5; 3 [(7) "rules" means the rules made under section 41;] (8) "Secondary standards" means the weights and measures prepared and stamped under section 7; 4 [(8A) "Stamping" includes casting, engraving, etching, branding or otherwise marking in such manner as to be, so far as practicable, indelible and the expression "stamp" and other expressions relating thereto shall be construed accordingly;] (9) The expression "verification" or "re-verification" with its grammatical variations, used with reference to a weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument, includes the process of comparing, checking or testing such weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument; (10) "Weighing instrument" includes scales, with the weights belonging thereto, scale beams, balances, spring balances, steelyards, weighing machines, and other instruments for weighing; 5 [...] (11) "Working standards" mean the weights and measures provided under section 9; 6 [(12) "Government" means in relation to the establishment of standards of weight 7 [and measure], the Central Government, and save as aforesaid means, the 8 [State] Government]. These words were substituted of the words "His Majesty's Mint" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "or regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 2(1). This clause was substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 2 (2). This clause was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 3. The word "and" was deleted by Bombay 39 of 1951, s. 2, First Schedule. Clause (12) was inserted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. These words were inserted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1)] The weights and measures including the multiples and sub-multiples thereof described in the First Schedule shall be the weights and measures authorised to be used in every place in which this Part has come into force. These weights and measures are called standard weights and measures for the purposes of this Act. 2 [(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), Government may, after previous publication by notification in the 3 [Official Gazette], declare, either generally or for any trade or class of trades- (a) any other multiple or sub-multiple of a weight or measure specified in the First Schedule, or (b) any other weight or measure, or any multiple or sub-multiple thereof to be a weight or measure authorised to be used in any place in which this Part has come into force. The weight, measure, multiple or sub-multiple shall to the extent so declared, be deemed to be a standard weight or measure for the purposes of this Act.] Section 4 was renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Bombay 33 of 1935, s. 2. Sub-section (2) was added by Bombay 33 of 1935. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purpose of verifying the secondary standards, such standard weights and measures as Government may direct shall be prepared 1 [...] by the Mint Master 2 [or by such other person as may be approved by Government]. They shall be made of such material, weight, length, form and specifications and in such manner as may be determined by Government by notification in the 3 [Official Gazette]. They shall be stamped with the stamp of the Mint 4 [or in such other manner as Government may approve]. The standard weights and measures so prepared and stamped shall be called primary standards. The words "at the Mint" were omitted by Bombay 9 of 1935, s. 2(1). These words were inserted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Order in Council. These words were inserted by Bombay 9 of 1935, s. 3(1).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra The primary standards shall be kept in the custody of such officer in the City of Bombay as Government may direct. They shall, once at least in every period of five years, be verified, and if necessary, adjusted or renewed, at the Mint in such manner and by such officer as Government may direct.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purpose of verifying the working standards and weights and measures in use in any area, such standard weights and measures as Government may direct, shall be prepared 1 [...] by the Mint Master 2 [or by such other person as may be approved by Government]. They shall be made of such material, weight length, form and specifications and in such manner as may be prescribed, and shall be stamped with the stamp of the Mint 3 [or in such other manner as Government may approve]. The standard weights and measures so prepared and stamped shall be called secondary standards. The words "at the Mint" were omitted by Bombay 9 of 1935, s. 3(1). These words were inserted by Bombay 9 of 1935. These words were inserted by Bombay 9 of 1935, s. 3(2).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The secondary standards shall be kept- (i) in the City of Bombay by such officer and at such place as Government may direct; (ii) elsewhere by the Collectors in the Government treasuries at the headquarter towns of their respective districts and at such other town or place within their respective districts as Government may direct. (2) 1 [...] (3) Once at least in every period of five years such secondary standards shall be verified with the primary standards and shall be adjusted or renewed, if necessary, and shall be marked with the date of verification, in the prescribed manner by such officer as Government may direct. (4) A secondary standard which is not so verified, adjusted or renewed and marked within the aforesaid period shall not be deemed legal and shall not be used for the purpose of this Act. Sub-section (2) was deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955. s. 3.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) For the purpose of verifying weights and measures in use in any area, Government may provide such standard weights and measures as it thinks fit, to be working standards. They shall be made of such material, weight, length, form and according to such specifications and shall be prepared by such agency and shall be stamped by such person and in such manner as may be prescribed. When they are not prepared at the Mint, they shall be verified with the secondary standards before being stamped. (2) The working standards shall be kept by such officers 1 [...] as Government may direct at such places, in such custody and in such manner as may be prescribed. (3) A working standard shall be verified or re-verified and marked by such person, at such place and in such manner, as may be prescribed. (4) A working standard shall not be deemed legal, or be used for purposes of this Act, unless it has been verified or re-verified and marked in the prescribed manner within such period as may be prescribed before the time at which it is used. A working standard which has become defective shall not be legal, or be used for the purposes of this Act, until it has been re-verified and marked in the prescribed manner. The words "and such municipalities and local boards" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1995, s. 4.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra Weighing and measuring instruments stamped in the manner prescribed by such officer as Government may direct shall be kept at all places where secondary standards or working standards are kept. Such instruments shall be of such kind kept in such number and shall be verified, adjusted or renewed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra [Duty of certain municipalities and local boards to provide and maintain secondary standards, etc.] Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 5.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 11A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that such standard weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, be used for such trade or class of trades in such area from such date and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification. (2) on and from the date specified in the notification under sub-section (1), no weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument other than the one specified in such notification shall be used in such trade or class of trades.] This section was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 4.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Subject to the provisions of section 46, and notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, all dealings or contracts, had or made in any area after this Part shall have come into force in the said area for any work to be done or goods to be sold or delivered b weight or measure, shall be deemed to be had or made according to one of the standard weights or measures or to multiples 1 [or sub-multiples] thereof and it shall not be lawful to use any other weight or measure in relation to any such dealing or contract. (2) Any dealing or contract had or made in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) so far as it contravenes the said provisions shall be void unless it is proved that such dealing or contract was had or made without intention to contravene the said provisions. Explanation.- Unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context dealing or contract is hereinafter called "trade". The words "or sub-multiples" were inserted by Bombay 33 of 1935, s. 3.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 12A--> State(s): Maharashtra Any custom, usage, practice or method of whatever nature which permits in any trade 2 [a trader, a seller or a buyer] to demand, receive or cause to be demanded or received any quantity of article in excess of or less than the quantity fixed by the weight or measure by which the contract or dealing 3 [in respect of the said article] has been made shall be void.] This section was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 5. These words were substituted for the words "a seller or a buyer" by Bombay 15 of 1995, s. 6(1). These words were substituted for the words "for the sale of the said article" by Bombay 15 of 1995, s. 6(2).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra Every weight which conforms to the provisions of this Act and the rules 2 [...] except where the small size of the weight renders it impracticable, shall have the denomination thereof stamped on the top or side thereof in legible figures and letters. Every measure of length, area, capacity or volume, which conforms to the provisions of this Act and the rules 3 [...] shall have the denomination thereof stamped on the outside of such measure in legible figures and letters. A weight or measure which does not conform to the provisions of this section shall not be stamped in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 4 [...]. This marginal note was substituted for the original by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 5. The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 7. The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 7. The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 7.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) No weight or measure shall be used for trade unless it has been verified or re-verified in the prescribed manner and stamped by an inspector with a stamp of verification under this Act. (2) Government may prescribe the amount of error to be tolerated in weights or measures or weighing or measuring instrument used for trade.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra No weighing or measuring instrument shall be used for trade unless it has been verified or re-verified within the period fixed and stamped in the prescribed manner by and inspector with a stamp of verification.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra No weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument shall be sold or delivered unless it has been verified or re-verified and stamped in the prescribed manner by an inspector with a stamp of verification.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 17--> State(s): Maharashtra [Empowering municipalities and district local boards to stamp, weights, etc.] Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 8.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 18--> State(s): Maharashtra Government shall provide proper and sufficient means for verifying, adjusting and stamping weights and measures and weighing of measuring instruments in the City of Bombay, in all headquarter towns in the districts and at such other places as Government may determine: 1 [...] The proviso was deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 9.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 19--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Government shall appoint a sufficient number of persons with prescribed qualifications as inspectors for keeping the secondary and working standards in safe and proper custody and for the discharge of the other duties of inspectors under this Act and the rules 1 [...]. 2 [(2) In the exercise of their powers and in the discharge of their duties and functions under the provisions of this Act and rules, the Inspectors shall, subject to the general or special orders of the State Government be subordinate to and under the control of such officer or officers as the State Government may by order authorize in this behalf. The Inspectors shall be bound to follow such directions as the officer so authorized may from time to time make. (3) The powers and duties conferred on the Inspectors by this Act or rules may also be exercised and performed by the officer or officers so authorised.] The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 10(a). Sub-sections (2) and (3) were substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 10(b).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 20--> State(s): Maharashtra Every inspector shall forthwith on his appointment enter into a recognizance with Government 1 [...] in such sum as may be prescribed for the due performance of the duties of his office, for the due payment, at the time and in the manner required by the authority appointing him, of all moneys received by him under this Act and for the safety of the secondary and working standards and the stamps and appliances for verification committed to his charge and for their due surrender immediately on ceasing to hold office. The words "or the municipality or district local board, as the case may be," were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 11.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 20A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every person using weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments for trade shall maintain such records, and (2) Every dealer, repairer or manufacturer in any weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments shall maintain such books, accounts and records, relating to weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments and in such manner as may be prescribed and shall produce them for inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.] This section was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 7.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 21--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every inspector shall, for the purposes of the verification weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments, attend at such time and place within his jurisdiction as may be appointed in this behalf by the authority appointing him. 1 [(2) He shall verify every weight and measure or weighing or measuring instrument which is brought to him for the purpose of verification or re-verification. If he finds such weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument correct, he shall stamp the same with a stamp of verification in the prescribed manner.] This sub-section was substituted for the original sub-sections (2) and (3) by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 12.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 22--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every inspector authorised in writing in this behalf by the authority appointing him may, at all reasonable times, inspect all weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments, within the area under his charge, which are used or are in the possession of any person or are on any premises for use for trade and may verify every such weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument with a secondary or working standard or a weighing or measuring instrument prescribed for this purpose 1 [and also verify the weight or measure of any article, delivered by such person in the course of trade to any other person with such secondary or working standard or weighing or measuring instrument]. 2 [(1A) Such Inspector may, at all reasonable times, require any trader or any employee or agent of a trader to produce before him for inspection all weights, measures and weighing or measuring instruments which are in his possession and are kept on any premises used for trade, whether or not such weights, measures or instruments are used, or are in his possession for use, for trade.] (2) Such inspector may seize and detain any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument regarding which an office under this Act appears to have been committed or which appears to have been or which may be used for the commission of such offence. (3) For the purpose of such inspection, the inspector may at all reasonable times enter into any place where weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments are used or kept for purpose of trade and inspect such weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments. These words were inserted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 13. This sub-section was inserted by Bombay 15 of 1947, s. 3.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 23--> State(s): Maharashtra An inspector shall not, during the time he holds office, derive any profit from or be employed in the making, adjusting, or selling of weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments: Provided that in any area in which it appears to Government desirable that an inspector should be allowed to adjust weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments Government may, if it thinks fit, authorize such inspector to adjust weights, measures or such instruments accordingly.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 24--> State(s): Maharashtra [Inspectors to be public servants.] Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 14.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 25--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 [(1) If any difference arises between an Inspector and any person interested as to the meaning or construction of any rule or as to the method of verifying, adjusting or stamping any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument, such difference may, at the request of the party interested or by the Inspector of his own accord be referred to such officer as Government may direct and the decision of such officer shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), be final.] (2) An appeal shall lie within the time prescribed from the decision under sub-section (1) to Government or such officer as Government may appoint in this behalf. The decision of Government or such officer under this sub-section shall be final. This sub-section and marginal note were substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 15.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 26--> State(s): Maharashtra [Expenses of municipality and district local board]. Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 16.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 27--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 Government shall charge such fee for the verification, re-verification, levy of fees, marking, adjustment and stamping of weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments as may be prescribed.] This section was substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 17.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 28--> State(s): Maharashtra [Power of municipalities and district local boards to combine for the purposes of the Act.] Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 18.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 29--> State(s): Maharashtra A weight or measure duly stamped by an inspector under this Act shall be a legal weight or measure in all places in which this part has come into force, unless false or defective, and shall not be liable to be re-stamped because used in any place other than that in which it was originally stamped.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 30--> State(s): Maharashtra A weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument duly stamped under the provisions of this Act or the rules 1 [...] shall be deemed to be correct until its inaccuracy is proved, if it is produced in any court by any public servant having charge thereof under the direction of Government 2 [...], or by any person acting under the general or special authority of such public servant. The words "or regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 19(1). The word "or the municipality or district local board, as the case may be" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 19(2).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 31--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever fraudulently uses any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument, shall on conviction, be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to three months or with fine extending up to rupees five hundred or with both.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 31A--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever uses any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument contravention of any notification issued under section 11A shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment of either description which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred or with both.] This section was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 8.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 32--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever willfully or knowingly makes, sells or disposes of or causes to be made, sold or disposed of any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument which is false or defective shall, on conviction, be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a period which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred or with both.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 33--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever sells 2 [of causes to be sold] 3 [or delivers or causes to be delivered during the course of any trade] any article by any denomination of weight or measure other than one of the standard weights or measures shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred. These words were inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 20(2). These words were inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 9. These words were inserted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 9(1).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 34--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever uses or has in his possession for use for trade any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument 1 [which he knows to be false or defective or which is not authorised], verified 2 [or re-verified] or stamped under or in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 3 [...] shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred and any trade had or made by such weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument shall be void. 4 [Explanation 5 [1].- When any such weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument is found in the possession of any trader or of any employee or agent of such trader, such trader, 6 [employee or agent] shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, to have had it in his possession for use for trade.] 7 [Explanation 2.- Where any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument is used or possessed in contravention of this section by any employee or agent of a trader on behalf of such trader, such trader shall, unless he proves that the offence under this section was committed by his employee or agent without his knowledge or consent be also deemed to be guilty of such offence.] These words were substituted for the words "which is not authorised" by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 21(a). These words were inserted by Bombay 1 of 1939, s. 2(i). The word "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 21(b). The Explanation was added by Bombay 1 of 1939, s. 2(ii). This Explanation was renumbered as Explanation I by Bombay 17 of 1951, s. 2(1). These words were inserted by Bombay 17 of 1951, s. 2(1). This Explanation was added by Bombay 17 of 1951, s. 2(2).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 35--> State(s): Maharashtra 2 [Whoever in selling or delivering in the course of any trade, any article by weight or measure, sells or delivers or causes to be sold or delivered to any person]- (i) in cases to which an amount of error prescribed under section 46A applies, short weight or measure, exceeding in shortage the amount of error so prescribed, or (ii) in other cases, short weight or measures, shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees three hundred,] Section 35 was substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1947, s. 4. This portion was substituted for the original by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 22.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 36--> State(s): Maharashtra [Penalty for possessing for use weight, etc., not verified or stamped.] Repealed of Bombay 1 of 1939, section 3.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 37--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever sells or delivers 1 [or causes to be sold or delivered] any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument not verified or re-verified and stamped under this Act shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one thousand. These words were inserted by Born. 56 of 1948, s. 10.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 38--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Whoever forges or counterfeits any stamp used under this Act for the stamping of. any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument 1 [or possesses any such counterfeit stamp] or removes a stamp from any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument and inserts the same into another weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument or willfully increases or diminishes a weight or measure so stamped shall, on conviction, be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a period which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. (2) Whoever knowingly uses, sells, utters, disposes of or exposes for sale any weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument with such forged or counterfeit stamp thereon, or a weight or measure so increased or diminished shall, on conviction, be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a period which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. These words were inserted by Born. 56 of 1948, s. 11.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 39--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever neglects or refuses to produce for inspection all weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments in his possession or on his premises or refuses to permit an inspector authorized to examine the same or any of them or obstructs the entry of the inspector under section 22 or otherwise obstructs or hinders him in the performance of his duties shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees five hundred.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 39A--> State(s): Maharashtra Whoever in contravention of the provisions of section 12A, demands, receives or causes to be demanded or received any quantity of articles 2 [in the course of any trade] shall, on conviction, be punished with fine which may extend to rupees three hundred.] This section was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 12. These words were substituted for the words "sold or bought" by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 23.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 40--> State(s): Maharashtra If an inspector knowingly stamps a weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument in contravention of the provisions of this Act or of the rules 1 [...] or is guilty of a breach of any duty imposed on him by this Act or by the rules 2 [...] he shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a period which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. The words "or regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 24. The words "or regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 24.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 41--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Government may make rules1 of carrying into effect the purposes of this Act. (2) Without prejudice to the generality or the foregoing provision, such rules may prescribe- (a) the composition, weight, length, form and specifications of secondary standards and the manner in which they shall be made; (b) 2 [...] (c) the procedure for the verification, re-verification, adjustment or renewal of primary and secondary standards and marking of secondary standards; (d) the composition, weight, length, form and specifications and use of working standards, the authority by whom and the manner in which such standards shall be provided, the agency by whom such standards shall be made, the person by whom and the manner in which such standards shall be stamped, and the places at which and the custody and manner in which such standards shall be kept; (e) the procedure for the verification or re-verification and marking of working standards and the person by whom and the place where they shall be verified or re-verified; (f) the number of weighing and measuring instruments to be kept and necessary particulars regarding the same; (g) the authority by whom certified scales shall be provided for the purposes of this Act and the rules 3 [...] and the manner in which they shall be verified or re-verified; (h) the composition, weight, length, form, specification and manufacture of weights and measures in use in any area; (i) the inspection, verification, re-verification, adjustment and stamping of weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments in use in any area, including the prohibition of stamping in cases where the nature, denomination, material or mode of construction of the weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument appears likely to facilitate the commission of fraud and the period within which such weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments shall be verified or re-verified; 4 [(ii) the books, accounts and records relating to weights or measures or weighing or measuring instruments to be maintained and the manner in which they shall be maintained or produced;] (j) the circumstances and conditions under which and the manner in which stamps may be obliterated or defaced; (k) the tests to be applied for the purpose of ascertaining the accuracy and efficiency of weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments; (I) the limits of error to be allowed on verification and to be tolerated on inspection either generally or as regards any trade; (m) the amount of error to be tolerated in weights and measurers and weighing or measuring instruments used or intended to be used for trade; 5 [(mm) the amount of error to be tolerated in selling articles by weight or measure generally or as regards any trade or class of trade]; 6 (mmm) the method of using weight or measure or weighing or measuring instrument generally or for a specified class of trades]; (n) the fees to be charged for the verification, re-verification, adjustment and stamping of weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments and the collection and levy of the same; (o) the seizure, detention and destruction of weights and measures and weighing or measuring instruments which are not authorised by this Act 7 [...]; 8 [...]. (q) the qualifications, functions and duties generally or inspectors under this Act and the rules 9 [...]; (r) any other matters for which no provision or insufficient provision is made in this Act and for which provision is, in the opinion of Government, necessary. (3) The powers to make rules under this section shall be subject to the condition of previous publication in the 10 [Official Gazette]. 11 [Any rules made by the 12 [State] Government] under this section shall be laid 13 [before each [House] of the 14 [State] legislature] for not less than one month previous to the next session thereof and shall be liable to be rescinded or modified by a resolution 15 [in which both 16 [Houses] concur]. If any rule is modified, the 17 [State Government] may accept the modification and republish the rule accordingly, or may rescind the rule. 18 [(4) The rules may provide that any person committing a breach of the same shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one hundred.] For Rules under this section, see G. N., G. D. No. 9492, dated 5th June, 1934, published in the B. G. G., Pt. I of 1934, pp. 1323-56 see also Bombay Rules and Orders, Vol. I. Clause (b) was deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 25(i). The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 25(2). This clause was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 13. Clause (mm) was inserted by Bombay 22 of 1936, s. 4. This clause was inserted by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 13. The words "and in regard to which n regulations have made under section 42" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 25(3). Clause (p) was deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 25(4). The words "and regulations" were deleted by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 25(5). The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "any rules made by the Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "The rules made" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were substituted words "on the table of the Bombay Legislative Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Orders in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were substituted for the words "of the said Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Orders in Council. The words "House" and "House," were substituted for the words "Chambers" and "Chambers" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor In Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This sub-section was instated by Bombay 56 of 1948, s. 13.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 42--> State(s): Maharashtra [Power of municipality and district local board to make regulations.] Deleted by Bombay 15 of 1965, s. 26.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 43--> State(s): Maharashtra No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall be instituted against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 44--> State(s): Maharashtra No prosecution under this Act shall be instituted except by or with the previous sanction of 1 [an officer authorised under sub-section (2) of section 19 and specially empowered] by Government in this behalf. These words, brackets and figures were substituted for the words "the Collector or any officer specially empowered by him or" by Bombay 15 of 1955, s. 27.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 44A--> State(s): Maharashtra Where a person committing an offence under this Act is a Company, or other body corporate, or an association of persons (whether incorporated or not), every director, manager, secretary, agent or other officer or person concerned with the management thereof shall, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or consent, be deemed to be guilty of such offence.] This Section was inserted by Bombay 17 of 1951. s. 3.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 45--> State(s): Maharashtra Any of the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon Government by this Act may be exercised and performed, subject to such conditions as Government may think fit, by any person whom Government may, by general or special order, empower in this behalf.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 46--> State(s): Maharashtra Government may, after previous publication by notification in the 1 [Official Gazette], and subject to such conditions and restrictions as it may think fit to impose, exempt any class of persons, any commodity, trade, 2 [...] any class of traders 3 [or any class of weights or measures or of weighing or measuring instruments used or intended to be used for any purpose other that trade] specified in the notification from all or any of the provisions of this Act. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The word "or" was omitted by Bombay 33 of 1935, s. 4(i). These words were inserted by Bombay 33 of 1935, s. 4(ii).
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 46A--> State(s): Maharashtra Government may prescribe the amount of error to be tolerated in selling articles by weight or measure generally or as regards any trade or class or trades.] Section 46A was inserted by Bombay 22 of 1936, s. 5.
Bombay Weights and Measures Act, 1932_Section 47--> State(s): Maharashtra On the coming into force of this Part in any area- (a) the enactment specified in Part I of Second schedule shall be deemed to have been amended to the extent and in the manner specified in the third column thereof; (b) the enactments specified in Part II of the said schedule shall be deemed to have been repealed, so far as they apply to the presidency of Bombay, to the extent specified in the third column thereof: Provided that- (i) the said repeal shall not affect the validity or invalidity or anything already done under the enactments repealed by this Act; (ii) all appointments made, notifications and notices issued, rules, bylaws and orders made, contracts entered into and suits and other proceedings instituted under any Act or enactment repealed by this Act shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations, continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued, entered into and instituted under this Act. SCHEDULES 
