Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to establish a Court of Wards in the Bombay Presidency. WHEREAS it is expedient to establish a Court of Wards in the Bombay Presidency; AND WHEREAS the previous sanction of the Governor General required by section 5 of the Indian Councils Act, 1892, has been obtained for the passing of this Act; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905. (2) It shall extend to the 1 [pre-Reorganisation state of Bombay, excluding the transferred territories and Greater Bombay]2 3 . These words were substituted for the words "whole of the Bombay Presidency, except the Greater Bombay" by the Bombay Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1956. The words "and Aden" were omitted by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in council. This Act has been re-enacted for the amendments made by section 9 and Sch. E of the said Act have been continued in force by Bombay 52 of 1947, s. 2.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- (a) "Government ward" shall mean any person of whose property, or of whose person and property, the Court of Wards may, for the time being, have the superintendence under this Act; (b) "Land-holder" shall mean, (i) in the case of minors and persons adjudged by a competent Civil Court to be of unsound mind and incapable of managing their affairs, a holder as defined in the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879; and 1 [(ii) in all other cases, a zamindar, jagirdar, saranjamdar, inamdar, talukadar, malek and a khot, and any person not herein before specified who is interested in land and whom the 2 [3 [State] Government] has declared on account of the extent and value of his interests to be a land-holder for the purposes of this Act]: Provided that no person who permanently resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain in 4 [the Greater Bombay] shall be deemed or declared to be a land-holder for the purposes of this Act; 5 [(bb) "pension-holder" shall mean a person lawfully entitled to the whole or a part of a pension or cash-allowance granted or continued by Government on political considerations or of a hereditary pension or cash allowance;] (c) "District Court" shall include the Court of an Assistant Judge invested under section 19 of the Bombay Civil Courts Act, 1869, with all the powers of a District Judge; and (d) "minor" shall mean a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875, is to be deemed not to have attained his majority. The paragraph was substituted by s. 2(a) of the Bombay Court of Words (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Orders in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation or Laws Order, 1950. These words were substituted for the words "the City of Bombay" by Bombay 17 of 1945, s. 9, Sch. E, read with Bombay 52 of 1947, s. 2, proviso. This clause was inserted by s. 2(b) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of section 12 1 [the Collector shall be the Court of Wards for the limits of his district]: Provided that the 2 [3 [State] Government] may, if 4 [it] thinks fit, by notification in the 5 [Official Gazette], (a) appoint a special officer to be the Court of Wards for a division; 6 [...] or (b) constitute a Board consisting of 7 [two or more] officers to the Court of Wards for a division; or (c) appoint any other officer or officers to be a Court of Wards for any part of the 8 [area to which this Act extends] and direct that such part shall thereupon be excluded from the jurisdiction of the Court of Wards of any division in which it lies wholly or partly. This portion was substituted for the words "the Commissioner shall be the Court of Wards for the limits of his division" by Bombay 28 of 1950, Sch. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The word "it" was substituted for the word "he" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette", by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "in lieu of the Commissioner" were deleted by Bombay 28 of 1950, Sch. These words were substituted for the words "the Commissioner and any other officer or", by Bombay 28 of 1950, Sch. These words were substituted for the words "Bombay Presidency" by the Bombay Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1956.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Court of Wards may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, assume the superintendence of the property of any land-holder, holding land 1 [or of any pension-holder receiving a pension] within the local limits of its jurisdiction who is disqualified to manage his own property: Provided that in the case of a land-holder or pension-holder disqualified under clause (b) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5 such assumption shall be sanctioned only where the State Government is of opinion that it is expedient in the public interests to preserve the property of such land-holder or pension-holder for the benefit of his family, and that the said property is of such value that economical management by the Court of Wards is practicable. (2) No sanction given under sub-section (1) shall be called in question in any Court, except in the case of a land-holder 2 [or pension-holder] disqualified under Section 5, sub-section (1), clause (a) where proceedings are instituted within three months of the giving of the sanction. These words were inserted by s. 3 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The following land-holders 1 [or pension-holders] shall, for the purposes of section 4, be deemed to be disqualified to manage their own property, namely:- (a) minors; (b) females declared by the District Court, on the application of the Collector and after such judicial inquiry as it thinks necessary, to be unfitted to manage their own property; (c) persons declared by the District Court, on the like application and after the like inquiry, to be incapable of managing, or unfitted to manage, their own property owing to (i) any physical or mental defect or infirmity, or (ii) such habits as cause, or are likely to cause, injury to their property or to the well-being of their inferior holders; and (d) persons adjudged by a competent Civil Court to be of unsound mind and incapable of managing their affairs. (2) No appeal shall lie from any declaration under clause (b) or (c) of sub-section (1). These words were inserted by s. 4(2) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra Where any 1 [Government Officer] is appointed or declared to be guardian of the property, or of the person and property, of a minor under section 7, sub-section (1), of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, he shall intimate the fact to the Court of Wards, and the Court of Wards may thereupon, with the previous sanction of the 2 [3 [State] Government], assume the superintendence of the property, or of the person and property of such minor. These words were substituted for the words "servant of the Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards shall not assume the superintendence of the property, or of the person and property, of any minor of whose property, or of whose person and property,- (a) a guardian has been appointed by will or other instrument, or (b) a guardian other than 1 [a Government officer has been appointed as declared under section 7, sub-section (1), of the 2 Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, except with the previous consent of the District Court. The words "a servant of the Crown" were substituted for the words "an Officer of Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Court of Wards shall not assume under section 4, sub-section (1), the superintendence of the property of any family which is undivided according to Hindu law, except where all the co-sharers are disqualified under sub-section(1) of section 5 1 [or where all the co-sharers other than those who are disqualified under sub-section (1) of section 5 agree to the Court of Wards assuming such superintendence.] (2) Where two or more land-holders 2 [or pension-holders] are co-sharers otherwise than as co-sharers in a family which is undivided according to Hindu law and one of such co-sharers is disqualified under sub-section (1) of section 5, the Court of Wards 3 [may assume the superintendence of the undivided share of such disqualified land-holder 4 [or pension-holder] or may obtain partition on behalf of the disqualified land-holder 5 [or pension-holder] by suit or otherwise, and assume the superintendence of the property allotted to such land-holder 6 [or pension-holder] in the partition. These words were inserted by s. 5 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted s. 4(2) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). There words were inserted by s. 2 and Sch. I, Part II of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Any land-holder 1 [or pension-holder] may apply in writing to the 2 [3 [State] Government] to have his property placed under the superintendence of the Court of Wards, and the 4 [5 [State] Government] may on such application, where 6 [it] is of opinion that it is expedient in the public interests to preserve the property of such land-holder 7 [or pension-holder] for the benefit of his family and that the said property is of such value that economical management by the Court of Wards is practicable, order the Court of Wards to assume the superintendence of the property. 8 [(1A) Any co-sharer of property, other than a co-sharer in a family undivided according to Hindu law, may make an application under sub-section (1) in respect of his own share in such property.] (2) 9 [In every case where property is held by co-sharers, whether as co-sharers in a family undivided according to Hindu law or otherwise] an application signed by co-sharers holding an aggregate interest of not less than three-fourths of the whole property shall, or the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to be an application by a land-holder 10 [or pension-holder] in respect of 11 [the whole property]: Provided, firstly, that no order shall be made 12 [on any such application] under sub-section (1) where it appears to the 13 [State Government] doubtful whether the aggregate interest of the co-sharers signing 14 [the] application amounts to not less than three-fourths of the whole property; and Provided, secondly, that nothing in this Act shall be deemed to prevent any co-sharer other than those signing any such application from obtaining partition of his share, whether by suit or otherwise. (3) An order made under sub-section (1) shall be sufficient to authorize the Court of Wards to assume the superintendence of the property referred to therein, and no such order shall be called in question in any Court. These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The word "it" was substituted for the word "he" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). This sub-section was inserted by s. 2 and Sch. I, Part II, of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were substituted for the words "Where property is held by co-sharers in undivided shares", by s. 2 and Sch. I, Part II, of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were substituted for the words "such property", by s. 2 and Sch. I, Part II, of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were inserted by s. 2 and Sch. I, Part II, of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the words "any such" of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 10--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Whenever the Collector receives information that any land-holder 1 [or pension- holder] is, or should be, disqualified under sub-section (1) of section 5, or that any land-holder 2 [or pension-holder] has died and that his heir is, or should be, so disqualified, he may apply to District Court and the District Court may authorize the Court of Wards to - (a) take such steps and make such order for the temporary custody and protection of the property as the court of Wards thinks fit; and (b) where the land-holder 3 [or pension-holder] or heir is a minor, direct that the person (if any) having the custody of the minor shall produce him or cause him to be produced at such place and time and before such person as the Court of Wards may appoint, and make such order for the temporary custody and protection of the minor as the Court of Wards thinks fit: Provided that, where the minor a female and belongs to a class the females of which do not usually appear in public, her production shall be required only in accordance with the manners and customs of the country. (2) Whenever the Court of Wards is authorized to proceed under sub-section (1) it shall forthwith report its action for the information of the State Government, (3) No appeal shall lie from any order of authorization under sub-section (1), except in the case of a land-holder '[or pension-holder] disqualified under section 5, sub-section (1), clause (a). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 11--> State(s): Maharashtra Where the Court of Wards assumes the superintendence of the property of any land-holder '[or pension-holder] disqualified under clause (a) or (d) of section 5, sub-section (1), it may, with the previous sanction of the 1 [2 [State] Government], assume the superintendence of his person also: Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize the Court of Wards to assume the superintendence of the person of a female who is married and is in the custody of her husband. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 12--> State(s): Maharashtra Where a disqualified land-holder '[or pension-holder] or a land-holder '[or pension- holder] who has been made a Government ward in pursuance of an order under section 9, sub-section (1), holds land 1 [or receives a pension] within the territorial jurisdiction, of two or more Courts of Wards such one only of the Courts of Wards 2 [as the Commissioner, where such Courts of Wards exercise jurisdiction within his division, and the State Government in any other case] may determine in this behalf shall assume the superintendence of the property, or of the person and property, of the land-holder 3 [or pension-holder]. These words were inserted by s. 4(3) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were substituted for the words "as the State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3, Schedule. These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 13--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Whenever the Court of Wards assumes the superintendence of the property of any land-holder 1 [or pension-holder] under this Act the fact of such assumption, and the date on which it was sanctioned by the 2 [3 [State] Government], shall be notified in the 4 [Official Gazette] and in such other manner as the 5 [State Government] may, by general or special order, direct. (2) On and with effect from the date of such sanction, the whole of the property, moveable and immovable, of such land-holder or pension-holder, whether the existence of any such property is known to the Court of Wards or not, shall be deemed to be under the superintendence of the Court of Wards. (3) Any property which the Government ward may, inherit or acquire by succession subsequently to the date of such sanction shall also be deemed to be under the superintendence of the Court of Wards. (4) The Court of Wards may, in its discretion, assume, or refrain from assuming, the superintendence of any property which the Government ward may acquire otherwise than by inheritance or succession subsequently to the date of such notification. These words were inserted by s. 4(1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 14--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) On the issue of a notification under section 13, sub-section (1), the Court of Wards shall publish in the s[Official Gazette], and in such other manner as the 1 [2 [State] Government] may, by general or special order, direct, a notice, in English and also in the vernacular, calling upon all persons having claims against the Government ward or his property to submit the same in writing to it within six months from the date of the publication of the notice. (2) Where the Court of Wards is satisfied that any claimant was unable to comply with the notice published under sub-section (1), it may allow his claim to be submitted at any time after the date of the expiry of the period fixed therein; but any such claim shall, notwithstanding any law, contract, decree or award to the contrary, cease to carry interest from the date of the expiry of such period until submission. (3) Every claim against the Government ward or his property (other than a claim 3 [on the part of the 4 [Government]]) not submitted to the Court of Wards in compliance with the notice published under sub -section (1), or allowed to be submitted under sub-section (2), shall, save in the cases provided for by section 18, sub-section (2), clause (c), and by sections 7 and 13 of the 5 [Indian Limitation Act, 1877, be deemed for all purposes and on, all occasions, whether during the continuance of the superintendence or afterwards, to have been duly discharged, unless, in any suit or proceeding instituted by the claimant, or by any person claiming under him, in respect of any such claim, it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was unable to comply with the notice published under sub-section (1). The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950. The words "on the part of the Crown" were substituted for the words "on the part of Government", by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council., This words was substituted for the word "Crown" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), Central Acts.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 15--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Court of Wards may by written order require that any claimant submitting his claim shall, within such reasonable time as it may prescribe in such order, furnish full particulars thereof, and produce all documents, (including entries in books of account) on which he relies to support his claim, together with a true copy of every such document: Provided that, where the claim relates to an amount secured by a decree or award, it shall be sufficient for the claimant to produce before the Court of Wards, a certified copy of the decree and a certificate from the Court which passed or is executing the same declaring the amount recoverable thereunder, or a true copy of the award and statement of the sum recoverable thereunder, as the case may be; and where the claim is pending adjudication in any Court or has been referred to arbitration, it shall be sufficient for the claimant to produce a certified copy of the Plaint, or a true copy of the reference to arbitration, as the case may be. (2) The Court of Wards shall, after making, for the purpose of identification, every original document so produced and verifying the correctness of the copy, retain the copy and return the original to the claimant. (3) Where any document, which is in the possession or under the control of a claimant, is not produced by him in accordance with an order under sub-section (1), the document shall not be admissible in evidence against the Government ward, whether during the continuance of the superintendence or afterwards, in any suit brought by such claimant, or by any person claiming under him, in respect of any claim to which such document relates, unless it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was unable to produce such document as required by such order.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 16--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) On receipt of all claims submitted in compliance with the provisions of sections 14 and 15, the Court of Wards shall proceed to investigate such claims and shall decide, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), which of them are to be wholly or partly admitted or wholly or partly rejected, as the case may be, and shall communicate its decision in writing to each claimant concerned. (2) Where the Court of Wards has admitted any claim under sub-section (1), it may make to the claimant a proposal in writing for the reduction of the claim, or of the rate of interest to be paid in future, or of both; and if such proposal or any modification of it, is accepted by the claimant, and his acceptance is finally recorded and attested by the Court of Wards or by any Revenue-officer not below the rank of an Assistant or Deputy Collector whom the 1 [Commissioner] may, by general or special order, appoint in this behalf, it shall be conclusively binding upon the claimant: Provided that if, when the superintendence of the property by the Court of Wards is withdrawn, any portion of the claim reduced as aforesaid is still unsatisfied, the claimant shall be entitled to recover a sum bearing the same proportion to the original claim admitted under sub-section (1) as the unsatisfied portion bears to the reduced claim. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), nothing in this section shall be construed to bar the institution of a suit in a Civil Court for the recovery of a claim against a Government ward or his property which has been duly submitted to the Court of Wards: Provided that no decision of the Court of Wards under this section shall be proved in any such suit as against the defendant. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3, Schedule.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 17--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) On the publication of a notice under section 14, sub-section (1), no proceeding in execution of any decree against the Government ward or his property shall be instituted or continued until the decree-holder files a certificate from the Court of Wards that the decree-claim has been duly submitted or until the expiration of one month from the date of receipt by the Court of Wards of a written application for such certificate, accompanied by a certified copy of a decree. (2) Any person holding a decree against the Government ward or his property shall be entitled to receive from the Court of Wards, free of cost, the certificate required by sub-section (1). (3) In computing the period of limitation prescribed by the 1 [Indian Limitation Act, 1877, or by section 230 of the 2 [Code of Civil Procedure, for any application for the execution of a decree, proceedings in which have been stayed or temporarily barred by reason of the claim not having been duly submitted, the time from the date of the notice published under section 14 sub-section (1) or of the decree if it was passed subsequently to the publication of the notice, to the date of due submission shall be excluded. See now the Indian Limitation Act, 1908 (9 of 1908), Central Acts. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), Central Acts.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 18--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) When all claims have been investigated under section 16, the Court of Wards shall submit to the 2 [Commissioner], a schedule of the debts and liabilities of the Government ward, and the 3 [Commissioner] may, where the property appears to be involved beyond all hope of extrication, or for any other sufficient reason, by order published in the 4 [Official Gazette], direct that, on a date to be fixed by the order, the superintendence of the property, or of the person and property, of the Government ward by the Court of Wards shall be withdrawn. (2) On the date so fixed- (a) the superintendence shall terminate; (b) the owner of the property under superintendence shall be restored to the possession thereof, subject of any contracts entered into by the Court of Wards for the preservation or benefit of such property; and (c) the claims referred to in section 14, sub-section (3), shall revive. (3) In calculating the periods of limitation applicable to suits to recover and enforce claims revived under sub-section (2), clause (c), the time during which such superintendence has continued shall be excluded. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 19--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) 1 [Where the Collector is not the Court of Wards] with the general or special sanction of the 2 [Commissioner], the Court of Wards may, from time to time, delegate all or any of its powers to the Collector of any district in which any part of the property of a Government ward is situated, or to any other officer not below the rank of an Assistant or Deputy Collector whom it may appoint in this behalf, and may, at any time, with the like sanction, revoke such delegation. (2) 3 [Where the Collector is not the Court of Wards] subject to any general or special orders of the 4 [Commissioner], the Court of Wards may exercise all or any of the powers conferred on it by this Act through the Collector of any district in which any part of the property of a Government ward is situated, or through any other officer not below the rank of an Assistant or Deputy Collector whom it may appoint in this behalf, and, subject to the like orders, any such Collector or Assistant or Deputy Collector may exercise all or any of the powers delegated to him under this Act through any Revenue- Officer subordinate to him not below the rank of a Mahalkari. 5 [(3) Where the Collector is the Court of Wards, subject to any general or special orders of the 6 [Commissioner], the Court of Wards may exercise all or any of the powers under this Act through an Assistant or Deputy Collector whom it may appoint in this behalf and subject to the like orders, any such Assistant or Deputy Collector may exercise all or any of the powers delegated to him under this Act through any Revenue Officer subordinate to him not below the rank of a Mahalkari.] This portion was inserted by Bombay 28 of 1950, Sch. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule. This portion was inserted by Bombay 28 of 1950, Sch. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule. Sub-section (3) was added by Bombay 28 of 1950. This word was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Schedule.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 20--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wads may appoint a manager of the property of any Government ward under its superintendence.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 21--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Every manager appointed by the Court of Wards shall- (a) give such security, with such sureties (if any), as the Court of Wards thinks fit for the due discharge of the trusts of his office, and for the due accounts of all property and moneys which come into his control or possession by reason of his office; (b) entitled to such allowance as the Court of Wards thinks fit for his care and pains in the execution of his duties; and (c) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property under his management by his willful default or gross negligence; and every such loss shall be recoverable from him and from his sureties (if any) as an arrear of land- revenue. Managers and other servants to be deemed public servants. (2) Every manager or other servant of the Court of Wards shall be deemed to be a "Public servant" within the meaning of Chapter IX of the Indian Penal Code and, in the definition of "legal remuneration" contained in section 161 of the said Code, the word "Government" shall, for the purposes of this sub-section, be deemed to include the Court of Wards.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 22--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Court of Wards may appoint guardians for the care of the persons of Government wards whose persons are, for the time being, under its superintendence. (2) In appointing a guardian under his section, the Court of Wards shall be guided by the provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 23--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules thereunder, the Court of Wards (a) may, of itself or through the manager (if any) appointed by it under this Act, do all such things requisite for the proper care and management of any property of which it assumes the superintendence, under this Act, as the owner of the property, if it was not under the superintendence of the Court of Wards, might do for its proper care and management; and (b) may, of itself or through the guardian (if any) appointed by it under this Act, do, in respect of the person of any Government ward whose person is, for the time being, under its superintendence, all such things as may lawfully be done by a guardian.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 24--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards may pass such orders as it thinks fit in respect of the custody and residence of any Government ward whose person is, for the time being, under its superintendence, and, where he is a minor, in respect of his education.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 25--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards may, from time to time, determine what sums shall be allowed in respect of the expenses of any Government ward and of his family and dependents.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 26--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards, or the manager (if any) appointed by it under this Act, shall manage the property or every Government ward under its superintendence or under his management diligently and faithfully for the benefit of the Government wards, and shall in every respect act to the best of its or his judgment for the Government Ward's interest as if the property were its or his own.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 27--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards may sell, exchange, mortgage, charge or let the property of a Government ward, and may do all such things as it may judge to be best for the benefit of the property and the advantage of the Government ward: Provided that- (a) the previous sanction of the 2 [Commissioner] shall be required to any sale, exchange or mortgage of, or charge on, immovable property and to any lease of such property for a term exceeding ten years, and (b) where 3 [one-third] of the immovable property of a Government ward has been sold or exchanged no further sale or exchange shall be made.] This section was substituted by s. 6 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). This ward was substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3. Sch. This word was substituted for the word "one-fourth" by Bombay 21 of 1949, s. 2.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 28--> State(s): Maharashtra The Court of Wards may summarily evict in the manner specified in section 202 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, any person occupying, or in possession of, any immovable property under its superintendence, to the use and occupation of which he has ceased to be entitled under any of the provisions of that Code, or which he uses or occupies in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 29--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purpose of the recovery of rents, profits and other sums due in respect of property under the superintendence of the Court of Wards (whether such arrears become due before or after the assumption of such superintendence) the Court of Wards shall have all the powers possessed by a Collector under the law for the time being in force for the recovery of land-revenue due to Government, including the power conferred by section 176 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879.] This section was substituted by s. 7 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 30--> State(s): Maharashtra No immovable property under the superintendence of the Court of Wards shall be liable to sale on account of arrears of land-revenue: Provided that all such arrears of land-revenue shall be the first charge upon the sale-proceeds of any such property which may be sold for any other cause than for arrears of land-revenue.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 30A--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Whenever it shall appear to the Court of Wards that by virtue of or in execution of a decree or order of a Civil Court, the property of a Government ward under its superintendence is or is likely to be insufficient for the payment of the expenses- (a) of the management of the property of the said ward under this Act, or (b) of the said ward, his family and dependents, allowed under section 25, the Court of Wards may issue a certificate in writing to the Civil Court executing the said decree or order directing that the said property shall for such period as the Court of Wards may from time to time deem expedient, be exempt from any attachment, sale, transfer or other process by a Civil Court. (2) Upon the receipt of such certificate the Civil Court executing the decree or order against the Government ward shall, notwithstanding anything contained in section 17 or any other law for the time being in force, remove any attachment or other process pending against the property specified in the certificate, and shall set aside any order of sale or transfer of the said property and thereupon the said property shall be exempt from any attachment, sale, transfer or other process by a Civil Court for the period specified in the said certificate and during the said period the execution of such decree or order shall so far as it affects the said property for the purposes of section 15 of the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, be deemed to have been stayed : Provided that if the superintendence of the Court of Wards of the property of the said Government ward terminates under section 18 or is withdrawn under section 40, the exemption granted under this section shall with effect from the date of such termination or withdrawal cease to be in operation.] Section 30A was inserted by Bombay 7 of 1934, s. 2.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 31--> State(s): Maharashtra No suit relating to the person or property of any Government ward shall be brought in any Civil Court until the expiration of two months after notice in writing stating the name and place of abode of the intending plaintiff, the cause of action and the relief claimed, has been delivered to, or left at the office of, the Court of Wards; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or left : Provided that notice under this section shall not be required in the case of any suit the period of limitation for which will expire within three months from the date of a notification issued under section 13, sub-section (1).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 32--> State(s): Maharashtra Subject to the provisions of the second paragraph of section 440 of the 1 Code of Civil Procedure, in every suit brought by or against a Government ward, the manager of the Government ward's property, or, where there is no manager, the Court of Wards having the superintendence of the Government ward's property, shall be named as the next friend or a guardian for the suit, as the case may be. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 33--> State(s): Maharashtra Where, in any suit brought by or against a Government ward any Civil Court decrees any costs against the Government ward's next friend or guardian for the suit, the Court of Wards shall cause the costs to be paid out of any property of the Government ward which may, for the time being, be in its hands.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 34--> State(s): Maharashtra Every process which may be issued out of any Civil or Revenue Court against any Government ward shall be served on the Government ward's next friend or guardian for the suit.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 35--> State(s): Maharashtra No suit shall be brought, and no appeal in any suit shall be preferred, by any guardian or manager appointed by the Court of Wards on behalf of any Government ward unless it is authorized by an order in writing of the Court of Wards: Provided that a manager may authorize a plaint or a memorandum of appeal to be filed in order to prevent a suit or appeal from being barred by the law of limitation, but the suit or appeal shall not afterwards be proceeded with except with the sanction of the Court of Wards.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 36--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Where any question arises as between two or more Government wards of such a nature that an adjudication upon it by a Civil Court is expedient, it shall be lawful for the Court of Wards, acting through the Collector of the district in which a case might have been stated for the opinion of the Civil Court with regard to such matter under section 527 of the 1 Code of Civil Procedure, to file in the Civil Court having jurisdiction a statement containing the point or points for determination. (2) When such statement has been filed, the Court shall appoint a guardian for the suit for each ward having a separate interest, and such, guardians shall thereupon conduct the case subject to the general control of the Court of Wards. (3) The Court may, if it thinks fit, amend the case so stated and shall then proceed to hear and dispose of the case in the manner provided in Chapter XXXVIII of the 'Code of Civil Procedure for the hearing and disposal of cases stated for opinion under that Chapter. See now the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Act 5 of 1908).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 37--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Except with the approval of the Court of Wards, a Government ward shall be incompetent to transfer or create any charge on, or interest in, his property or any part thereof (except such interest as may be created by a will made in accordance with section 38), or to enter into any contract which may involve him in pecuniary liability; and no suit shall be brought in any Civil Court whereby to charge any person upon any promise made after he has ceased to be a Government ward to pay any debt contracted during the period when he was a Government ward, or upon any ratification made after he has ceased to be a Government ward of any promise or contract made during the period aforesaid, whether there is or is not any new consideration for such promise or ratification. (2) Nothing in his section shall be deemed to affect the capacity of a Government ward to enter into a contract of marriage: Provided that a Government ward shall not incur, in connection with such a contract, any pecuniary liability, except such as, having regard to the personal law to which he is subject and to his rank and circumstances, the Court of Wards may, in writing, declare to be reasonable.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 38--> State(s): Maharashtra No will made by a Government ward shall be valid without the consent of the Provincial Government obtained, either previously or subsequently to the making of the will, on application made to 1 [it] through the Court of Wards: Provided that consent shall not be withheld unless it appears to the Provincial Government that the will is contrary to the personal or special law applicable to the ward, or that it is likely to cause considerable pecuniary embarrassment to the property, or to lower considerably the influence or respectability of the family in public estimation. The word "it" was substituted for the word "him" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 39--> State(s): Maharashtra Where on the death of any Government ward, the succession to his property or any part thereof is disputed the Court of Wards may, with the sanction of the 1 [Provincial Government], either retain the superintendence of the property until one of the claimants has established his claim to the same in a competent Civil Court, or institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 40--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Where superintendence has been assumed in pursuance of an order under section 9, sub-section (1), the Court of Wards shall withdraw such superintendence as soon as, in the opinion of the 1 [Provincial Government], the property is free from embarrassment. (2) The Court of Wards may, with the sanction of the 2 [3 [State] Government], at any time withdraw its superintendence from the person or property, or both, of a Government ward, and shall withdraw its superintendence as soon as, in the opinion of the District Court, certified to the Court of Wards. (a) in the case of a person disqualified under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 5, he attains or has attained his majority; (b) in the case of a female disqualified under clause (b) of the same sub-section, she is fit to manage her own property; (c) In the case of a person disqualified under clause (c) of the same sub-section, he is fit to manage his own property; (d) In the case of a person disqualified under clause (d) of the same sub-section, he ceases to be of unsound mind and incapable of managing his affairs; and (e) Where it was assumed under section 4, sub-section (1), in the case of a family which was undivided according to Hindu Law, any co-sharer ceases to be disqualified under sub-section (1) of section 5: Provided, firstly, that - (i) where a Government ward dies or ceases to be disqualified and his property is still encumbered with debts and liabilities, the Court of Wards may, with the sanction of the State Government retain the said property under its superintendence until such debts and liabilities have been discharged; and (ii) in the case of land-holders 4 [or pension-holders], 5 [who are co-sharers in a family which is undivided according to Hindu law] where one or more of the proprietors of a property remain disqualified although another or others have ceased to be disqualified, the Court of Wards may, with the sanction of the State Government, retain the whole of the property under its superintendence, paying any proprietor who has ceased to be disqualified 6 [from surplus income such portion as shall be proportionate to his interest in the estate]: Provided, secondly, that, where the Court of Wards withdraws its superintendence, such withdrawal shall not affect any contract entered into by the Court of Wards in the lawful exercise of its powers; and Provided, thirdly, that- (a) no person who has once been declared disqualified under clause (b) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5, and (b) except in the case of any co-sharer other than those signing an application described in section 9, sub-section (2), no land-holders 7 [or pension- holder] who has been made a Government ward in pursuance of an order under section 9, sub-section (1), shall be competent, on the withdrawal of such superintendence, to transfer or create any charge on or interest in his property or any part thereof for a period beyond the term of his natural life, except with the previous sanction of the Collector. (3) No appeal shall lie from any opinion certified under sub-section (2). The words " Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. These words were inserted by s. 4(2) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). These words were substituted for the words, figures and brackets "referred to in section 8, sub-section (2)" by s.2 and Sch. I, Part II, of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were substituted for the words "the surplus income according from his share of the estate", of the Bombay Repealing and Amending Act, 1910 (Bombay 1 of 1910). These words were inserted by s.4 (1) of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 Bom.2 of 1913.)
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 41--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Where, in exercise of the power conferred by section 40, the Court of Wards decides to withdraw its superintendence form the person or property, or both, of any minor, it shall, before such withdrawal, by an order in writing, appoint some person to be guardian of the person or property, or both, of the minor, and such appointment shall take effect from the date of such withdrawal. (2) In appointing a guardian under this section, the Court of wards shall be guided by the provisions of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890; and every guardian so appointed shall have, and be subject to, the same rights, duties and liabilities as if he had been appointed under that Act.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 42--> State(s): Maharashtra Where the Court of Wards withdraws its superintendence from any person or property under this Act, the fact of such withdrawal shall be notified in the 1 [Official Gazette] and in such other manner as the 2 [3 [State] Government] may, by general or special order, direct. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 43--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) An appeal shall lie from every order, other than an order of the District Court, passed under this Act, whether original or on appeal, (a) where the order is that of a 1 [Commissioner] or of any special or other officer appointed or Board constituted, under the proviso to section 3, to the 2 [3 [State] Government]; 4 [(b) where the order is that of a Collector, to the Commissioner, or where any such officer or Board has jurisdiction, to such officer or Board; and] (c) In all other cases, to the Collector: 5 [Provided that where any such officer or Board has been appointed to be Court of Wards and the order has been passed by any officer subordinate to such Court of Wards for the purposes of this Act, the 6 [7 [State] Government] may direct that appeals shall lie to such officer or Board.] (2) The provisions of sections 205 to 210, both inclusive, of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, shall apply to all such appeals. This word was substituted for the word "Collector" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3, Schedule. This words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Governor in Council by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. This clause was inserted by Bombay 8 of 1958. This proviso was added by s. 8 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913). This words "Provincial Government" were substituted for the words "Government in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 44--> State(s): Maharashtra All orders or proceedings under this Act, other than orders or proceedings of the District Court, shall be subject of the supervision and control of the 2 [Commissioner and the State Government]; and the Commissioner and the State Government may, if 3 [he or it] thinks fit, revise, modify, or reverse any such order or proceeding, whether an appeal is presented against any such order or proceeding or not. These words were substituted for the word "Control of Provincial Government" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. These words were substituted for the words "State Government" by Bombay 8 of 1958 s. 3, Schedule. These words were substituted for the word "It" by Bombay 8 of 1958, s. 3 Schedule.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 44A--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purposes of this Act, the Court of Wards may summon and enforce the attendance of witnesses and compel them to give evidence, and compel the production of documents, by the same means and, as far as possible, in the same manner, as is provided in the case of a Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908]. This section was inserted by s. 9 of the Bombay Court of Wards (Amendment) Act, 1913 (Bombay 2 of 1913).
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 45--> State(s): Maharashtra No suit shall be brought in any Civil Court in respect of the exercise of any discretion conferred by this Act, or against the Court of Wards or any public servant or person duly appointed or authorized under this Act in respect of anything in good faith done or purporting to be done under the provisions thereof or the rules made thereunder: Provided, firstly, that any person evicted under section 28 may sue for restitution: and Provided, secondly, that any tenant from whom an arrear of rent has been recovered under section 29 may sue for recovery of the amount, or any part thereof, so recovered.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 46--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The 2 [State Government] may, by notification published in the 3 [Official Gazette], make rules to carry out the purposes and objects of this Act. (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may- (a) prescribe the matters to which regard should be had in appointing or removing guardians and managers, and in fixing their remuneration; (b) regulate the form, conditions and amount of security, and the number of sureties (if any), to be given by managers; (c) prescribe the cases in which proposals or arrangements connected with the administration of the properties of Government wards shall be reported for the sanction of the 4 [5 [State] Government]; (d) prescribe the accounts and other returns, and the form and other particulars thereof, which shall be recorded to the Court of Wards and by the Court of Wards to the 6 [7 [State Government]; (e) regulate the custody of securities and title-deeds belonging to the estate or property of a Government ward; (f) regulate the procedure in inquiries by, and in appeals from orders of the Court of Wards; (g) prescribe the mode in which powers delegated to managers are to be notified for the information of persons concerned; (h) prescribe the mode in which any expenses incurred by the Court of Wards or the Collector under any power conferred by this Act may be recovered; and (i) generally prescribe the manner in which the powers and duties of the Court of Wards under this Act shall be exercised and performed. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government "were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Official Gazette" were substituted for the words "Bombay Government Gazette", by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. The words "Provincial Government "were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. The words "Provincial Government "were substituted for the words "Governor in Council" by the Adaptation of Indian Laws Order in Council. This word was substituted for the word "Provincial" by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
Bombay Court of Wards Act, 1905_Section 47--> State(s): Maharashtra The powers and functions conferred on the State Government by or under this Act shall, in relation to the estates of Rulers of Indian States, be powers and functions of the Central Government.] Section 47 was inserted by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950. 
