Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra 1 An Act further to amend the Bombay Court-fees Act, 1959. Whereas both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; And Whereas the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Court-fees Act, 1959 (Bom. XXVI of 1959), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011 (Mah. Ord. XVI of 2011); And Whereas it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:- The following Act of the Maharashtra Legislature, received the assent of the Governor on 10th August, 2011 and was published in the Maharashtra Govt. Gazette, Extra-ordinary, Part VIII, dated 10th August, 2011.
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th June, 2011.
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 15 of the Bombay Court-fees Act, 1959 (Bom. XXXI of 1959) (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act "), for the words "from the Collector" the words "from the Collector or by way of e-payment, in the manner as prescribed by rules" shall be substituted.
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 16 of the principal Act, for the words" from the Collector" the words "from the Collector or by way of e-payment, in the manner as prescribed by rules" shall be substituted.
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words" from the Collector" the words" from the Collector or by way of e-payment, in the manner as prescribed by rules" shall be substituted.
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "37. Collection of fees by stamps or e-payment:- All fees referred to in section 3 or chargeable under this Act shall be collected by stamps or e-payment.".
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 39 of the principal Act,- (1) in clause (c), the word "and" shall be deleted; (2) after clause (d), the following clause shall be added, namely :- "(e) the manner of payment of court-fee and refund thereof by e-payment:".
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra To section 42 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that, where court-fee is paid by e-payment, the officer competent to cancel stamp shall verily the genuineness of the payment and after satisfying himself that the court-fee is paid, shall lock the entry in the computer and make an endorsement under his signature on the document that the court-fee is paid and the entry is locked.".
Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Court-fees (Amendment) Ordinance, 2011, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
