Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Ordinance, 2003, on the 14th May 2003 and thereafter the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2003, on the 1st July 2003; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinances by a consolidated Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) (a) Section 1, clauses (d), (e) and (f) of section 2, sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) and clauses (b) to (f) of section 3 and clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of section 4 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 14th May 2003. (b) Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of section 2, sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of section 3 and clause (iv) of section 4 of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st July 2003;
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as" the principal Act"), in clause (b), - (a) in sub-clause (vi), the word "and" shall be deleted; (b) in sub-clause (vii), at the end, the word "and" shall be added; (c) after sub-clause (vii), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely :- "(viii) any payment made by way of sponsorship amount for a programme which is organised only for invitees, without selling tickets;"; (d) in the second proviso, for the words "One rupee" the words "two rupees" shall be substituted; (e) in the third proviso, for the words "two financial years" the words "four financial years" shall be substituted; (f) after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided also that, the proprietor shall be allowed to set off the amount spent in a financial year in excess of the amount collected as service charges in that financial year towards maintenance and for providing facilities and safety measures as provided in the second proviso, against the amount of the service charges which will be collected during the next four financial years immediately following the financial year in which the excess amount is spent;" .
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1),- (i) in the principal clause, after the words "pool game" the words "or tourist bus with video facility" shall be inserted; (ii) for clause (b), the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(b) in the case of every entertainment, other than exhibition by cinematograph including video exhibition, video games, exhibition by means of any type of antenna, cable television, exhibition by means of Direct-to-Home (DTH) Broadcasting service, bowling alley, go-carting, dance bar, discotheque, amusement park, water sports activity, pool game or tourist bus with video facility, within the limits of,- TABLE Serial No. Area Amount payable as entertainment duty out of Gross value of the ticket. (1) (2) (3) 1 Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 25 per cent. 2 All Municipal Corporations (other than Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation) and all Cantonment areas. 20 per cent. 3 "A" Class, "B" Class and "C" Class Municipal Councils. 15 per cent. 4 Any other areas not covered by entries 1 to 3 above. No duty."; (iii) for clause (c), the following shall be substituted, namely :- "(c) in the case of exhibition by cinematograph including video exhibition other than exhibition by means of any type of antenna or cable television within the limits of,- TABLE Serial No. Area Rate of entertainment duty on payment for admission fixed by the proprietor (1) (2) (3) 1 Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 55 per cent. 2 All other Municipal Corporations and Cantonments 50 per cent. 3 "A" Class Municipal Councils. 44 per cent. 4 "B" Class Municipal Councils. 38 per cent. 5 "C" Class Municipal Councils. 32 per cent. 6 Any other areas not covered by entries 1 to 5 above. 15 per cent."; (b) in sub-section (1A),- (i) in the principal clause, for the words "at the following lump sum rates, namely" the words "at the rates specified in the TABLE below, namely" shall be substituted; (ii) for sub-clauses (a) and (b), the following table shall be substituted, namely :- "TABLE Serial No. Area Type of Video Game Machine Rate of entertainment duty per month, per machine (in rupees) (1) (2) (3) (4) 1 Within the limits of Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. (1) Machine operated by one person. 1,000.  (2) Machine operated by two persons simultaneously. 2,000. 2 Within the limits of all Municipal Corporations other than Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. (1) Machine operated by one person. 750.  (2) Machine operated by two persons simultaneously. 1,500. 3 Within the limits of all other areas not covered by entries 1 and 2 above. (1) Machine operated by one person. 500.  (2) Machine operated by two persons simultaneously. 1,000.";    (c) in sub-section (3),- (i) in clause (a),- (A) the words "exhibition by cinematograph including" shall be deleted; (B) for the existing table, the following table shall be substituted, namely :- "TABLE Serial No. (1) Area (2) Amount of duty (3) I. (A) Within the limits of the areas of all Municipal Corporations, Cantonments of Pune, Solapur, Dehu Road, Deolali, Kamptee and Kirkee; 30 per cent. of the gross collection capacity for a show multiplied by 72 per cent. of the shows actually held. (B) Within the limits of the areas of cities and towns having population of one lakh fifty thousand and above. 30 per cent. of the gross collection capacity for a show multiplied by 68 per cent. of the shows actually held. II. Within the limits of the areas of cities and towns having population above twenty-five thousand but below one lakh fifty thousand. 20 per cent. of the gross, collection capacity for a show multiplied by 72 per cent. of the shows actually held. III. Any other areas with population upto twenty-five thousand and below. 15 per cent. of the gross collection capacity for a show multiplied by 60 per cent. of the shows actually held."; (C) in the Explanation,- (1) for the words and brackets "cinematograph exhibition (including video exhibition)" the words "video exhibition" shall be substituted; (2) for the word "cinema" the words "video cinema" shall be substituted; (ii) after clause (a), the following clause and the table shall be inserted, namely :- "(a-a) In lieu of the tax payable under clause (c) of sub-section (2), in the case of exhibition by cinematograph but excluding video exhibition and exhibition by means of any type of antenna or cable television held in the places of entertainment specified in column (2) of the Table below, the proprietor of such exhibition may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, pay the amount of duty to the State Government every week as specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Table. TABLE Serial No. Area Amount of entertainment duty (1) (2) (3) 1 Within the limits of "A" Class Municipal Councils. 30 per cent. of the houseful tax capacity of a show multiplied by the number of shows actually held. 2 Within the limits of "B" Class Municipal Councils. 24 per cent. of the houseful tax capacity of a show multiplied by the number of shows actually held. 3 Within the limits of "C" Class Municipal Councils. 18 per cent. of the houseful tax capacity of a show multiplied by the number of shows actually held. 4 All other areas not covered by entries 1 to 3 above but, excluding the areas of Municipal Corporations and Cantonments. 12 per cent. of the houseful tax capacity of a show multiplied by number of shows actually held Explanation:- For the purposes of this sub-section, "houseful tax capacity", in relation to a cinematograph exhibition, means the notional aggregate of the duty for a show leviable under clause (c) of sub-section (1) if all the seats and other accommodation available and provided to the audience in the cinema theatre as specified in the license issued by the Licensing Authority under the Maharashtra Cinemas (Regulation) Rules, 1966, were occupied by spectators."; (iii) in clause (b), after the word, brackets and letter "clause (a)" the words, brackets and letters "or clause (a-a), as the case may be," shall be inserted; (iv) in clause (d),- (A) for the words "cinema theatre" the words "video cinema or houseful tax capacity of a cinema theatre" shall be substituted; (B) after the words "gross collection capacity" the words" of video cinema or houseful tax capacity of a cinema theatre, as the case may be," shall be inserted; (v) in clause (e),- (A) for the words "cinema theatre" the words "video cinema or a cinema theatre, as the case may be," shall be substituted; (B) after the words "collection capacity" the words "or houseful tax capacity, as the case may be," shall be inserted; (vi) in clause (g),- (A) after the words "collection capacity" the words "or houseful tax capacity, as the case may be," shall be inserted; (B) after the word, brackets and letter "clause (a)" the words, brackets and letters "or clause (a-a), as the case may be," shall be inserted; (vii) in clause (i), for the words "cinematograph exhibition", at both the places where they occur, the words "video exhibition or cinematograph exhibition, as the case may be," shall be substituted; (viii) in clause (j), for the words, brackets, figures and letter "specified in column (2) of the Table under clause (a)" the words, brackets and letters "specified in the Tables under clause (a) or (a-a), as the case may be," shall be substituted; (d) in sub-section (10), for the words and figures "at the rate of Rs. 1,000 per lane per month" the following shall be substituted, namely :- "at the rates specified in Table below :- TABLE Serial No. Area Amount of entertainment duty per lane per month (in rupees) (1) (2) (3) 1 Within the limits of Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 5,000. 2 All other areas not covered by entry 1. 3,000. (e) in sub-section (11), for the existing table, the following table shall be substituted, namely :- "TABLE Serial No. Area Amount of entertainment duty in a dance bar per performance, per month (in rupees) (1) (2) (3) 1 Within the limits of Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 30,000. 2 Within the limits of the Municipal Corporations other than the Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 25,000."; 3 All other areas not covered by entries 1 and 2 above. 15,000."; (f) in sub-section (17), for the existing table, the following table shall be substituted, namely :- "TABLE Serial No. Category Amount of entertainment duty to be paid in advance per month (in rupees) (1) (2) (3) 1 Within the limits of Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation,-  (a) discotheques in the Five Star Hotels; 2,00,000. (b) discotheques situated at places other than in the Five Star Hotels. 1,00,000. 2 Outside the limits of Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation,-  (a) discotheques in the Five Star Hotels; 1,00,000. (b) discotheques situated at places other than in the Five Star Hotels. 50,000."
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3AA of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (a),- (i) for the words and figure "section 3, and" the word and figure "section 3," shall be substituted; (ii) for the words "or cable television and" the words "or cable television;" shall be substituted; (iii) after the words "Broadcasting service" the words "and Discotheque" shall be inserted; (iv) after the words "and Discotheque" the words "Exhibitions, Music and Dance Performances and Fashion Shows" shall be inserted.
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Ordinance, 2003 and the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 2003, are hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinances, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
