Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Ordinance, 2005, on the 29th November, 2005; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th November, 2005.
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), in clause (g-3), after the words "an amount paid" the words "or value of goods supplied or services rendered or benefits provided " shall be inserted.
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the principal Act, - (a) in sub-section (13), in clause (b), for sub-clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 2nd January, 2002, namely :- "(i) during the period of concession covered by clause (a) above, the minimum rates of admission in a multiplex shall be determined by the Collector. Such minimum rates of admission shall not be less than the prevailing highest rate, excluding the rates of the highest priced fifty seats, in any of the cinema theatres in the District in which multiplex is situated and accordingly such minimum rates of admission may be different for morning, matinee and other shows ;"; (b) in sub-section (15), for the Table, the following Table shall be substituted, namely :- "TABLE Serial No. Area Amount of entertainment duty per television set per month (Rupees) (1) (2) (3) 1. Within the limits of Municipal Corporations and Cantonments. 30 2. Within the limits of 'A' Class and 'B' Class Municipal Councils. 20 3. Any other areas not covered by entries 1 and 2 above. 10."
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 10A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the portion beginning with the words "A proprietor who is aggrieved" and ending with the words and figures " within 30 days from the receipt of the order :" the words and figures "A proprietor who is aggrieved by the order of the Collector determining the rates for the admission in a multiplex under sub-section (13) of section 3 or of assessment, with or without penalty, under section 4B, may file an appeal to the Commissioner within thirty days from the receipt of the order :" shall be substituted.
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment) Act, 2005_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Entertainments Duty (Amendment Ordinance, 2005, is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken as the case may be, under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
