Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Bombay Entertainments Duty Act, 1923, (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act"), in clause (b),- (a) in the second proviso, for the words "two rupees" the word "three rupees in case of ordinary and air-cooled cinemas and four rupees in case of air-conditioned cinemas " shall be substituted; (b) after the fourth proviso, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided also that, any payment not exceeding fifty paise per ticket if charged by the proprietor of a touring cinema towards service charges, separately and the proprietor of such touring cinema shows to the satisfaction of the prescribed officer (as defined in the rules made under this Act), that such payment made is spent by him during the license period towards maintenance and providing facilities and safety measures in such touring cinema, as specified by the State Government (by notification in the Official Gazette issued in this behalf), in addition to those required under the provisions of the Bombay Cinemas (Regulation) Act, 1953 and the Maharashtra Cinemas (Regulation) Rules, 1966, or any other law for the time being in force, in that case, such payment towards service charges shall not be included in the payment for admission, subject to the condition that the proprietor of such touring cinema shall submit, to the prescribed officer within a period of one month from the date of expiry of license period, the audited accounts of the service charges collected and spent by him towards the maintenance and for providing the additional specified facilities and safety measures for such touring cinema.".
Bombay Entertainments Duty (Second Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (c), for the existing table, following table shall be substituted, namely:- "TABLE Serial No. Area Rate of entertainment duty on payment for admission fixed by the proprietor (1) (2) (3) 1 Within the limits of Brihan-Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 45 per cent 2 Within the limits of all other Municipal Corporations and Cantonments. 40 per cent 3 Within the limits of 'A' Class Municipal Councils. 34 per cent 4 Within the limits of ' B' Class Municipal Councils. 28 per cent 5 Within the limits of ' C' Class Municipal Councils. 22 per cent 6 Any other areas not covered by entries (1) to (5) above. 15 per cent.". 
