Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners' Act, 1959. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners' Act, 1959 (Bom. XU of 1960), for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners' (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 20 of the Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners' Act, 1959 (Bom. XII of 1960) (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act "),- (a) in sub-section (3), for the words" a fee of three hundred rupees" the words" such fee as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify" shall be substituted; (b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "(3A) (a) If the courses of study to be undergone for obtaining any of the recognised medical qualifications include a period of training after a person has passed the qualifying examination, and before such qualification is conferred on him, any such person shall, on an application made to the Registrar, in the form prescribed by the Rules and on payment of such fee, as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, be granted a provisional registration in order to enable him to practice Homoeopathic system of medicine in the Recognised Institution for the purpose of such training and for no other purpose, for the period aforesaid'; (b) every person who is granted a provisional registration under clause (a) shall be given a certificate of provisional registration in the form prescribed by the Rules, which shall remain in force for such period as may be specified therein.".
Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely :- "26. Renewal of registration:- Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the certificate of registration or renewed certificate of registration issued to every Registered practitioner on or after the commencement of the Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners' (Amendment) Act, 2011 (Mah. XXII of 2011) shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of its issue or, as the case may be, of its renewal: Provided that, any such certificate of registration or renewed certificate of registration, as the case may be, which is valid on the date of commencement of the Bombay Homeopathic Practitioners' (Amendment) Act, 2011 (Mah. XXII of 2011), shall expire after a period of five years from the date of such commencement. ".
Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 26 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, namely :- "26A. Producer for renewal of registration:- (1) Every Registered praclitioner who has been given a certificate of registration or who has obtained the renewed certificate of registration may get his certificate renewed by following the procedure mentioned in this section. (2) Any application for renewal of the certificate of registration shall be made to the Registrar. The application shall be in such form and shall be submitted alongwith such documents, as may be prescribed by the Rules. The application shall be accompanied by the certificate of registration and such renewal fee and late fee as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify : Provided that, such application shall be made not less than two months prior to the date on which the registration is to expire: Provided further that, the Registrar may, on sufficient cause being shown, entertain any such application made at any time before or within a reasonable time after expiry of the registration; (3) The Registrar shall, upon receipt of the application, make such enquiry as he may deem fit, and renew the certificate. (4) When the certificate is renewed, the Registrar shall endorse such renewal on the certificate of registration and return the same to the Registered practitioner. 26B. Issue of Identity Card:- The Registrar shall, at the time of issue of the certificate of registration as provided in sub-section (12) of section 20, also issue all Identity Card to the Registered practitioner. The Identity Card shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed b) the Rules : Provided that, in case of Registered practitioner holding the certificate of registration on the date of commencement of the Bombay Homoeopathi Practitioners' (Amendment) Act, 2011 (Mah. XXII of 2011), the Registrar shall issue such Identity Card at the time of renewal of the certificate of registration.".
Bombay Homoeopathic Practitioners (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(ia) the form of application for provisional registration and the form of certificate of provisional registration, under sub-section (3 A) of section 20 ; "; (b) after clause (n), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(na) the form of application for renewal of certificate of registration and the documents to accompany such form, under section 26A ; (nb) the form of Identity Card to be issued and particulars to be mentioned therein, under section 26B ;". 
