Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953. WHEREAS it is expedient further to amend the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7th January 2002, save as otherwise expressly provided anywhere in the provisions of this Act.
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) In section 2 of the Bombay Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"),- (a) for clause (2), the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 31st December 2000, namely :- "(2) "Employee "means any person who is employed for hire or reward to do any work, skilled or unskilled, manual, clerical, supervisory or technical in an establishment directly by the employer or through contractor or any other agency, but does not include any person - (i) who is employed mainly in a managerial capacity, (ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding three thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem, or exercises powers or carries out, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office, or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature, or (iii) who is employed as an apprentice under the Apprentice Act, 1961;"; (b) in clause (4), in sub-clause (iii), after the words "five or more persons", the following words shall be added, namely :- "including the establishments which have been granted exemption partly or wholly under the proviso to section 4 of that Act.".
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- (a) in clause (b), the word "and "shall be deleted; (b) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be added, namely :- "(d) the Principal Secretary or Secretary (Finance) or his nominee shall be the ex officio member; and (e) the Principal Secretary or Secretary (Labour) or his nominee shall be the ex officio member.".
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6BB of the principal Act, - (a) in sub-section (2), - (i) in clause (a), - (A) in sub-clause (i), for the words "one thousand rupees per mensem, one rupee" the words "three thousand rupees per mensern, six rupees" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 31st December 2000; (B) in sub-clause (ii), for the words "one thousand rupees per mensem, two rupees" the words "three thousand rupees per mensem, twelve rupees" shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 31st December 2000; (ii) to clause (a), the following proviso shall be added, namely :- "Provided that, the State Government may, on receipt of a proposal from the Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, increase once in every three years, the rate of employee's contribution so, however that, such increase shall not exceed 30 per cent. of the rates of contribution."; (iii) for clause (b) and the existing provisos, the following clause shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 31st December 2000, namely :- "(b) in respect of an employer for each employee referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a), thrice the amount of contribution payable by an employee."; (b) in sub-section (8), for the portion beginning with the words "an amount equal to" and ending with the word "respectively" , the following shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 31st December 2000, namely :- "an amount equal to half the employee's contribution for the period from the 31st December 2000 to the 31st March 2003; and an amount equal to twice the employee's contribution with effect from the 1st April 2003, in respect of every employee referred to in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (2).".
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6B of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (a) in clause (a),- (i) in sub-clause (i), for the words "one per cent." the words "one and a half per cent." shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-clause (ii), for the words "one and a half per cent." the words "two per cent." shall be substituted; (b) in clause (b),- (i) in sub-clause (i), for the words "one per cent." the words "one and a half per cent." shall be substituted; (ii) in sub-clause (ii), for the words "one and a half per cent." the words "two per cent." shall be substituted.
Bombay Labour Welfare Fund (Amendment) Act, 2003_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words "Government may" the words "Government may, after consulting the Board," shall be substituted. 
