Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to provide for contribution by local authorities to census expenses. WHEREAS it is expedient to make provision for contribution by local authorities of a portion of the expenses incurred in connection with the taking of any census in the State of Bombay and for certain other purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted as follows:-
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950. 1 [(2) It extends to the whole of the [State of Maharashtra], Sub-section (2) was substituted for the original by Bom. 68 of 1959, s. 3.
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,- (1) "Census Act" means the Census Act, 1948; (2) "Census" means a census taken in accordance with the provisions of the Census Act; (3) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any enactment in regard to the funds of any local authorities, the State Government may direct that such portion of any expenses as may be prescribed, incurred for anything done in accordance with the Census Act or the rules made thereunder, may be charged to the funds of any local authority constituted for and on behalf of the area within which such expenses were incurred. (2) The sum directed to be charged under sub-section (1) shall be computed and paid in the prescribed manner.
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra Every local authority shall be bound to give such assistance in connection with census as it may be called upon to give by an order made under section 6 of the Census Act.
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra If the State Government after receiving a report from the District Magistrate or the Superintendent of Census Operations is satisfied that a local authority has failed to make payment of the expenses or costs as required by or under section 3 of this Act or section 16 of the Census Act or has made default in performing any duty imposed upon it by or under this Act or the Census Act, the State Government may make such order or take such steps as it may .consider expedient for securing the payment of such expenses or costs or the performance of such duty, as the case may be.
Bombay Local Authorities Census Expenses Contribution Act, 1950_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :- (a) the portion of the expenses incurred in connection with the taking of a census which may be charged under this Act to the funds of any local authority; (b) the manner in which the sums charged under this Act shall be computed and paid; (c) the manner in which and the extent to which any duty in connection with the taking of a census shall be performed by a local authority. (3) All rules made by the State Government under this section shall be laid before each House of the State Legislature as soon as may be after they are made, and shall be subject to such modifications as the State Legislature may make during the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following. 
