Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958. WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session; AND WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action further to amend the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 2001, on the 30th May, 2001; AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; It is hereby enacted in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows, namely:-
Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th May, 2001.
Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), in subsection (1E), for the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely :- "Provided that, the tax in respect of the motor vehicles referred to above, except in respect of the light motor vehicles used for carriage of goods, may be collected and paid at the option of the registered owners in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1).".
Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In the FIRST SCHEDULE to the principal Act, in clause A, in sub-clause IV, - (a) in entry (1), - (i) after sub-entry (e), the following sub-entry shall be added, namely :- "(f) airconditioned motor vehicles fitted with fare meters (cool cabs) permitted to carry not more than six passengers, excluding the driver, for every passenger that the vehicle is permitted to carry ... 200."; (ii) the second proviso shall be deleted; (b) after entry (1), the following entry shall be inserted, namely :- "(1A) Motor Vehicles (including tri-cycles) plying for hire and used for carriage of passengers, not required to be fitted with fare meters (tourist taxies), - (a) Manufactured in India and permitted to carry not more than six passengers excluding the driver, - (i) other than air-conditioned, for every passenger that the vehicle is permitted to carry ... 375; (ii) air-conditioned, for every passenger that the vehicle is permitted to carry ... 500; (b) manufactured in other countries and imported in India and permitted to carry not more than six passengers excluding the driver, for every passenger that the vehicle is permitted to carry ... 750. Explanation:-Where not more than two children below the age of twelve years are permitted to be carried in a motor vehicle in addition to the number of passengers which the vehicle is permitted to carry, the child or children so carried, shall not be reckoned as passengers.".
Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Act, 2001_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Bombay Motor Vehicles Tax (Third Amendment) Ordinance, 2001 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification issued), under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken, as the case may be, under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
