Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to provide for the establishment and maintenance of a Contingency Fund in the 1 [State of Maharashtra]. WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the establishment and maintenance of a Contingency Fund in the 2 [State of Maharashtra);] AND WHEREAS the Legislature of the State, by clause (2) of Article 267 and clause (2) of Article 283 of the Constitution of India, has been empowered by law to establish and maintain such Fund; it is hereby enacted in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:- These words were substituted for the words "State of Bombay" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960. These words were substituted for the words "State of Bombay" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960.
Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called 1 [the Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act]. These words were substituted for the words and figures "the Bombay Contingency Fund Act, 1956" by Maharashtra 15 of 1980, Schedule.
Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest entitled the 1 [Contingency Fund of the State of Maharashtra], into which shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the 2 [State of Maharashtra] 3 [a sum of one hundred fifty crores of rupees]. These words were substituted for the words "Contingency Fund of the State" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurred Subjects) Order, 1960. These words were substituted for the words "State of Bombay" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960. These words were substituted for the words "a sum of eighty crores of rupees" by Maharashtra 8 of 1990, s. 2.
Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra The Contingency Fund of the State shall be held on behalf of the Governor by the Secretary to the 1 [Government of Maharashtra] in the Finance Department and no advances shall be made out of such Fund except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the State Legislature under appropriations made by law. These words were substituted for the words "Government of Bombay" by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960.
Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra For the purposes of carrying out the objects of this Act, the State Government may make rules regulating all matters connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys into, and withdrawals of moneys from, the Contingency Fund of the state.
Maharashtra Contingency Fund Act, 1956_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra The Bombay Contingency Fund Act, 1950, and any law corresponding to the provisions of this Act in Force immediately before the 1st Day of November 1956 in any territory which after that date forms part of the new 1 State of Bombay shall stand repealed. The words "State of Bombay" shall stand unmodified by the Maharashtra Adaptation of Laws (State and Concurrent Subjects) Order, 1960. 
