Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act to amend the Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1987. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibitions of Capitation Fee) Act, 1987, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; It is hereby enacted in the Forty-seventh year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra This Act may be called the Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition Short title. Of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996.
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of (Capitation Fee) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"),- (a) in clause (a), the words "paid or collected, directly or indirectly," shall be deleted; (b) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely :- "(aa) "Deputy Director" means the Deputy director of Education or any officer co-designated as such by the State Government, working under the Director of Education, Director of Higher Education, Director of Technical Education, Directorate of the State Government entrusted with the task of supervision of educational institutions imparting any kind of education in the State." (c) in clause (c), in sub-clause (iii) for the words "Maharashtra Municipalties" the words "Maharashtra Municipal Council, Nagar Panchayat and Industrial Townships" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 3 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1), for the word "collected" the words "demanded or collected" shall be substituted ; (b) in sub-section (2),- (i) for the portion beginning with the words "in good faith" and ending with the words "prescribed manner," the following shall be substituted, namely :- "in good faith, demand or, collect or accept donations in cash or kind in the prescribed manner." ; (ii) the second proviso shall be deleted ; (c) in sub-section (4), after the words "such institution" the word "demanding" shall be inserted ; (d) in the marginal note, for the word "Collection" the words "Demand or collection" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted namely :- "5. Any person from whom a capitation fee or donation has been demanded or collected by the management of any educational institution or on behalf of any educational institution by any person who is in charge of, or is responsible for, the management of such institution, in relation to any student in consideration of his admission to, and prosecution, of any course of study, or of his promotion to a higher standard or class in such institution, may be file a complaint against such management or such person, as the case may be, with the concerned police station within thirty days from the date on which such capitation fee or donation or both has been demanded or collected by such management or such person."
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "District Education Officer" the words "Deputy Director of Education" shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra To section 7 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely :-"Provided that, any person who is accused of having committed the offence under sub-section (1) of section 3 of demanding capitation fee shall, on conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees."
Maharashtra Educational Institutions (Prohibition of Capitation Fee) (Amendment) Act, 1996_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 7 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be inserted, namely :- "7A. Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act shall, on conviction, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence. "7AA. All offences under this Act, except the offence of the demanding of capitation fee, shall be cognizable and non-bailable." 
