Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Highways Act. Whereas it is expedient further to amend the Maharashtra Highways Act, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; it is hereby enacted in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016. (2) It shall come into force on such date, as the State Government may, by notification in Official Gazette, appoint.
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 2 of the Maharashtra Highways Act (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"),- (a) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(d-1) "Competent Authority" means the Collector of the revenue district, and includes any officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector appointed by the Government, for the purpose of the Land Pooling Scheme;"; (b) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(k-1) "Land Pooling Scheme" or "Scheme" means voluntary assembly of land under different ownership falling within the highway boundary and the site of New Town, for the purposes of making such land available for the construction of highway and development of New Town, in lieu of entitlement of developed non-agricultural plot or land of a size determined as per the Land Pooling Scheme, declared by the Government, from time to time;"; (c) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(m-1) "New Town" means the area declared or to be declared as New Town by notification in the Official Gazette, under section 113 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966;".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 4 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added, namely:- "Provided that, in case of any highway or highways notified under section 3, to be developed by or transferred, assigned, handed over for construction, maintenance, development or improvement to the Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation Limited, in that case, the Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation Limited shall be the Highway Authority, for that highway or highways.".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 4--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 5 of the principal Act, after the words "improvement of highways" the words "and development of New Town" shall be added.
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 5--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 14 of the principal Act, after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- "(g-1) demarcate the boundaries of New Town and demarcation of roads and plots in the final layout of the land covered under the Land Pooling Scheme by placing boundary stones and marks;".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 6--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 19E of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:- "CHAPTER IIIA Land Pooling Scheme. 19F. Identification of area for Scheme. - (1) The Highway Authority shall be the Authority for the purpose of the Land Pooling Scheme. (2) The Highway Authority may identify the area for the Scheme either on its own or based on the applications received from the land owners or persons interested. (3) The Highway Authority shall initiate the Scheme for the identified area. (4) The Highway Authority shall submit the proposal of delineating the boundaries and the area comprised in the Scheme in the prescribed manner to the Competent Authority. 19G. Declaration of intention and issue of final notification of Scheme. - (1) The Competent Authority shall, publish the preliminary notification in the Official Gazette, declaring its intention to make the Scheme in respect of the proposal received from the Highway Authority as provided in sub-section (4) of section 19F, in the prescribed manner and within the prescribed period, calling for objections or suggestions, as well as the consent for voluntary participation in the Scheme, from the land owners or persons interested, whose lands are included in the Scheme. (2) The land owners or persons interested shall submit their objections or suggestions, as well as consent, for the Scheme in the prescribed manner, in writing to the Competent Authority or appear before such authority, within prescribed period from the date of the publication of the preliminary notification in the Official Gazette. (3) The Competent Authority shall, after all such objections or suggestions have been considered or heard, as the case may be, and after such further inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary, forward to the Highway Authority, a copy of the record of its proceedings held by it together with the report setting forth its recommendations on the objections or suggestions. (4) The Highway Authority shall consider the record and report specified in sub-section (3) and may publish the final notification in the Official Gazette, delineating the boundaries and area comprised in the Scheme, in the prescribed manner, with or without such modifications, if required, as it thinks fit. (5) The decision of the Highway Authority to publish the final notification under sub-section (4) shall be final and conclusive. (6) The consent given by the land owners or persons interested under sub-section (2) shall be irrevocable. 19H. Verification of title of land and extent of consent. - (1) The Competent Authority shall, verify the title of the land and extent of consent as provided in sub-section (2) of section 19G, covered under the Scheme, with reference to revenue records, registered documents and other relevant records of ownership of land in the prescribed manner within prescribed period. (2) The Competent Authority shall pass the appropriate order under his seal and signature, confirming the acceptance or otherwise of the land for the Scheme. 19I. Disputed ownership. - (1) Where there is a dispute over the claim of the ownership of any land included in the area under the Scheme, in respect of which a declaration of intention has been made, or any entry in the record of rights or mutation relevant to such disputed claim is inaccurate or inconclusive, in such cases, the Competent Authority may, hold an enquiry in the prescribed manner, at any time, before the final allotment of the developed non-agricultural plot or land. (2) The Competent Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the land owner or person interested, pass an appropriate order, for the purposes of deciding who is the land owner or person interested for the purposes of the Scheme, under his seal and signature. (3) The aggrieved person may, file an appeal before the competent revenue authority or regular suit in a Court of competent jurisdiction, as the case may be, under the applicable law. 19J. Acquisition of land of land owners not participating in Scheme. - The land owners or persons interested, who have not voluntarily participated in the Scheme, the land of such land owners or persons interested, shall be acquired as per the law applicable for acquisition of land. 19K. Publication of draft and final layout. - (1) The Highway Authority shall prepare the draft layout of land included in the boundaries of the New Town in the prescribed manner. The draft layout shall include all the land whether the land owners or persons interested has voluntarily participated or not in the Scheme. (2) The Highway Authority shall, publish the draft layout of such land, in the prescribed manner, calling for objections or suggestions from the land owners or persons interested, who has voluntarily participated in the Scheme. (3) The land owners or persons interested shall submit their objections or suggestions for the draft layout in the prescribed manner, in writing to the Highway Authority or appear before Authority, within the prescribed period from the date of the publication of the draft layout. (4) The Highway Authority shall hear all such objections or suggestions, consider the record and may publish the final layout, in the prescribed manner, with such modifications, if any, as it thinks fit. (5) The decision of the Highway Authority to publish the final layout under sub-section (4) shall be final and conclusive. 19L. Vesting of land with Highway Authority. - (1) The land in final notified area under the Scheme as provided in sub-section (4) of section 19G and the final layout as provided in sub-section (4) of section 19K, shall vest absolutely with the Highway Authority, as non-agricultural land, free from all encumbrances, on Class-I occupancy basis, for the development and implementation of the Scheme: Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no premium or nazarana or share of unearned income shall be levied by the Government for transferring of any land held on Class-II occupancy to the Highway Authority under the Scheme, and upon such transfer, such land shall vest in the Highway Authority, as non-agricultural land, free from all encumbrances, on Class-I occupancy basis. (2) Any person wrongfully occupying any land vested with the Highway Authority, shall be summarily evicted by the Collector in the manner provided in the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966, on being required to do so by the Highway Authority. 19M. Allotment of developed non-agricultural plot or land. - (1) The Highway Authority shall, allot the developed non-agricultural plot or land to the land owners or persons interested, who have voluntarily participated in the Scheme, as per the Scheme declared by the Government. (2) The procedure of allotment of developed non-agricultural plot or land shall be in the prescribed manner. 19N. Land Pooling Ownership Certificate. - (1) The Highway Authority shall, within prescribed period, issue the Land Pooling Ownership Certificate (hereinafter referred to as "the Certificate") to the land owners or persons interested, after allotment of the developed non-agricultural plot or land as provided in section 19M: Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the ownership of the developed non-agricultural plot or land, shall be free from all encumbrances, on Class-I occupancy basis. (2) The Certificate shall contain details of the original land of land owners or persons interested, details of the developed non-agricultural plot or land, including its original ownership details, along with a map of developed non-agricultural plot or land. (3) The Highway Authority shall register the Certificate under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908. Such Certificate shall be the conclusive proof of the title of the property in respect of the allotted developed non-agricultural plot or land and shall be eligible for transfer of rights of the property in accordance with the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. 19O. Exemption from payment of registration fee, stamp duty, etc. - (1) No registration fee and stamp duty shall be charged from the Highway Authority for registration of the Certificate as provided in sub-section (3) of section 19N. (2) No non-agricultural assessment shall, be levied on the allotted developed non-agricultural plot or land under sub-section (1) of section 19M by the Highway Authority from the first allottee. 19P. Power to take possession of land. - (1) The Competent Authority shall, take the possession of the land in the Scheme from the land owners or persons interested, to whom the Certificate is issued as provided in sub-section (1) of section 19N and hand over the possession of such land to the Highway Authority in the prescribed manner. (2) The Competent Authority shall, take the possession of the land acquired as provided in section 19J, after ensuring that full payment of compensation as well as rehabilitation and resettlement entitlements are paid to the concerned land owners or persons interested as per the law applicable for acquisition of land. Thereafter, the Competent Authority shall hand over the possession of such land to the Highway Authority in the prescribed manner. 19Q. Incorporation of land in development plan. - The Planning Authority shall incorporate the land of the final notified area of the Scheme as provided in sub-section (4) of section 19G and the final layouts as provided in sub-section (4) of section 19K, in the development plan of the New Town under the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966. 19R. Responsibilities of owner of developed non-agricultural plot or land. - The owner of the developed non-agricultural plot or land shall be responsible for the following, namely:- (a) for all the required infrastructure within the developed non-agricultural plot or land and for obtaining development permissions as per the law applicable; (b) to obtain all other permissions and requisite 'No Objection Certificates' required for the development of the allotted plot or land; and (c) to pay necessary fees and charges as per the applicable law and rules for the sanction of development permission before commencing any construction activity on the developed non-agricultural plot or land. 19S. Implementation of Scheme. - (1) The Highway Authority shall implement the Scheme in the prescribed manner. (2) The Highway Authority shall carry out the physical demarcation of roads and plots or land of the final layout. (3) The Highway Authority shall hand over the possession of the developed non-agricultural plot or land to the Certificate holder as per the Scheme in the prescribed manner, after formation of the roads as per the final layout. (4) The remaining infrastructure like street light, solid waste management, sewerage treatment facility, water supply, parks and play grounds and other amenities shall be developed by the Highway Authority in a phased manner. 19T. Completion of Scheme. - (1) The Highway Authority shall publish notice of the completion of the Scheme in the prescribed manner within prescribed period. (2) The Highway Authority shall also publish the details of the allotment of developed non-agricultural plot or land to the land owners or persons interested, in the prescribed manner. 19U. Infrastructure maintenance. - (1) The owners of the developed non-agricultural plot or land shall pay for the usage, consumption and maintenance charges levied by the Highway Authority or local authorities or agencies responsible for the common infrastructure and respective services including roads, street lights, solid waste management, sewerage treatment facility, water supply, parks and play grounds and other amenities. (2) The Highway Authority may maintain the common infrastructure facilities either on its own or authorize the local authority or agency with the prior approval of the Government. (3) The Highway Authority may collect such necessary user charges for infrastructure maintenance, as may be prescribed in the prescribed manner. 19V. Delegation of powers. - (1) The Highway Authority may, as it thinks fit, authorise and delegate its powers to any officer, for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Highway Authority and the authorised officers shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed. (3) The Competent Authority may, as it thinks fit, authorise and delegate its powers to the officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector, for the purposes of this Act. (4) The Competent Authority and authorized officers shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be prescribed. 19W. Restrictions on development of land in Scheme area. - (1) After declaration of intention of the Scheme as provided in sub-section (1) of section 19G, no land owners or persons interested shall, without the prior permission in writing of the Highway Authority, construct, erect, build, excavate, etc. in the Scheme area. (2) The provisions of sections 9 to 13 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply for the Scheme area.".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 7--> State(s): Maharashtra After section 63 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- "63A. Power of Highway Authority to dispose land. - The Highway Authority may dispose the land vested in it in the prescribed manner.".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 8--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 71 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),- (1) after clause (d-1), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- "(d-2) the manner of submission of the proposal of Scheme to the Competent Authority under sub-section (4) of section 19F; (d-3) the manner and the period for calling objections or suggestions, as well as the consent, for voluntary participation in the Scheme under sub-section (1) of section 19G; (d-4) the manner to submit objections or suggestions, as well as the consent, for voluntary participation in the Scheme to the Competent Authority and the period to appear before the Competent Authority under sub-section (2) of section 19G; (d-5) the manner of publication of final notification, delineating the boundaries and area comprised in the Scheme under sub-section (4) of section 19G; (d-6) the manner and the period for verification of title of land by the Competent Authority and the extent of consent under sub-section (1) of section 19H; (d-7) the manner to hold enquiry by the Competent Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19I; (d-8) the manner to prepare the draft layout by the Highway Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19K; (d-9) the manner to publish the draft layout by the Highway Authority under sub-section (2) of section 19K; (d-10) the manner and period to submit objections or suggestions for the draft layout under sub-section (3) of section 19K; (d-11) the manner to publish the final layout by the Highway Authority under sub-section (4) of section 19K; (d-12) the manner to allot the developed non-agricultural plot or land under sub-section (2) of section 19M; (d-13) the period to issue Land Pooling Ownership Certificate under sub-section (1) of section 19N; (d-14) the manner to hand over the possession of the land to the Highway Authority under section 19P; (d-15) the manner to implement the Scheme by the Highway Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19S; (d-16) the manner to hand over the possession of developed non-agricultural plot or land to the Certificate holder under sub-section (3) of section 19S; (d-17) the manner and the period to publish notice of the completion of the Scheme by the Highway Authority under sub-section (1) of section 19T; (d-18) the manner to publish the details of the allotment of the developed non-agricultural plot or land by the Highway Authority under sub-section (2) of section 19T; (d-19) the necessary user charges to be collected by the Highway Authority and the manner to collect such charges under sub-section (3) of section 19U; (d-20) the powers and duties of the Highway Authority and the authorised officers under sub-section (2) of section 19V; (d-21) the powers and duties of the Competent Authority and the authorised officers under sub-section (4) of section 19V; (d-22) the manner of disposal of land by the Highway Authority under section 63A;".
Maharashtra Highways (Amendment) Act, 2016_Section 9--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, as occasion arises, by an order published in the Official Gazette, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: Provided that, no such order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. (2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature. 
