Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Act, 2004_Section Preamble--> State(s): Maharashtra An Act further to amend the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Act, 1976. WHEREAS the Governor of Maharashtra had promulgated the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment) Ordinance, 2004 on the 29th March 2004 (hereinafter referred to as " the said Ordinance"); AND WHEREAS upon the re-assembly of the State Legislature on the 24th May 2004, the said Ordinance was laid before both Houses of the State Legislature and a Bill for converting the said Ordinance into an Act of the State Legislature was also introduced in the Maharashtra Legislative Council as L. C. Bill No. V of 2004 on the 26th May 2004, and was passed by the Maharashtra Legislative Council on the 9th June 2004. The said Bill, however, could not be passed in the Legislative Assembly and the session of the State Legislature was prorogued on the 11th June 2004; AND WHEREAS as provided by article 213 (2) (a) of the Constitution of India, the said Ordinance has ceased to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the re-assembly of the State Legislature that is, on the 4th July 2004 ; AND WHEREAS it was considered expedient to continue the operation of the provisions of the said Ordinance; AND WHEREAS both Houses of the State Legislature were not in session and the Governor of Maharashtra was satisfied that circumstances existed which rendered it necessary for him to take immediate action to continue the operation of the provisions of the said Ordinance, for the purposes hereinafter appearing; and, therefore, promulgated the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Ordinance, 2004 on the 29th July 2004; AND WHEREAS it is expedient to replace the said Ordinance by an Act of the State Legislature; it is hereby enacted in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Act, 2004_Section 1--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) This Act may be called the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Act, 2004. (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th March 2004.
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Act, 2004_Section 2--> State(s): Maharashtra In section 88 of the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as " the principal Act "), in sub-section (3), for the words " one thousand rupees ", wherever they occur, the words " one thousand and two hundred rupees " shall be substituted.
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Act, 2004_Section 3--> State(s): Maharashtra (1) The Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Amendment and Continuance) Ordinance, 2004 is hereby repealed. (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including any notification or order issued) under the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done, taken or issued, as the case may be, under the corresponding provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act. 
