Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section Preamble--> A BILL to amend the Emigration Act, 1983. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002. (2) It extends to the whole of India and applies also to citizens of India outside India. (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 2--> In section 2 of the Emigration Act, 1983 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),- (i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(aa) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Council appointed under sub-section (2) of section 22C;'; (ii) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(ba) "Council" means the Central Manpower Export Promotion Council established under sub-section (1) of section 22A;'; (iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(ha) "member" means a member of the Council appointed under sub-section (2) of section 22C; (iv) after clause (n), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- '(na) "Vice-Chairperson" means the Vice-Chairperson of the Council appointed under sub-section (2) of section 22C;'.
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 3--> After Chapter V of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted, namely:- "CHAPTER VA Central Manpower Export Promotion Council 22A. Establishment and incorporation of Export Promotion Council - (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification appoint, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a Council to be called the Central Manpower Export Promotion Council. (2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. (3) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi and the Council may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India or outside India. 22B. Functions of Council -The Council shall perform the following functions, namely:- (i) promotion of employment opportunities for emigrants; (ii) projection of manpower services; (iii) collection of statistics and information relating to employment opportunities and matters connected therewith; (iv) collection and maintenance of statistics and information in respect of persons seeking employment; (v) liaison with other export promotion agencies; (vi) making recommendations to the Central Government about the standards and guidelines for overseas employment; and (vii) administration of the Indian Overseas Workers' Welfare Fund. 22C. Composition of Council -(1) The Council shall consist of the following, namely:- (a) the Union Minister of Labour-ex officio Chairperson; (b) the Labour Secretary to the Government of India-ex officio Vice-Chairperson; (c) five members not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to represent the Ministries of Home Affairs, External Affairs, Finance, Shipping and Human Resource Development; (d) five members not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to represent the States and Union territories appointed in the manner prescribed; (e) three members to represent the recruiting agents appointed in the manner prescribed; (f) three members to represent the Central Trade Unions appointed in the manner prescribed; (g) three members from amongst the persons having special knowledge and practical experience in the fields of social science, labour employment and labour laws, appointed in the manner prescribed: Provided that one of the members to be appointed under this clause shall be a woman; and (h) Protector General of Emigrants, ex officio Member-Secretary. (2) The members shall be appointed by the Central Government by notification: Provided that an appointment under clause (d) shall be made on the recommendation of the Government of the State or the Union territory concerned, as the case may be. 22D. Tenure of office of members -(1) Every member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date of notification under sub-section (2) of section 22C and shall be eligible for reappointment: Provided that no person shall hold office as a member after he has attained the age of sixty-two years. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a member may,- (a) relinquish his office by giving in writing under his hand to the Central Government a notice of not less than ninety days; or (b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 22G: Provided that a member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of ninety days from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of term of office, whichever is the earliest. (3) A casual vacancy of a member in the Council shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 22C and the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member in whose place he was appointed would have held that office. 22E. Administrative powers of Chairperson -The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and direction in respect of all administrative matters of the Council. 22F. Vacation of office by members -If a member- (a) relinquishes his office under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 22D; or (b) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 22G; or (c) is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive meetings of the Council, his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 22G. Removal of member from office -(1) The Central Government may remove from office any member who- (a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or (b) is, or becomes, of unsound mind or is so declared by a competent court; or (c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or (d) has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or (e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as a member; or (f) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental to the public interest. (2) No member shall be removed under clauses (c) to (f) of sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 22H. Allowances payable to members -The allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, members shall be such as may be prescribed. 22-I. Meetings of Council -(1) The Council shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings, including quorum at such meeting, as may be prescribed. (2) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of the Council, the Vice-Chairperson, and if for any reason both of them are unable to attend a meeting of the Council, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the meeting. (3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Council shall be decided by a majority of votes by the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the person presiding at the meeting, may exercise a second or casting vote. 22-J. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council -No act or proceeding of the Council constituted under section 22A shall be invalid merely by reason of- (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council; or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a member of the Council; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case. 22K. Staff of Council - (1) The Central Government shall provide the Council with such officers and employees as it may deem fit. (2) The officers and employees of the Council shall discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the Chairperson. (3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed. 22L. Members and staff of Council to be public servants - The members, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 22M. Power of Council to collect administrative charges - The Council may, at the time of giving emigration clearance under the provisions of section 22, charge from every recruiting agent for providing guidance, information, and any other service or facility, the administrative charges at the rate of two per cent. of the total service charges realised by him from the emigrant: Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, in consultation with the Council, fix the rate of administrative charges from time to time. 22N. Executive Committee of Council -(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute an Executive Committee of the Council for the purposes of exercising such of the powers and performing such of the duties of the Council as may be prescribed or as the Council may delegate to it. (2) The Executive Committee shall consist of- (i) the Additional Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour-ex officio Chairperson; (ii) the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour-ex officio Vice-Chairperson; and (iii) eight members elected by the members of the Council, from amongst themselves of whom two members shall be representing the Ministries of External Affairs and Finance, two representing the States and Union territories, two representing the Central Trade Unions and two representing the recruiting agents; and (iv) an officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour-ex officio-Member Secretary. 22-O. Constitution of Fund - (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Indian Overseas Workers' Welfare Fund and there shall be credited thereto- (a) all grants made to the Council by the Central Government or any State Government or Union territory; and (b) all sums received by the Council from such other source as may be decided upon by the Central Government. (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting- (a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the officers and other employees of the Council; (b) the expenses towards return ticket for stranded emigrants, compensation for injury, accident, disability, transportation of dead body or any other just and reasonable ground as may be prescribed; and (c) any other expenses of the Council in connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this Act. (3) No assistance shall be provided under sub-section (2) to illegal immigrants. 22P. Grants by Central Government -(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Council by way of grants such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. (2) The Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1). 22Q. Budget The Council shall, in each financial year, prepare in such form and at such time as may be prescribed its budget for the next financial year and forward the same to the Central Government at least three months prior to the commencement of the next financial year. 22R. Accounts and audit -(1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. (2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Council under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Council. 22S. Annual report -The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government. 22T. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament -The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House of Parliament.".
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 4--> In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (o), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- "(o) the manner of appointment of members of the Council under clauses (d) to (g) of sub-section (1) of section 22C; (p) the allowances and terms and conditions of service of members under section 22H; (q) the procedure to be observed by the Council at its meetings under section 22-I; (r) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees of the Council under sub-section (3) of section 22K; (s) the powers and duties of the Executive Committee under sub-section (1) of section 22N; (t) the additional grounds for which the fund may be applied under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 22-O; (u) the form and time schedule for preparation of budget under section 22Q; (v) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of section 22R; (w) the form and time schedule for the annual report under section 22S; and (x) any other matter which is for the purposes of this Act required to be, or may be, prescribed.".
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 5--> Clause 3 of the Emigration (Amendment) Bill, 2002, inter alia, provides for grants to the proposed the Central Manpower Export Promotion Council to meet the expenditure on the salaries, allowances and remuneration of the officers and other employees of the Council, other expenses of the Council in connection with the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this Act, as well as expenses towards a return ticket for a stranded emigrant, compensation for injury, accident, disability, transportation of dead body or other purposes as may be provided in the rules. The annual expenditure on the functioning of the proposed the Central Manpower Export Promotion Council is expected to be approximately rupees one crore and fifty lakhs per annum. To start with, the Central Government will give a one-time grant of sum of rupees one crore. The affairs of the Council will be managed out of the administrative charges that would be two per cent. of the total turnover of the registered recruiting agents in terms of the service charges collected from the intending emigrants. This grant will also serve as the initial corpus of the Indian Overseas Workers' Welfare Fund. The Central Government may, in consultation with the proposed Council and having regard to the resources available, fix the amount of the Welfare Fund. 2. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature.
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 6--> Clause 4 of the Emigration (Amendment) Bill, 2002 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 43 of the Emigration Act, 1983 which empowers the Central Government to make rules by notification to carry out the provisions of the Act. The proposed matters in respect of which rules may be made under the provisions of the Bill, inter alia, include the manner of appointment of the members of the Council, the allowances and terms and conditions of service of members, procedure to be observed by the Council in its meetings, salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees of the Council, powers and duties of the Executive Committee, additional grounds for which the fund may be applied, form and time schedule of accounts and annual report, and any other matter which is for the purposes of the Act required to be, or may be, prescribed. 2. These matters relate to matters of procedure and administrative details. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
Emigration (Amendment) Act, 2002_Section 7--> EXTRACTS FROM THE EMIGRATION ACT, 1983 (31 of 1983) 2. Definitions -(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 43. Power to make rules -(1) (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:- (o) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
