Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 1--> ( 1 ) This Act may be called the Employees' State Insurance ( Amendment ) Act, 1984. ( 2 ) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different State or for different parts thereof. 27th January 1985, vide Notification No.S.O.215 dated 5-1-1985 Gazette of India, 1985, Part II, Section 3(ii)
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 2--> In the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) ( hereinafter referred to as the principal Act ), in section 2 , - ( a ) in clause ( 2 ), - ( I) for the words "being not less than twenty-five but not exceeding twenty-seven consecutive weeks or", the words "being not exceeding" shall be substituted; ( ii ) in the proviso, the words "or shorter" shall be omitted: ( b ) in clause ( 5 ) , - ( I ) for the words "being not less than twenty-five but not exceeding twenty-seven consecutive weeks or", the words "being not exceeding" shall be substituted; ( ii) in the proviso, the words "or shorter" shall be omitted, ( c ) in clause ( 9 ), in sub-clause ( b ) , for the words "one thousand" rupees" at both the places wherever they occur, the words "one thousand and six hundred rupee" shall be substituted; ( d ) for clause ( 23 ), the following clause shall be substituted, namely- '( 23 ) "wage period" in relation to an employee means the period in respect of which wages are ordinarily payable to him whether in terms of the contract of employment, express or implied or otherwise,'.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 3--> In section 17 of the principal Act,- (a ) in sub-section ( 1 ), for the words "one thousand and two hundred rupees", the words "two thousand and two hundred fifty rupees" shall be substituted; ( b ) in sub-sections ( 3 ) and ( 4 ) , for the words and figures "Class I or Class II", the words and letters "Group A and Group B" shall be substituted.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 4--> In section 39 of the principal Act,- ( a ) for sub-section ( 3 ), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely: - "(3 ) The wage period in relation to an employee shall be the unit in respect of which all contributions shall be payable under this Act."; ( b ) in sub-section ( 4 ), for the word "week" wherever it occurs, the words "wage period" shall be substituted.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 5--> In section 42 of the principal Act,- (a ) in sub-section ( 1 ), for the words "are below one rupee and fifty paise", the words "during a wage period are below six rupees" shall be substituted; ( b ) in sub-section (2 ), for the word "week", the words "wage period" shall be substituted; ( c ) sub-section ( 3 ) shall be omitted.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 6--> For section 47 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "47.When person eligible for sickness benefit.- A person shall be qualified to claim sickness benefit for sickness occurring during any benefit period if the contributions in respect of him were payable for not less than half the number of days of the corresponding contribution period.".
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 7--> In section 50 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 1 ) and the proviso thereto, the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- "( 1 ) An insured woman shall be qualified to claim maternity benefit for a confinement occurring or expected to occur in a benefit period, if the contributions in respect of her were payable for not less than half the number of days of corresponding contribution period.".
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 8--> In section 56 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3 ), for the word "week", the word "period" shall be substituted.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 9--> In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1 ), for the words and figures "section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 ", the words and figures "section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 " shall be substituted.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 10--> In section 95 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2 ), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely(5 of 1998)(2 of 1971):- "( 2A ) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interest of any person other than the Corporation to whom such rule may be applicable.".
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 11--> In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2 ), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- "( 3 ) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.".
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 12--> In section 97 of the principal Act,- (a ) in sub-section ( 1 ), after the words "The Corporation may,", the words "with the prior approval of the Central Government and" shall be inserted; ( b ) after sub-section ( 3 ), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :- "( 4 ) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be, after it is made by the Corporation, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulations shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.".
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 13--> In the First Schedule to the principal Act,- (a ) for paragraph 1, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:- "1.The amount of contribution of a wage period shall be, in respect of- ( a ) employer's contribution, a sum ( rounded to the next higher multiple of five paise ) equal to five per cent of the wages payable to an employee; ( b ) employee's contribution a sum ( rounded to next higher multiple of five paise ) equal to two and one-fourth per cent.of the wages payable to an employee"; ( b ) in paragraph 2,- ( i ) in the opening portion, after the words "daily wages", the words "during a wage period for the purposes of section 42 and sub-paragraph ( b ) of paragraph 6 of this Schedule" shall be inserted; ( ii) in sub-paragraph ( b ), the word "first" shall be omitted; ( iii ) Explanation II shall be omitted; ( c ) after paragraph 2, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:- "2A.The average daily wages during a contribution period in respect of an employee for the purposes of paragraphs 4, 5 and sub-paragraph ( 1 ) of paragraph 6 o this Schedule shall be the sum equal to one hundred and fifteen per cent.of the aggregate amount of wages payable to him during that period divided by the number of days ( including paid holidays and leave days ) for which such wages were payable."; (d ) for paragraph 3 and the Table thereunder, the following paragraph and the Table shall be substituted, namely:- '3.Daily rate of benefit ( hereinafter referred to as the "standard benefit rate" ) in respect of group of employees specified in the first column of the Table below shall be the amount respectively specified in the corresponding entry in the second column thereof. TABLEGroup of employees whose average dailyCorresponding daily standarwages are benefit rate12 Rs.P. 2.Rs.6 and above but below Rs.83.50 3.Rs.8 and above but below Rs.125.00 4.Rs.12 and above but below Rs.167.00 5.Rs.16 and above but below Rs.2410.00 6 Rs.24 and above but below Rs.3615.00 7.Rs.36 and above 20.00.
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 14--> For the Third Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be substituted, namely: - "THE THIRD SCHEDULE ( See section 52 A ) List of occupational diseases 1.Infectious and parasitic diseases contracted in an(a) All work involving exposure to healthoccupation where there is a particular risk ofor laboratory work;contamination (b) All work involving exposure toveterinary work; (c) Work relating to handling animals,animal carcasses, merchandise which mayhave been contaminated by animals oranimal carcasses; ( d ) Other work carrying a particular risk ofcontamination. 2.Diseases caused by work in compressed air.All Work involving exposure to the riskconcerned 3.Diseases caused by lead or its toxic compounds.All Work involving exposure to the riskconcerned 4.Poisoning by nitrous fumes.All Work involving exposure to the riskconcerned 5.Poisoning by organ phosphorus compounds.All Work involving exposure to the riskconcerned Part B 1.Disease caused by Phosphorus or its toxiccompounds 2.Disease caused by mercury or its toxic compounds 3.Disease caused by benzene or its texichomologues 4.Disease caused by nitro and amido toxicderivatives of benzene or its homologues. 5.Diseases caused by chromium or its toxiccompounds. 6.Diseases caused by arsenic or its toxic compounds 7.Diseases caused by radioactive substances andionising radiations. 8.Primary epitheliomatous cancer of the skin caused by tar, pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, anthracene, orthe compounds, products or residues of thesesubstances. 9.Diseases caused by the toxic halogen derivativesof hydrocarbons ( of the aliphatic and aromaticseries ). 10.Diseases caused by carbon disulphide. 11.Occupational cataract due to infra-red radiations 12.Diseases caused by manganese or its toxiccompounds. 13.Skin diseases caused by physical, chemical orbiological agents not included in other items. 14.Hearing impairment caused by noise. 15.Poisoning by dinitrophenol or a homologue or by substituted dinitrophenol or by the salts of such substances. 16.Diseases caused by beryllium or its toxiccompounds. 17.Diseases caused by cadmium or its toxiccompounds. 18.Occupational asthma caused by recognisedsensitising agents inherent to the work process. 19.Diseases caused by fluorine or its toxiccompounds. 20.Diseases caused by nitroglycerine or othernitroacidesters. 21.Diseases caused by alcohols and ketones. 22.Diseases caused by asphyxiants: carbonmonoxide,and its toxic derivatives, hydrogen sulfide. 23.Lung cancer and mesotheliomas caused byasbestos. 24.Primary neoplasm of the epithelial lining ofthe urinary bladder or the kidney or the ureter. Part C S.No.Occupational diseaseEmployment(1)(2)(3) 1.Pneumoconioses caused by sclerogenic mineral dust All Work involving exposure to the risk( silicosis, anthraoosilicosis, asbestosis ) and silico-concernedtuberculosis provided that silicosis is an essential factor in causing the resultant incapacity or death. 2.Bagassosis.All Work involving exposure to the risk concerned3.Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by cotton, flax hemp and sisal dust ( Byssinosis ).All Work involving exposure to the risk concerned 4.Extrinsic allergic alveelitis caused by the inhalation All Work involving exposure to the riskof organic dusts.concerned 5.Bronchopulmonary diseases caused by hard metals.All Work involving exposure to the risk concerned
Employees State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1984_Section 15--> The Employees' State Insurance Corporation ( General Provident Fund ) Rules, 1973 shall be and shall be deemed always to have been as valid and effective as if the provisions of section 95 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, were in force at the time when those rules were made. 
