Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend the Employment of Children Act, 1938. WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Employment of Children Act, 1938, for the purposes hereinafter appearing ; It is hereby enacted as follows :-
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939.1 (2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of October, 1939. Received the assent of the Governor General on the 8th April, 1939.
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 2--> In section 2 of the Employment of Children Act, 1938 (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), after the words " In this Act " the letter and brackets " (a) " shall be inserted, and to the said section as so amended the following shall be added, namely :- ‘(b) " occupier " of a workshop means the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the workshop; (c) " prescribed " means prescribed by rules made under this Act; (d) " workshop " means any premises (including the precincts thereof) wherein any industrial process is carried on, but does not include any premises to which the provisions of section 50 of the Factories Act, 1934, for the time being apply.’
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 3--> To section 3 of the said Act the following sub-section shall be added, namely :- " (3) No child who has not completed his twelfth year shall be employed, or permitted to work, in any workshop wherein any of the processes set forth in the Schedule is carried on : Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any workshop wherein any process is carried on by the occupier with the aid of his family only and without employing hired labour or to any school established by, or receiving assistance or recognition from, a Provincial Government."
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 4--> After section 3 of the said Act the following sections shall be inserted., namely :- " 3A. Power to amend the Schedule - The Provincial Government, after giving, by notification in the official Gazette, not less than three months’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, add any description of process to the Schedule, and thereupon the Schedule shall have force in the Province as if it has been enacted accordingly. 3B. Notice to inspector before carrying on work in certain processes - Before work in any of the processes set forth in the Schedule is carried on in any workshop after the 1st day of October, 1939, the occupier shall send to the inspector, within whose local limits the workshop is situated, a written notice containing- (a) the name and situation of the workshop, (b) the name of the person in actual management of the workshop, (c) the address to which communications relating to the workshop should be sent, and (d) the nature of the processes to be carried on in the workshop. 3C. Disputes as to age - If any question arises between an inspector and an employer as to whether any child has or has not completed his twelfth or fifteenth year, as the case may be, the question shall, in the absence of a certificate as to the age of such child, granted by a prescribed medical authority, be referred by the inspector for decision to the prescribed medical authority."
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 5--> In section 4 of the said Act, after the word and figure " section 3 " the words, letter and figure " or fails to give notice as required by section 3B " shall be inserted.
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 6--> For sub-section (2) of section 5 of the said Act the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely :- " (2) Every certificate as to the age of a child which has been granted by a prescribed medical authority shall, for the purposes of this Act, be conclusive evidence as to the age of the child to whom it relates."
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 7--> In clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 7 of the said Act, for the words " the authorities " the words " the medical authorities " shall be substituted.
Employment of Children (Amendment) Act, 1939_Section 8--> To the said Act the following Schedule shall be added, namely:- "The Schedule. (See sections 3, 3A and 3B.) List of Processes, 1. Bidi-making. 2. Carpet-weaving. 3. Cement manufacture, including bagging of cement. 4. Cloth-printing, dyeing and weaving. 6. Manufacture of matches, explosives and fireworks. 6. Mica-cutting and splitting. 7. Shellac manufacture. 8. Soap manufacture. 9. Tanning. 10. Wool cleaning." 
