Extradition Act, 1962_Section Preamble--> An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals. 1 [and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.] BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth year of the Republic of India as follows Added by Act 66 of 1993, Section 2 w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Extradition Act, 1962. (2) It extends to the whole of India. (3) It shall come into force on such date 1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5th January, 1963, vide Notification NO. General Statutory Rules (G.S.R.) 55, dated 5th January, 1963, published in the Gazette f India, Extraordinary, Part 11, Section 3 (i), p. 7.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 2--> In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 1 [(a) "composite offence" means an act or conduct of a person occurred, wholly or in part, in a foreign State or in India but its effects or Intended effects, taken as a whole, would constitute an extradition offence In India or in a foreign State, as the case may be;] (b) "conviction" and "convicted" do not include or refer to a conviction which under foreign law is a conviction for contumacy, but the term "person accused" includes a person so convicted for contumacy ; 2 [(c) "extradition offence" means--(i) in relation to a foreign State, being a treaty State, an offence provided for in the extradition treaty with that State; (ii) in relation to a foreign State other than a treaty State an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year under the laws of India or of a foreign State and includes a composite offence;] (d) "extradition treaty" means a treaty 3 [agreement or arrangement) made by India with a foreign State Relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals, and includes any treaty 4 [agreement or arrangement] relating to the extradition of fugitive criminals made before the 15th day of August, 1947, which extends to, and is binding on, India; (e) "foreign State" means any State outside India 5 [...], and includes every constituent part, colony or dependency of such State: 6 [(f) "fugitive criminal" means a person who is accused or convicted of an extradition offence within the jurisdiction of a foreign State and includes a person who, while in India, conspires, attempts to commit or incites or participates as an accomplice in the commission of an extradition offence in a foreign State;] (g) "Magistrate" means a Magistrate of the first class or a Presidency Magistrate ; (h) "notified order" means an order notified in the official Gazette; (i) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and (j) "treaty State" means a foreign State with which an extradition treaty is in operation. Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 4 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 4 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Section 4, Act No. 66 of 1993 , for the words "or agreement" (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Section 4, Act No. 66 of 1993 , for the words "or agreement" (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Omitted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 54, (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 4 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 3--> 1 [(1) The Central Government may, by notified order, direct that the provisions of this Act, other than Chapter III, shall apply to such foreign State or part thereof as may be specified in the order.] (2) The Central Government may, by the same notified order as is referred to in sub-section (1) or any subsequent notified order, restrict such application to fugitive criminals found, or suspected to be, in such part of India as may be specified in the order. (3) Where the notified order relates to a treaty State--(a) it shall set out in full the extradition treaty with that State; (b) it shall not remain in force for any period longer than that treaty: and (c) the Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notified order, render the application of this Act subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as may be deemed expedient for implementing the treaty with that State. 2 [(4) Where there is no extradition treaty made by India with any foreign State, the Central Government may, by notified order, treat any convention to which India and a foreign State are parties, as an extradition treaty made by India with that foreign State providing for extradition in respect of the offences specified in that Convention.] Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , section 5 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Inserted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 5 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 4--> A requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal of a foreign State 1 [...] may be made to the Central Government--(a) by a diplomatic representative of the foreign 2 [...] at Delhi; or (b) by the Government of that foreign State 3 [...] communicating with the Central Government through its diplomatic representative in that State or country; and if neither of these modes is convenient, the requisition shall be made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by the Government of the foreign State 4 [...] with the Government of India. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 Section 3, w.e.f. 18-12-1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 Section 3, w.e.f. 18-12-1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 Section 3, w.e.f. 18-12-1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 Section 3, w.e.f. 18-12-1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 5--> Where such requisition is made, the Central Government may, if it thinks fit, issue an order to any Magistrate who would have had jurisdiction to inquire into the offence if it had been an offence committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction directing him to inquire into the case.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 6--> On receipt of an order of the Central Government under Section 5, the Magistrate shall issue a warrant for the arrest of the fugitive criminal.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 7--> (1) When the fugitive criminal appears or is brought before the Magistrate, the Magistrate shall inquire into the case in the same manner and shall have the same jurisdiction and powers, as nearly as may be, as if the case were one triable by a Court of Session or High Court. (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Magistrate shall, in particular, take such evidence as may be produced in support of the requisition of the foreign State 1 [...], and on behalf of the fugitive criminal, including any evidence to show that the offence of which the fugitive criminal accused or has been convicted is an offence of political character or is not an extradition offence. (3) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case is not made out in support of the requisition of the foreign State 2 [...], he shall discharge the fugitive criminal. (4) If the Magistrate is of opinion that a prima facie case is made out in support of the requisition of the foreign State 3 [...], he may commit the fugitive criminal to prison to await the orders of the Central Government and shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government, and shall forward together with such report, and written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to submit for the consideration of the Central Government. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 8--> If upon receipt of the report and statement under sub-section (4) of Section 7, the Central Government, is of opinion that the fugitive criminal ought to be surrendered, to the foreign State 1 [...], it may issue a warrant for the custody and removal of the fugitive criminal and of his delivery at a place and to a person to be named in the warrant. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 9--> (1) Where it appears to any Magistrate that a person within the local limits of his jurisdiction, is a fugitive criminal of a foreign State 1 [...], he may, if he thinks fit, issue a warrant for the arrest of that person on such information and on such evidence as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant if the offence of which the person is accused or has been convicted had been committed within the local limits of his jurisdiction. (2) The Magistrate shall forthwith report the issue of a warrant under sub-section (1) to the Central Government and shall forward the information, and the evidence, or certified copies thereof to that Government. (3) A person arrested on a warrant issued under sub-section (1) shall not be detained for more than three months unless within that period the Magistrate receives from the Central Government an order made with reference to such person under Section 5. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 10--> (1) In any proceedings against a fugitive criminal of a foreign State 1 [...] under this chapter, exhibits and depositions (whether received or taken in the presence of the person against whom they are used or not) and copies thereof and official certificates of facts and judicial documents stating facts may, if duly authenticated, be received as evidence. (2) Warrants, depositions or statement on oath which purport to have been issued or taken by any Court of Justice outside India or copies thereof, certificates of, or judicial documents stating the facts of conviction before any such Court shall be deemed to be duly authenticated if- (a) the warrant purports to be signed by a Judge. Magistrate or officer of the State 2 [...] where the same was issued or acting in or of such State 3 [...] (b) the depositions of statements or copies thereof purport to be certified under the hand of a Judge, Magistrate or officer of the State or country where the same were taken or acting in or for such State or country, to be original depositions or statements or to be true copies thereof, as the case may require ; (c) the certificate of, or judicial document stating the fact of, a conviction purports to be certified by a Judge, Magistrate or officer of the State 4 [...] where the conviction took place or acting in or for such State ; (d) the warrants, depositions, statements, copies, certificates and judicial documents, as the case may be, are authenticated by the oath of some witness or by the official seal of a Minister of the State 5 [...] where the same were 6 [...] issued, taken or given. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the words "or country", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the words "or country", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the words "or country", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the words "or country", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Section 7, Act 66 of 1993 , (w.e.f. 18th December,1993), for the Word "respectively".
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 11--> Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to fugitive criminals 1 [...] to which Chapter 111 applies. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 8 for the word "country"(w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 12--> (1) This chapter shall apply only to any such 1 [foreign State] to which, by reason of an extradition arrangement entered into with that 2 [State], it may seem expedient to the Central Government to apply the same. (2) Every such application shall be by notified order and the Central Government may, by the same or any subsequent notified order, direct that this chapter and Chapters I, IV and V shall, in relation to any such 3 [foreign State] apply subject to such modifications, exceptions, conditions and qualifications as it may think fit to specify in the order for the purpose of implementing the arrangement. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 13--> Where a fugitive criminal of any 1 [foreign State] to which this chapter applies is found in India, he shall be liable to be apprehended and returned in the manner provided by this chapter to that 2 [foreign State]. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 14--> A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in India under an endorsed warrant or a provisional warrant.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 15--> Where a warrant for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal has been issued in any 1 [foreign State] to which this chapter applies and such fugitive criminal is, or is suspected to be, in India, the Central Government may, if satisfied that the warrant was issued by a person having lawful authority to issue the same, endorse such warrant in the manner prescribed, and the warrant so endorsed shall be sufficient authority to apprehend the person named in the warrant and to bring him before any Magistrate in India. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 16--> (1) Any Magistrate may issue a provisional warrant for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal from any 1 [foreign State] to which this chapter applies who is, or is suspected to be in or on his way to India, on such information and under such circumstances as would, in his opinion, justify the issue of a warrant, if the offence of which the fugitive criminal is accused or has been convicted had been committed within his jurisdiction and such warrant may be executed accordingly. (2) A Magistrate issuing a provisional warrant shall forthwith send a report of the issue of the warrant together with the information or a certified copy thereof to the Central Government and the Central Government may, If it thinks fit, discharge the person apprehended under such warrant. (3) A fugitive criminal apprehended on a provisional warrant may, from time to time, be remanded for such reasonable time not exceeding seven days at any one time, as under the circumstances seems requisite for the production of an endorsed warrant. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth Countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 17--> (1) If the Magistrate, before whom a person apprehended under this chapter is brought is satisfied on inquiry that the endorsed warrant for the apprehension of the fugitive criminal is duly authenticated and that the offence of which the person is accused or has been convicted is an extradition offence, the Magistrate shall commit the fugitive criminal to prison to await his return and shall forthwith send to the Central Government a certificate of the committal. (2) If on such inquiry the Magistrate is of opinion that the endorsed warrant is not duly authenticated or that the offence of which such person is accused or has been convicted is not an extradition offence, the Magistrate may, pending the receipt of the orders of the Central Government detain such person in custody or release him on bail. (3) The Magistrate shall report the result of his inquiry to the Central Government and shall forward together with such report any written statement which the fugitive criminal may desire to submit for the consideration of that Government.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 18--> The Central Government may, at any time after a fugitive criminal has been committed to prison under this chapter issue a warrant for the custody and removal to the 1 [foreign State] concerned of the fugitive criminal and for his delivery, at a place and to a person to be named in the warrant. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3, for the Words "Commonwealth countries" (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 19--> (1) A requisition for the surrender of a person accused or convicted of an extradition offence committed in India and who is, or is suspected to be, in any foreign State 1 [...] to which Chapter 111 does not apply, may be made by the Central Government--(a) to a diplomatic representative of that State or country at Delhi; or (b) to the Government of that State or country through the diplomatic representative of India in that State 2 [...] ; and if neither of these modes is convenient the requisition shall be made in such other mode as is settled by arrangement made by the Government of India with that State 3 [...]. (2) A warrant issued by a Magistrate in India for the apprehension of any person who is, or is suspected to be, in any 4 [foreign State] to which Chapter III applies shall be in such form as may be prescribed. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 11, for the words "or Commonwealth countries", w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3. (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3. (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 20--> Any person accused or convicted of an extradition offence who is surrendered or returned by a foreign State 1 [...] may, under the warrant of arrest for his surrender or return issued in such State or country be brought into India and delivered to the proper authority to be dealt with according to law. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 21--> Whenever any per-son accused or convicted of an offence, which, if committed in India would be an extradition offence, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State, such person shall not until he has been restored or has had an opportunity of returning to that State, be tried in India for an offence other than- 1 [ (a) the extradition offence in relation to which he was surrendered or returned; or (b) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his surrender or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or return could not be lawfully made; or (c) the offence in respect of which the foreign State has given its consent. ] Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 12 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 22--> Every fugitive criminal of a foreign State or Commonwealth country shall, 1 [...]subject to the provisions of this Act, be liable to be arrested and surrendered or returned, whether the offence in respect of which the surrender or return is sought was committed before or after the commencement of this Act, and whether or not a Court in India has jurisdiction to try that offence. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993, section 3 w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 23--> Where the offence in respect of which the surrender or return of a fugitive criminal is sought was committed on board any vessel on high seas or any aircraft while in the air outside India or the Indian territorial waters which comes into any port or aerodrome of India, the Central Government and any Magistrate having jurisdiction in such port or aerodrome may exercise the powers conferred by this Act.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 24--> If a fugitive criminal who, in pursuance of this Act, has been committed to prison to await his surrender or return to any foreign State 1 [...] is not conveyed out of India within two months after such committal, the High Court upon application made to it by or on behalf of the fugitive criminal and upon proof that reasonable notice of the intention to make such application has been given to the Central Government may order such prisoner to be discharged unless sufficient cause is shown to the contrary. Omitted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 25--> In the case of a person who is a fugitive criminal arrested or detained under this Act, the provisions of 1 [the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)], relating to bail shall apply in the same manner as they would apply if such person were accused of committing in India the offence of which he is accused or has been convicted and in relation to such bail, the Magistrate before whom the fugitive criminal is brought shall have, as far as may be, the same powers and jurisdiction as a Court of Session under that Code. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 26--> A fugitive criminal who is accused or convicted of abetting 1 [conspiring, attempting to commit, inciting or participating as an accomplice in the commission of] any extradition offence shall be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be accused or convicted of having committed such offence and shall be liable to be arrested and surrendered accordingly. Omitted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 15, w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 27--> It shall be lawful for any person to whom a warrant is directed for the apprehension of a fugitive criminal to hold in custody and convey the person mentioned in the warrant to the place named in the warrant and if such person escapes out of any custody to which he may be delivered in pursuance of such warrant, he may be re-taken as a person accused of an offence against the law of India (may be re-taken) upon an escape.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 28--> Everything found in the possession of a fugitive criminal at the time of his arrest which may be material as evidence in proving the extradition offence may be delivered up with the fugitive criminal on his surrender or return, subject to the rights, if any, of third parties with respect thereof.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 29--> If it appears to the Central Government that by reason of the trivial nature of the case or by reason of the application for the surrender or return of a fugitive criminal not being made in good faith or in the interests of justice or for political reasons or otherwise, it is unjust or inexpedient to surrender or return the fugitive criminal, it may, by order at any time stay any proceedings under this Act and direct any warrant Issued or endorsed under this Act to be cancelled and the person for whose arrest the warrant has been issued or endorsed to be discharged.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 30--> If requisitions for the surrender of a fugitive criminal are received from more than one foreign State 1 [...], the Central Government may, having regard to the circumstances of the case surrender the fugitive criminal to such State 2 [...] as that Government thinks fit. Omitted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 15, w.e.f. 18-12-1993. Omitted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 31--> 1 [(1)] A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered or returned to a foreign State or Commonwealth country-- (a) if the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is of a political character or if he proves to the satisfaction of the Magistrate or Court before whom he may be produced or of the Central Government that the requisition or warrant for his surrender has, in fact, been made with a view to try or punish him for an offence of a political character ; (b) if prosecution for the offence in respect of which his surrender is sought is according to the law of that State or country barred by time ; 2 [(c) unless provision is made by that law of the foreign State or in the extradition treaty with the foreign State that fugitive criminal shall not be determined or tried in that State for an offence other than--(i) the extradition offence in relation to which he is to be surrendered or returned; (ii) any lesser offence disclosed by the facts proved for the purposes of securing his surrender or return other than an offence in relation to which an order for his surrender or return could not be lawfuly made; or (iii) the offence in respect of which the Central Government has given its consent;] (d) if he has been accused of some offence in India, not being the offence for which his surrender or return is sought or is undergoing sentence under any conviction in India until after he has been discharged, whether by acquittal or on expiration of his sentence or otherwise ; (e) until after the expiration of fifteen days from the date of his being committed to prison by the Magistrate. 3 [(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the offences specified in the Schedule shall not be regarded as offences of a political character. (3) The Central Government having regard to the extradition treaty made by India with any foreign State may, by notified order, add or omit any offence from the lists given in the Schedule.] Renumbered by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 16, w.e.f.18-12-1993. Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 16 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Inserted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 16 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 32--> Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Section 3 or Section 12 the provisions of Secs. 29 and 31 shall apply without any modification to every foreign State 1 [...]. Omitted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 3. (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 33--> Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946), or any order made thereunder.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 34--> An extradition offence committed by any person in a foreign State shall be deemed to have been committed in India and such person shall be liable to be prosecuted in India for such offence. Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 17 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 34A--> Where the Central Government is of the opinion that a fugitive criminal cannot be surrendered or returned pursuant to a request for extradition from a foreign State, it may, as it thinks fit, take steps to prosecute such fugitive criminal in India. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993, Section 17 w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 34B--> (1) On receipt of an urgent request from a foreign State for the immediate arrest of a fugitive criminal, the Central Government may request the Magistrate having competent jurisdiction to issue a provisional warrant for the arrest of such fugitive criminal. (2) A fugitive criminal arrested under sub-section (1) shall be discharged upon the expiration of sixty days from the date of his arrest if no request for his surrender or return is received within the said period. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993, Section 17 w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 34C--> Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, where a fugitive criminal, who has committed an extradition offence punishable with death in India, is surrendered or returned by a foreign State on the request of the Central Government and the laws of that foreign State do not provide for a death penalty for such an offence, such fugitive criminal shall be liable for punishment of imprisonment for life only for that offence. ] Substituted by Act 66 of 1993, Section 17 w.e.f. 18-12-1993.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 35--> Every notified order made or notification issued, under this Act shall, as soon as may be after It is made or issued, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 36--> (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely : (a) the form in which a requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal may be made ; (b) the form in which warrant for the apprehension of any person in a 1 [foreign State] to which Chapter III applies may be made; (c) the manner in which any warrant may be endorsed or authenticated under this Act ; (d) the removal of fugitive criminals accused or in custody under this Act and their control and maintenance until such time as they are handed over to the persons named in the warrant as entitled to receive them ; (e) the seizure and disposition of any property which is the subject of, or required for proof of, any alleged offence to which this Act applies; (f) the form and manner in which or the channel through which Magistrate may be required to make his report to the Central Government under this Act; (g) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 2 [in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification In the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. Substituted by Act 66 of 1993 , Section 3 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993). Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 17 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993).
Extradition Act, 1962_Section 37--> (1) The Indian Extradition Act, 1903 (15 of 1903), and any law corresponding thereto in force at the commencement of this Act In the territories which immediately before the 1st day of November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States and the North East Frontier Agency and Tuensang District (Extradition) Regulation, 1961 (3 of 1961), are hereby repealed. (2) The Extradition Acts, 1870 to 1932 (33 & ; 34 Vict. c. 52; 36 & ; 37 Vict, c. 60; Edw. 7, c. 15; 22 & ; 23 Geo. 5, c. 39; 44 & ; 45 Vict., c. 69) and the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881 , in so far as they apply to and operate as part of the law of India, are hereby repealed.
Extradition Act, 1962_Section Sch.1-->  THE SCHEDULE EXTRADITION TREATY BETWEEN INDIA AND SWITZERLAND 1 [See Section 31 (2)] Offences which are not to be Regarded as Offences of a Political Character The following list of offences is to be construed according to the law in force in India on the date of the alleged offence. Wherever the names of the relevant Acts are not given, the sections referred to are the sections of the Indian Penal Code,1860 (45 of 1860):-- 1. Offences under the Anti-Hijacking Act, 1982 (65 of 1982). 2. Offences under the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 (66 of 1982). 3. An offence within the scope of the Convention on the punishment of crimes against Internationally protected persons including diplomatic agents, opened for signature at New York on 14th December, 1973. 4. An offence within the scope of the International Convention against the taking of hostages opened for signature at New York on 18th December, 1979. 5. Culpable homicide, murder (Sections 299 to 304). 6. Voluntarily causing hurt or grevious hurt by a dangerous weapon or means (Sections 321 to 333). 7. Offences under the Explosive Substances Act, 1908 (6 of 1908). 8. Possession of a fire-arm or ammunition with intention to endanger life [Section 27 of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)1. 9. The use of a fire-arm with intention to resist or prevent the arrest or detention [Section 28 of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959)]. 10. Causing of loss or damage to property used for public utilities or otherwise with intention to endanger life (Section 425 read with section 440). 11. Wrongful restraint and wrongful confinemnt (Sees. 339 to 348). 12. Kidnapping and abduction including taking of hostages (Sees. 359 to 369). 13. Offences related to terrorism and terrorist acts [ Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (28 of 1987). 14. Abetting, conspiring or attempting to commit, inciting, participating as an accomplice in the commission of any of the offences listed above.] EXTRADITION TREATY BETWEEN INDIA AND SWITZERLAND G.S.R. 462 (E), dated 9th October, 1996 2 . Whereas the Extradition Treaty between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Swiss Federal Council was concluded and signed at Berne on the 26th November, 1880, as amended by the Convention dated the 29th June, 1904, are considered to be in force between India and Switzerland: And whereas the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Extradition Act, 1962 (34 of 1962), had directed by an order number G.S.R. 56, dated the 5th January, 1963 that the provisions of the said Act, other than Chapter III shall apply to Switzerland; Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby sets out the aforesaid Treaty as under:--" ARTICLE I Her Majesty, the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland engages to deliver up, under the circumstances and on the conditions stipulated in the present Treaty, all persons, and the Swiss Federal Council engages to deliver up, under the like circumstances and conditions, all persons, excepting Swiss citizens, who, having been charged with, or convicted by the Tribunals of one of the two High Contracting Parties of the crimes or offences enumerated in Art. II, committed in the territory of the one party, shall be found within the territory of the other. In the event of the Federal Council being unable, by reason of his Swiss nationality, to grant the extradition of an individual, who, after having committed in the United Kingdom one of the crimes or offences enumberated in Art. II, should have taken refuge in Switzerland, the Federal Council engages to give legal effect to and prosecute the charge against him according to the laws of the Canton of his origin; and the Government of the United Kingdom engages to communicate to the Federal Council all documents, depositions, and proofs relating to the case, and to cause the commissions of examination directed by the Swiss Judge, and transmitted through the proper Diplomatic channel, to be executed gratuitously. ARTICLE II The crimes for which the extradition is to be granted are the following:-- 1. Murder (including infanticide) and attempt to murder. 2. Manslaughter. 3. Counterfeiting or altering money, uttering or bringing into circulation counterfeit or altered money. 4. Forgery, or counterfeiting, or altering, or uttering what is forged, or counterfeited, or altered; comprehending the crimes designated in the Penal Codes of both States as counterfeiting or falsification of paper money, banknotes, or other securities, forgery, or falsification of other public or private documents, likewise the uttering or bringing into circulation, or wilfully using such counterfeited, forged or falsified papers. 5. Embezzlement or larceny, 6. Obtaining money or goods by false pretences. 7. Crimes against bankruptcy law. 8. Fraud committed by a bailee, banker, agent, factor, trustee, or director, or member of public officer of any Company made criminal by any law for the time being in force. 9. Rape. 10. Abduction of minors 11. Child stealing or kidnapping. 12. Burglary, or house breaking, with criminal intent. 13. Arson. 14. Robbery with violence. 15. Threats by letter or otherwise with intent to extort. 16. Perjury or subornation or perjury. 17. Malicious injury to property, if the offence be indictable. The extradition is also to take place for participation in any of the aforesaid crimes, as an accessory before or after the fact, provided such participation be punishable by the laws of both Contracting Parties. ARTICLE III A fugitive criminal may be apprehended in either country under a warrant issued by any Police Magistrate, Justice of the Peace, or other competent authority, on such information or complaint, and such evidence, or after such proceedings as would, in the opinion of the authority Issuing the warrant, justify the issue of a warrant if the crime had been committed or the person convicted in that part of the dominions of the two Contracting parties in which the Magistrate, Justice of the Peace, or other competent authority exercises jurisdiction: provided, however, that, in the United Kingdom, the accused shall, In such case, be sent as speedily as possible before a Police Magistrate in London. Requisitions for provisional arrest may be addressed by post or by telegraph, provided they purport to be sent by some judicial or other competent authority. Such requisitions must contain a description in general terms of the crime or offence, and a statement that a warrant has been granted for the arrest of the criminal, and that his extradition will be demanded. He shall in accordance with this Article be discharged, as well in the United Kingdom as in Switzerland, if within the term of thirty days a requisition for extradition shall not have been made by the Diplomatic Agent of the country claiming his surrender in accordance with the stipulations of this Treaty. ARTICLE IV The requisition for extradition must always be made by the way of diplomacy, and to wit, in Switzerland by the British Minister to the President of Confederation, and in the United Kingdom to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs by the Swiss Counsel-General in London, who, for the purposes of this Treaty, is hereby recognised by Her Majesty as a Diplomatic Representative of Switzerland. ARTICLE V In Switzerland the manner of proceeding shall be as follows:- The requisition for the extradition of an accused person must be accompanied by an authentic copy of the warrant of arrest, issued by a competent official or Magistrate, clearly setting forth the crime or offence of which he is accused, together with a properly legalized information setting forth the facts and evidence upon which the warrant was granted. If the requisition relates to a person already convicted must be accompanied by an authentic copy of the sentence/conviction, setting forth the crime or offence of which he has been convicted. The requisition must be accompanied by a description of the person claimed, and, if it be possible, by other information and particulars which may serve to identify him. After having examined these documents, the Swiss Federal Council shall communicate them to the Cantonal Government in whose territory the person charged is found, in order that he may be examined by a judicial or police officer on the subject of their contents. The Cantonal Government will transmit the procesuerbal, of the examination, together with all the documents, accompanied, if there be one. by a more detailed report to the Federal Council, who, after having examined them, and there be no opposition on either side, will grant the extradition, and will communicate its decision both to the British Legation and to the Cantonal Government in question, to the latter in order that it may send the person to be surrendered to such place on the frontier, and deliver him to such foreign police authority as the British Legation may name in each special case. Should the documents furnished with a view of proving the facts, or a establishing the identity of the accused, or the particulars collected by the Swiss authorities appear insufficient, notice shall be immediately given to the Diplomatic Representative of Great Britain, in order that he may furnish further evidence if such further evidence be not furnished within fifteen days the person arrested shall be set at liberty. In the event of the application of this Treaty being contested, the Swiss Federal Council will transmit the documents ("dossier") to the Swiss Federal Tribunal, whose duty it is to decide definitely the question whether extradition should be granted or refused. The Federal Council will communicate the judgment of the Federal Tribunal to the British Legation. If this judgment grants the extradition the Federal Council will order its execution, as in the case when the Federal Council itself grants the extradition. If, on the other hand, the Federal Tribunal refuses the extradition, the Federal Council will immediately order the person accused to be set at liberty. ARTICLE VI In the dominions of Her Britannic Majesty, other than the Colonies or foreign possessions of Her Majesty, the manner of proceeding shall be as follows :-- (a) In the case of a person accused. The requisition for the surrender shall be made to Her Britannic Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs by the Diplomatic Representative of the Swiss confederation. The said demand shall be accompanied by a warrant of arrest, or other equivalent judicial document, issued by a Judge or Magistrate duly authorised to take cognizance of the acts charged against the accused in Switzerland, and duly authenticated depositions or statements taken on oath, or solemnly declared to be true, before such Judge or Magistrate, clearly setting forth the said acts, and containing a description of the person claimed, and any particulars which may serve to identify him. The said Principal Secretary of State shall transmit such documents to Her Britannic Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, who shall then, by order under his hand and seal, signify to some Police Magistrate in London that such requisition has been made, and require him, if there be due cause, to issue his warrant for the apprehension of the fugitive. On the receipt of such order from the Secretary of State, and on the production of such evidence as would, in the opinion of the Magistrate, justify the issue of the warrant if the crime had been committed in the United Kingdom, he shall issue his warrant accordingly. When the person claimed shall have been apprehended, he shall be brought before the Magistrate who issue the warrant, or some other Police Magistrate in London. If the evidence to be then produced shall be such as to justify, according to the law of England, the committal for trial of the prisoner, if the crime of which he is accused had been committed in the United Kingdom, the Police Magistrate shall commit him to prison to await the warrant of the Secretary of State for his surrender, sending immediately to the Secretary of State a certificate of the committal and a report upon the case. After the expiration of a period from the committal of the prisoner, which shall never be less then fifteen days, the Secretary of State shall, by order under his hand and seal, order the fugitive criminal to be sent to such seaport-town as shall, in each, special case, be selected for his delivery to the Swiss Government. (b) In the case of a person convicted,--The course of proceeding shall be the same as in the case of a person accused, except that the warrant to be transmitted by the Diplomatic Representative of Switzerland in support of his requisition shall clearly set forth the crime or offence of which the person claimed has been convicted, and state the place and date of his conviction. The evidence to be produced shall consist of the penal sentence passed against the convicted person by the competent Court of the State claiming his extradition. (c) Person convicted by judgment in default or arrdt dc contumace shall be, in the matter of extradition, considered as persons accused, and may, as such, be surrendered. (d) After the Police Magistrate shall have committed the accused or convicted person to prison to await the order of a Secretary of State for his surrender, such person, shall have the right to apply for a writ of habeas corpus; if he should so apply, his surrender must be deferred until after the decision of the Court upon the return to the writ, and even then can only take place if the decision is adverse to the applicant. In the latter case, the Court may at once order his delivery to the person authorized to receive him, without waiting for the order of a Secretary of State for his surrender, or commit him to prison to await such order. ARTICLE VII In the examinations which they have to make in accordance with the foregoing stipulations, the authorities of the State applied to shall admit as entirely valid evidence the depositions or statements of witnesses, either sworn or solemnly declared to be true, taken in the other State, or copies thereof, and likewise the warrants and sentences issued therein, or copies thereof, provided such documents purport to be signed or copies thereof, provided such documents purport to signed or certified by a Judge, Magistrate, or officer of such State, and are authenticated by the official seal of a British Secretary of State, or of the Chancellor of the Swiss Confederation being affixed thereto. The personal attendance of witnesses can be required only to establish the identity of the person who is being proceeded against with that of the person arrested. ARTICLE VIII If proof sufficient to warrant the extradition be not furnished within two months from the day of the apprehension, the person arrested shall be discharged from custody. ARTICLE IX In cases where it may be necessary, the Swiss Government shall be represented at the English Courts by the Law Officer of the Crown, and the English Government in the Swiss Courts by the competent Swiss authorities. The respective Government will give the necessary assistance within their territories to the Representatives of the other State who claim their, intervention for the custody and security of the persons subject to extradition. No claim for the repayment of expenses for the assistance mentioned in this ARTICLE shall be made by either of the Contracting parties. ARTICLE X The present Treaty shall apply to crimes and offences committed prior to the signature of the Treaty; but a person surrendered shall not be tried for any crime or offence committed in the other country before the extradition other than the crime for which his surrender has been granted. ARTICLE XI A fugitive criminal shall not be surrendered if the offence in respect of which his surrender is demanded is one of a political character, or if he proved that the requisition for his surrender has, in fact, been made with a view to try and punish him for an offence of political character. ARTICLE XII The extradition shall not take place If, subsequently to the commission of the crime, or the institution of the penal prosecution, or the conviction thereon, exemption from prosecution or punishment has been acquired according to the laws of the State applied to. ARTICLE XIII The extradition shall not take place if the person claimed on the part of the Government of the United Kingdom, or the person claimed on the part of the Swiss Government, has already been tried and discharged or punished, or is still under trial, in one of the Swiss Cantons or in the United Kingdom respectively, for the crime for which his extradition is demanded. ARTICLE XIV If the person claimed on the part of the Government of the United Kingdom, or if the person claimed on the part of the Swiss Government, should be under examination, or have been condemned for any other crime, in one of the Swiss Cantons or in the United Kingdom respectively, his extradition may be deferred until he shall have been set at liberty in due course of law. In case such individual should be proceeded against in the country in which he has taken refuge, on account of obligations contracted towards private individuals, his extradition shall, nevertheless, take place, the injured party retaining his right to prosecute his claims before the competent authority. ARTICLE XV If the individual claimed by one of the two High Contracting Parties in pursuance of the present Treaty should be also claimed by one or several other Powers, on account of other crimes or offences committed upon their respective territories, his extradition shall be granted to that State whose demand is earliest in date. ARTICLE XVI All articles, seized, which were in the possession of the person to be surrendered at the time of his apprehension, shall, if the competent authority of the State applied for the extradition has ordered the delivery thereof, be given up when the extradition takes places, and the said delivery shall extend not merely to the stolen articles, but to every thing that may serve as a proof of the crime. This delivery shall take place even when the extradition, after having been granted, cannot be carried out by reason of the escape or death of the individual claimed, unless the claims of third parties with regard to the above-mentioned articles render such delivery inexpedient. ARTICLE XVII The Contracting Parties renounce any claim for the reimbursement of the expenses incurred by them in the arrest and maintenance of the person to be surrendered, and his conveyance to the frontiers of the State to which the requisition is made; they reciprocally agree to bear such expenses themselves. ARTICLE XVIII The stipulations of the present Treaty shall be applicable to the Colonies and foreign possession of her Britannic Majesty. The requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal who has taken refuge in any of such Colonies or foreign possessions shall be made to the Governor or to the supreme authority of such colony or possession through the Swiss Consul residing there, or in case there should be no Swiss consul, through the recognized Consular Agent of another State charged with the Swiss Interests in the Colony or possession in question. The Governor or supreme authority above-mentioned shall decide with regard to such requisitions as nearly as possible in accordance with the provisions of the present Treaty. He will, however, be at liberty either to consent to the extradition or report the case to his Government. Her Britannic Majesty shall, however, be at liberty to make special arrangements in the British Colonies and foreign possessions for the surrender of such Individuals as shall have committed in Switzerland any of the crimes hereinbefore mentioned, who may take refuge within such Colonies and foreign possessions, on the basis, as nearly as may be, of the provisions of the present Treaty. The requisition for the surrender of a fugitive criminal from any Colony or foreign possession of Her Britannic Majesty shall be governed by the rules laid down in the preceding Articles of the present Treaty. ARTICLE XIX The present Treaty shall come into force ten days after its publication in conformity with the forms prescribed by the laws of the High Contracting Parties. After the Treaty shall have come into force, the Treaty concluded between the High Contracting Parties on the 31st of March, 1874, shall be considered as cancelled, except as to any proceedings that may have been already taken or commenced in virtue thereof. It may be terminated by either of the High Contracting Parties, on giving to the other party six months' notice of its intention to terminate the same, but no such notice shall exceed the period of one year. The Treaty shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at Berne as soon as possible. In witness whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the same, and have affixed thereto the seal of their arms. Done at Berne, the twenty-sixth day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eighty". The Convention dated 29th June, 1904 provides as follows: The Federal Council of the Swiss Confederation and the Government of His Majesty the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, having deemed, it necessary to extend, so far as regards the relations of Switzerland with the British Colonies and foreign possessions, the periods of thirty days and two months respectively fixed by Art. III, paragraph 8, and Art. VIII, of the Treaty concluded on the 26th November, 1880, between the Swiss Federal Council and Her late Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, Empress of India, & ; c., respecting the extradition of persons accused or condemned, the Undersigned, duly authorized to that effect by their respective Governments, have agreed as follows:- The following stipulation is added to the first paragraph of Art. XVIII of the Treaty of Extradition: "Nevertheless, so far as regards the relations of Switzerland with these Colonies and foreign possessions, the period of time fixed by Art. III paragraph 8, within which the requisition for extradition is to be made through the diplomatic channel, shall be six weeks; and that provided by Art. VIII for the production of proof sufficient to warrant the extradition shall be three calendar months." The present Convention shall come into force from the date when the ratifications shall be exchanged, it shall have the same force and duration, as the Treaty of Extradition of the 26th November, 1880, to which it relates. It shall be ratified, and the ratifications shall be exchanged at London as soon as possible. In witness whereof the Undersigned have signed the present Convention, and have affixed their seals thereto. Done at London, in duplicate, the 29th day of June, 1904. Substituted by Act No. 66 of 1993 , Section 18 (w.e.f. 18th December, 1993. PUBLISHED IN THE GAZETTE OF INDIA, EXTRAORDINARY, PART. II, SECTION 3 (I), DATED 9TH OCTOBER, 1996. 
