Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section Preamble--> An Act further to amend the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 2--> In section 4 of the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as Amendment the principal Act), for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, of namely:- "(1) The Corporation shall consist of - (a) a Chairman; (b) a member (technical) and a member (finance); (c) one representative from the Central Government; (d) two representatives one each from the State Governments of Jharkhand and West Bengal; (e) three independent experts one each from the field of irrigation, water supply and generation or transmission or distribution of electricity; and (f) a Member-Secretary. (IA) The Chairman and members under clauses (a), (b), (d) and (f) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Governments concerned while the members under clauses (c) and (e) shall be appointed by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette. (IB) The Chairman and members under clauses (fa), (b) and (f) of sub-section (1) shall be whole-time while the members under clauses (c), (d) and (e) shall be part-time. (IC) The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Corporation. (ID) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1C), the Member-Secretary shall be in charge of general administration and business development of the Corporation.".
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 3--> In section 6 of the principal Act, sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be omitted.
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 4--> In section 7 of the principal Act, clause (a) shall be omitted.
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 5--> For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- "8. Functions and duties of members:-The functions and duties of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.".
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 6--> In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words "financial adviser", the words and brackets "member (finance)" shall be substituted.
Damodar Valley Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011_Section 7--> In section 59 of the principal Act,- (a) in sub-section (1), the words "the secretary and the financial adviser" shall be omitted; (b) in sub-section (2), for the words "financial adviser", the word "members" shall be substituted. V.K. BHASIN, Secy. to the Govt. of India. 
