Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section Preamble--> An Act to amend certain Acts to implement the recommendations of the Committees on Subordinate Legislation regarding publication and laying of rules and other delegated legislation. BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 1--> (1) This Act may be called the Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983. (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for amendments relating to different enactments mentioned in the Schedule to this Act.
Delegated Legislation Provisions (Amendment) Act, 1983_Section 2--> The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in the third column thereof. Sch.1 THE SCHEDULE(See section 2) AMENDMENTS Sl.No. Short title Amendments 1. The Opium Act, 1857 (13 of 1857). After section 31, the following section shall be inserted, namely, Publication and lying of rules. "32.(1) Every rule required to be prescribed or sanctioned by the Central Government shall be prescribed or sanctioned by that Government by notification in the Official Gazette.  (2) Every rule prescribed or sanctioned by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is prescribed or sanctioned, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not have effect, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 2. The Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (20 of 1863). In section 8,-  (i) in paragraph 3, after the words "under such rules", the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted;  (ii) after paragraph 3, the following paragraph shall be inserted, namely:-  "Every rule framed under this section shall be laid, as soon as it is framed, before the State Legislature.". 3. The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867) (1) For section 20, the following section shall be substituted, namely:- Power of State Government to make rules. "20.(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules (not inconsistent with the rules made by the Central Government under section 20A) as may be necessary or desirable for carrying out the objects of this Act.  (2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.".  (2) In section 20A, in sub-section (2), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 4. The Indian Christian Marriage Act, 1872 (15 of 1872). Section 83 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and-  (a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "may (15 of 1872) make rules".the words "may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules" shall be substituted; and  (b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follow- ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  "(2) Every rule made by the State Govern- ment under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.". 5. The Government Savings Bank Act, 1873 (5 of 1873). In section 15, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedi- ately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 6. The Indian Reserve Forces Act, 1888 (4 of 1888). Section 4 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and-  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words "The Central Government may", the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follow- ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) Every rule and every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or order or both Houses agree that the rule or order should not be made, the rule or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or order.". 7. The Indian Tolls (Army and Air Force) Act, 1901 (2 of 1901). In section 7, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (5) Every rule made by the Central Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 8. Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). In section 67, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.". 9. The Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908). In section 6, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-  "(2A) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.  (2B) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 10. The Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908). Section 91 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and--  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "State Government prescribes in this behalf" the words "State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, prescribes in this behalf" shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follow- ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  (2) Every rule prescribed under this section or made under section 69 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.". 11. The Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (9 of 1910). (1) In section 35,-  (a) in sub-section (3), for the words "by general or special order", the words "by general or special order published in the Official Gazette" shall be substituted;  (b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-  "(4) Every order made by the State Govern-ment under sub-section (3) shall be laid, as soon a may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.  (5) Every order made by the Central Govern-ment under sub-section (3) shall be laid, as soon a may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.".  (2) In section 38, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  "(3) Every rule made under section 37 shall be publis-hed in the Gazette of India and shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 12. The Indian Museum Act, 1910 (10 of 1910). (1) In section 8,-  (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "make bye-laws", the words "make, by notification in the Official Gazette, bye-laws" shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  "(3) The Central Government shall cause every bye-law made under this section to be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the bye-law or both Houses agree that the bye-law should not be made, the bye-law shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that bye-law.".  (2) In section 15A, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessi ons aforesaid" shall be substituted. 13. The Official Trustees Act, 1913 (2 of 1913). In section 30,-  (a) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  "(3A) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.";  (b) in sub-section (4), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 14. The Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914 (9 of 1914). In section 4, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  "(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon a may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 15. The Maintenance Orders Enforcement Act, 1921 (18 of 1921). Section 12 shall be renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and-  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "may make rules", the words "may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules" shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) Every rule made by the Central Govern-ment under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 16. The Cantonments (House-Accommodation) Act, 1923 (6 of 1923). In section 35, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the succes-sive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that may such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 17. The Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925). (1) In section 223, after the words "rules to be made", the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted.  (2) In section 236, after the words "rules to be made", the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted.  (3) After section 236 and before "Chapter II-Of Limited Grants", the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Lying of rules before State Legislature. "236A.Every rule made by the State Government under section 223 and section 236 shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.". 15. The Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (2 of 1930). In section 36, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-  " (3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befo- re the State Legislature.  (4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before such House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 19. The Indian Partner- ship Act, 1932 (9 of 1932). In section 71,-  (i) in sub-section (1), for the words "may make rules", the words "may be notification in the Official Gazette make rules" shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (4) Every rule made by the State Governm- ent under this section shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.". 20. The Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking): Act, 1937 (1 of 1937). Section 3 shall be renumbered as subsection (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case maybe; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 21. The Muslim Personal, Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (26 0f 1937). In section 4, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legi- slature.". 22. The Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938). (1) In section 34H, in sub-section (10), for the words "may make rules", the words "may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules" shall be substituted.  (2) In section 64UB,-  (i) in sub-section (1), after the words "The Central Government may:, the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted;  (ii) in sub-section (3), after the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted.  (3) In section 114, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  "(3) Every rule made under this section or under sub-section (10) of section 34H or under sub-section (1) of section 64UB and every regulation made under sub-section (3)of section 64UB and every regulation made under this Part shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.". 23. The Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947 (29 of 1947). In section 12, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  " (2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 24. The Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948). (1) Section 4C shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and-  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words "The Authority may", the words ", by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follow- ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this section to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation, should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.".  (2) In section 79, in the opening portion, for the words "The Board may make regulations", the words "The Board may, by noti- fication in the Official Gazette, make regulations" shall be substituted.  (3) After section 79, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Laying of certain rules and regulations before State Legislature. "79A.Every rule made by the State Government under section 78A, and every regulation made by the Board under section 79 shall be laid, as soon as may be, before the State Legislature.". 25. The Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949). After section 30A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-  30B.Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 26. The Army and Air Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950 (40 of 1950) In section 16, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  "(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 27. The Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950). After section 193, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. "193A.Every rule and every regulation made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.". 28. The Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment), Act, 1951 (70 of 1951). After section 58, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Laying of rules. "58A.(1) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.  (2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 29. The Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952). In section 15, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or ann- ulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.". 30. The Special Marriage Act, 1954 (43 of 1954). In section 50, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:-  " (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one ses- sion or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  (4).Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the State Legislature.". 31. The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 (16 of 1955). In section 19, in sub-section (4), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immedia- tely following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 32. The Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955 (36 of 1955). In section 20, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (6) Every bye-law made under this section and every order made by the Central Government under sub-section (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the bye-law or order, or both Houses agree that the bye-law or order should not be made, the bye-law or order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that bye-law or order.". 33. The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956). In section 30, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  " (3) Every rule made under this section shall be subj- ect to the condition of previous publication and shall, as soon as may be, after its publication in the Official Gazette, be laid, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one or session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice done under that rule.". 34. The Inter-State Corporations Act, 1957 (38 of 1957). In section 4, for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  " (5) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Par- liament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afo- resaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.". 35. The Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957). After section 481, the following section shall be inserted, namely:- Regulations and bye- laws to be laid before Parliament. "481A.Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act and every bye-law made under secti- on 481 to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or bye-law or both Houses agree that the regulation or bye-law should not be made, the regulation or bye-law shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be with- out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done und- er that regulation or bye-law.". 36. The International Finance Corporation (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1958 (42 of 1958). In section 4, for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-  " (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parlia- ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore- said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that ru- le.". 37. The Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959). In section 39, after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (5) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 38. The Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959 (46 of 1959). In section 12, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 39. The International Development Association (Status, Immunities and Privileges) Act, 1960 (32 of 1960) In section 5, for the words "in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 40. The Salar Jung Museum Act, 1961 (26 of 1961). (1) In sub-section (3) of section 27, for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted.  (2) In section 28, after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (4) Every regulation made under this Act and every notification issued under sub-section (3) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament , while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afor- esaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or notification or both Houses agree that the regulation or notification should not be made, the regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified fo - rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation or notification.". 41. The Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961). In section 9, in sub-section (2), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 42. The Asian Development Bank Act, 1966 (18 of 1966) In section 7, for the words "in two successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 43. The Civil Defence Act, 1968 (27 of 1968). In section 20, for the words "in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 44. The Gold (Control) Act, 1968 (45 of 1968). In section 114, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 45. The Foreign Marriage Act, 1969 (33 of 1969). In section 28, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 46. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969). (1) In section 66,-  (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "may make regulations", the words "may by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations" shall be substituted;  (b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (3) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this section to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.".  (2) In section 67, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 47. The Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 (48 of 1970). (1) In section 35, in sub-section (2), for the words "in two succ- essive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted.  (2) Section 36 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and--  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words "the Central Government,", the words "by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) The Central Government shall cause every regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the succe- ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi- fication in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulati- on should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 48. The Naval and Aircraft Prize Act, 1971 (59 of 1971). In section 17, in sub-section (3), for the words "in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which they are so laid or the session immediately following", the words "in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 49. The Homeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 (59 of 1973). Section 33 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and--  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, for the words "make regulations", the words "make, by notification in the Official Gazette, regulations" shall be substituted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the follow- ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) The Central Government shall cause ev- ery regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the su- ccessive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in maki- ng any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regu - lation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation.". 50. The Press Council Act, 1978 (37 of 1978). Section 26 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) thereof, and--  (i) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, after the words "The Council may", the words ", by notification in the Official Gazette," shall be inserted;  (ii) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-  " (2) The Central Government shall cause ev- ery regulation made under this Act to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parli- ament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Ho- uses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such mo- dified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous- ly done under that regulation.". 
